Game Changer

Matthew Sadler and Natasha Regan
Game Changer
AlphaZero’s Groundbreaking Chess Strategies
and the Promise of AI
New In Chess 2019

© 2019 New In Chess
Published by New In Chess, Alkmaar, The Netherlands
www.newinchess.com
All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval
system or transmitted in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical,
photocopying, recording or otherwise, without the prior written permission from
the publisher.
Cover design: Buro Blikgoed
Editing and typesetting, supervision: Peter Boel
Proofreading: Maaike Keetman
Production: Joop de Groot, Anton Schermer
Have you found any errors in this book?
Please send your remarks to editors@newinchess.com. We will collect all relevant
corrections on the Errata page of our website www.newinchess.com and
implement them in a possible next edition.
ISBN: 978-90-5691-818-7

Part I
Chapter 1
Chapter 2
Chapter 3
Part II
Chapter 4
Chapter 5
Part III
Chapter 6
Chapter 7
Chapter 8
Chapter 9
Chapter 10
Chapter 11
Chapter 12
Chapter 13
Part IV
Chapter 14
Contents
Explanation of symbols
Foreword by Garry Kasparov
Introduction by Demis Hassabis
Preface
Introduction
AlphaZero’s history
A quick tour of computer chess competition
ZeroZeroZero
Demis Hassabis, DeepMind and AI 54
Inside the box
How AlphaZero thinks
AlphaZero’s style – meeting in the middle
Themes in AlphaZero’s play
Introduction to our selected AlphaZero themes
Piece mobility: outposts
Piece mobility: activity
Attacking the king: the march of the rook’s pawn
Attacking the king: colour complexes
Attacking the king: sacrifices for time, space and
damage
Attacking the king: opposite-side castling
Attacking the king: defence
AlphaZero’s opening choices
AlphaZero’s opening repertoire

Chapter 15
Chapter 16
Part V
Chapter 17
Chapter 18
The King’s Indian Sämisch
The Carlsbad
Conclusion
Epilogue
Technical note
Glossary
About the authors
Index of names

Explanation of symbols
The chessboard with its coordinates:
White to move
Black to move
♔
King
♕
Queen
♖
Rook
♗
Bishop
♘
Knight
White stands slightly better
Black stands slightly better
White stands better
Black stands better

+–
White has a decisive advantage
–+
Black has a decisive advantage
=
balanced position
!
good move
!!
excellent move
?
bad move
??
blunder
!?
interesting move
?!
dubious move

FOREWORD BY GARRY KASPAROV
AlphaZero and the Knowledge Revolution
The ancient board game of chess has played a significant role in the
history of artificial intelligence, if mostly as a chimera. Founding
fathers of computation like Alan Turing and Claude Shannon
understood that a simple algorithm could play a competent game,
famously demonstrated by Turing and David Champernowne’s ‘paper
machine’ program in 1948.
Because early computers were so slow, they also imagined that to
ever challenge human chess masters a machine would have to
approach chess like a human, using selective, knowledge-based
algorithms. The brute force examination of every possible move –
well into the millions of possibilities after just a few moves – was
obviously too slow.
Of course, these luminaries had no way of knowing that computer
processing speed would soon begin to increase geometrically with
the advent of integrated circuits. Gordon Moore would not postulate
his eponymous Law until 1965, twelve years after Turing’s tragic and
tragically premature death.
Much as there can be great beauty within the tight constraints of
a sonnet or haiku, the limitations of early computers forced
programmers to be creative and experimental. They were addressing
AI questions that were far larger than the humble game they were
attempting to conquer. Can a program learn from its mistakes
instead of repeating the same errors every time? Can a form of
intuition be instilled into a machine? Is output what matters when
determining intelligence, or method? If the human brain is just a
very fast computer, what happens when computers become faster
than the brain?

As an aside, chess’s role as a symbol in spreading the
computational theory of mind (CTM) is an interesting subject. By
1997, the computer-savvy general public wasn’t amazed that Deep
Blue could play world champion-level chess. They were amazed that
a human could possibly compete with a machine in a pursuit
believed by most to be an exercise in calculation. I was credited with
super-human, ‘computerlike’ abilities when, in fact, human mastery
in chess is believed to be based more on pattern recognition and
spatial visualization than on calculation or other computer strengths.
Unfortunately, it turned out that the answers to all these profound
questions weren’t required to create a machine that would defeat
the world chess champion. As early as the late 1970s, the top
programs were all built on the same model: Shannon’s ‘Type A’
machine that used brute-force search, the minimax algorithm, and
all the speed the day’s CPUs could provide.
The programming community was happy with the rapid progress
in strength, but disillusioned by the straightforwardness with which it
was obtained. It was as if the goal to build a robot mountain-climber
to scale Mount Everest was achieved by a giant tank plowing a
straight line to the top. Once Ken Thompson’s hardware-based
machine Belle reached master level in 1983, the writing was on the
wall – even if many of us would stay in denial for another decade.
This isn’t to denigrate the achievement of the Deep Blue team or
the generations of brilliant chess programmers and inventors that
came before them – only to put it into perspective with the benefit
of hindsight. It’s an important lesson that our original visions are
often far off the mark when faced with the pragmatic results
machines produce. Our intelligent machines don’t have to imitate us
to surpass our performance. They don’t have to be perfect to be
useful, only better than a human at a particular task, whether it’s
playing chess or interpreting cancer scans.
With the human versus machine era closing, in 1998 I created
Advanced Chess to investigate the potential of human plus machine.

Once again, chess proved to be a handy laboratory for experiments
that had much wider applications. The revelation was that a superior
coordination process between them was more important than the
strength of the human or the machine. This formula obviously has
an expiration date in a small, closed system like chess, where
machines grind ever onward toward perfection, but an emphasis on
improving interfaces and collaborative processes has become
conventional wisdom in open, real-world areas like security analysis,
investing, and business software.
By 2017, the ratings of the top chess programs were to Magnus
Carlsen what Carlsen is to a strong club player. They use giant
opening books, terabytes of endgame tablebases, and multi-core
CPUs that make your iPhone faster than Deep Blue. It was hard to
imagine that my beloved chess had any more to offer in its old role
as a cognition laboratory, and AI game programmers had moved on
to video games and Go, a more mathematically difficult game for
machines to crack.
In fact, it was a Go program that led to chess’s return to the AI
spotlight. DeepMind’s AlphaGo moved beyond pure brute force to
compete, and beat, the world’s top Go players. Then the bigger
surprise, a generic version called AlphaGo Zero, easily surpassed its
great predecessor by eschewing embedded human knowledge and
teaching itself to play better by playing against itself.
After seeing this important result, I of course had to ask
DeepMind’s Demis Hassabis when he was going to turn his
machine’s sights on our favorite game. Humans and machines are
relatively very bad at Go due to its complexity. Was there much
room for improvement in chess? After decades of stuffing as much
human chess knowledge as possible into code, would a self-taught
algorithm be able to compete with the top traditional programs?
As we now know, and as this book describes in detail, the answer
was a resounding ‘Yes.’ AlphaZero dominated the world’s strongest

traditional program Stockfish 8 in two matches, despite calculating
far fewer positions.
AlphaZero’s strength is impressive, but its method is far more
important. AlphaZero isn’t just applying human knowledge and
plowing through billions of positions to generate moves – it’s
creating its own knowledge first. And, based on its results and my
observations, the knowledge it generates for itself is unique and
superior. We aren’t just getting faster results the way we do from a
calculator. Instead of a postcard from a far-off land, it’s a telescope
that has the potential to let us see for ourselves.
And while chess style is hardly of great interest to the AI crowd, I
was quite happy to see AlphaZero’s dynamic, sacrificial style. Not
only because it mirrored my own, but because it could play like this,
and win, against a fearsomely accurate elite program. Instead of
grinding chess into dust with tedious and incomprehensible
maneuvering, AlphaZero prefers piece activity and attacking
chances.
Of course, a self-taught machine has no use for human heuristics
like those, although we cannot help but use them ourselves when
referring to its play. It doesn’t think in terms of sacrifices or anything
else. It is simply playing what works best, just like every other
program. The difference is the journey it takes to arrive and the
objective superiority of its output. Instead of the prejudices of
centuries of human chess knowledge, AlphaZero distills what matters
most in a matter of hours.
One of the great Capablanca’s nicknames was ‘the Chess
Machine’, reflecting his invincible consistency. Perhaps in the
AlphaZero future, someone who plays ‘like a chess machine’ will be
thought of as more of an Alekhine, with dazzling sacrifices and a
fondness for unbalanced positions!
The impact of such a system in other areas is difficult to
overestimate – again with the caveat that chess is a closed system

where all information is known, and no new information can be
introduced. Still, virtualization of data is a tremendous shortcut.
AlphaZero doesn’t need to laboriously analyze millions of human
games when it can play more games against itself in a few hours
than have ever been recorded in human history.
One implication is for the decline of the preeminence of collecting
human-generated data and expertise, especially in closed systems
and elements of open systems that can be effectively broken into
closed ones. For example, Google’s self-driving cars have recorded
millions of miles on the road but billions of miles virtually. Tesla is
hiring digital artists and video-game designers to improve their
simulated driving environments in which they train their autopilot.
And while it’s not a perfect substitute for the real thing, simulations
will only get better and their speed will only increase.
As machines become smarter, we will have to overcome our
paranoia and prejudices. This is the next phase of human-machine
cooperation, to accept that machine knowledge and judgment can
be superior to our own. Instead of just using machines as tools – the
‘centaur’ model – the machines become the experts and humans will
oversee them – I call it a ‘shepherd’ model.
Machine learning systems like AlphaZero aren’t perfect, and this is
perhaps the most difficult prejudice to overcome, our demand that
our machines be completely free of error instead of merely superior.
For example, studies show that people prefer a human doctor’s
diagnosis to a computer’s even if they are told that the machine is
more accurate.
This isn’t entirely irrational, as there will be rare cases where AI
systems fail to detect exceptions to their rules, while humans can
think creatively and adaptively. And we must not underestimate the
power of empathy and the importance of human-to-human
relationships in every aspect of building a better society. Technology
is a means to an end, not an end. Humans are also prone to
dogmatic blind spots and a lack of objectivity, so we should take

care not to pass our biases on to our digital creations. There is little
point in creating an artificial intelligence that only makes our same
mistakes faster.
Chess has been shaken to its roots by AlphaZero, but this is only
a tiny example of what is to come. Hidebound disciplines like
education and medicine will also be shaken, if slowly, by the
improved results promised by AI analysis, if we allow them to. Even
if AlphaZero once again looks like the end of the road for chess as a
machine cognition research subject, I’m very excited to see where it
goes from here.
Garry Kasparov, New York, December 2018

Introduction by Demis Hassabis
Far from being just a game, chess has always been a part of
me.
I started playing when I was four, and as I rose up the England
junior ranks my dream was to become a world champion. Playing
the game seriously at such a young age was an extremely formative
experience. It taught me how to solve problems, how to make plans
and devise strategies, how to deal with the intense pressure of
competition, and how to imagine and visualise possible futures. In
essence, chess taught me how to think. But as I strove to improve
as a chess player, I started to deeply introspect and wonder about
the nature of thinking itself. How was my brain coming up with
these moves, and what was behind this phenomenon we call
intelligence?
These questions led to my lifelong obsession with the workings of
the mind and a fascination with philosophy and neuroscience, but
one particular moment would end up having a big impact on the
direction I would take for the rest of my life. I was 11 years old and
in the middle of a gruelling eight-hour match with a veteran Danish
master at a big international tournament in Liechtenstein. We had
reached a highly unusual endgame, which I had never seen before –
I only had my queen, and my far more experienced opponent had a
rook, bishop and knight. He was ahead in material but if I could just
keep his king in check with my queen, I could force a draw. Hours
rolled by as he pushed his pieces around trying to outmaneuver me,
and the vast playing hall slowly emptied as everyone else finished
their games. Then suddenly, after dozens of moves of not making
any progress, he finally somehow managed to trap my king, with

checkmate seemingly forced on his next move. Exhausted and
shocked, I resigned.
Immediately he stood up, perplexed. He laughed as he dramatically
gestured that I could have secured a draw if only I had sacrificed my
queen, to achieve a stalemate. At the last moment he had just tried
a final cheap trick, and it had worked! I felt sick to the pit of my
stomach. The next day I reflected over what had happened, and as I
looked out over the packed hall filled with brilliant minds, I vividly
remember wondering, what if all this incredible collective mental
effort being expended could instead somehow be channelled into
something beyond games, perhaps an important area of science or
medicine, what might it be possible to achieve?
That epiphany marked the beginning of the end of my professional
chess career, but also sowed the initial seeds for what would
eventually become DeepMind, the artificial intelligence (AI) research
company I co-founded in 2010. And while I didn’t become a world
champion or even a professional player in the end, the transferable
skills I honed through chess have continued to influence and inform
all aspects of my life, and that is why I’m always very encouraging of
children being taught chess as part of the school curriculum.
In fact, a chess connection was even partly responsible for attracting
our first major investor. Back in 2009 AI was not the hot topic that it
is today and we were trying to get a meeting with a well-known
Silicon Valley venture capitalist to pitch DeepMind. After many
requests, we eventually managed to snag an invite to speak at an AI
conference where we would have a chance to briefly meet him.
Unfortunately, so would hundreds of others who also wanted to pitch
their business idea. I knew we would have to do something unique
to stand out from the crowd but wasn’t sure what. During my
background research, I had read that he was a strong chess player,

so when our turn finally came around to briefly speak to him I
decided to forgo the details of the company we wanted to create
and instead discuss chess. I told him that – in my opinion – it was
the exquisite balance of the bishop and knight across the set of all
positions, despite their vastly different mobility, that creates the
dynamic tension in the game. It was a risky strategy but, suitably
intrigued and his interest piqued, we got our full pitch meeting the
next day and off the back of that he invested in the company!
Our ambition at DeepMind is to build intelligent systems that can
learn to solve any complex task by themselves, and then use this
technology to help find solutions to some of society’s biggest
challenges and unanswered questions. Put another way, we want to
solve intelligence and then use it to solve everything else. And on
the path towards that ultimate goal we, perhaps surprisingly, use
games.
Games are designed to be challenging for humans to master and
usually represent some interesting aspect of the real world. We think
they are the perfect platform to develop and test ideas for AI
algorithms. It’s very efficient to use games for AI development, as
you can run thousands of experiments in parallel on computers in
the cloud and often faster than real-time, and generate as much
training data as your systems need to learn from. Conveniently,
games also normally have a clear objective or score, so it is easy to
measure the progress of the algorithms to see if they are
incrementally improving over time, and therefore if the research is
going in the right direction.
Using this approach, we’ve already had many notable successes
including DQN, a learning algorithm that achieved expert-level
scores on a range of classic Atari games with just the raw pixels as
inputs; as well as AlphaGo, the predecessor of AlphaZero that

became the first computer program ever to beat a professional
player at the ancient and complex game of Go, a feat considered by
many to be a decade ahead of its time. The 2016 match that
AlphaGo won against the legendary Go champion Lee Sedol in South
Korea turned out to be a major landmark for AI, but it was the
original way that AlphaGo played that completely astounded the
experts.
Most famous of these novel ideas was Move 37 in Game 2, which
will probably go down in Go history. It was a move so unthinkable,
that some of the world’s top Go players who were live commentating
thought there must have been some sort of mistake, and yet more
than 100 moves later this stone turned out to be in the perfect
strategic place to decide the outcome of the game. After the match
Lee Sedol said, ‘When I saw this move… I [thought] surely AlphaGo
is creative.’ This motif and many other ideas AlphaGo revealed have
subsequently overturned centuries of received wisdom about the
game, and many experts feel that it has ushered in a new era for
Go.
Building on the success of AlphaGo, in 2017 we began working on
our latest and most ambitious project yet, and the subject of this
book, AlphaZero. At DeepMind we believe one of the keys to AI is
the notion of generality, whereby a single system is able to perform
well across a wide variety of tasks, much like the brain. AlphaZero
was our attempt to generalise AlphaGo to play any two-player
perfect information game. And of course the obvious thing to try it
on first was chess!
The relationship between chess and AI is as old as computer science
itself. The early giants of computing, and some of my all-time
scientific heroes – Turing, Shannon, Von Neumann – all tried their
hand at writing chess programs. From a personal perspective, it also

felt like something of a homecoming, bringing me back full circle to
the game that had first sparked my curiosity about intelligence. But I
also had doubts.
Unlike with Go, of course IBM’s groundbreaking Deep Blue program
had long proven chess could be mastered by computers.
Subsequently its legion of successors, including Stockfish, Komodo
and Houdini, have become extraordinarily strong. But all these
programs rely on thousands of hardcoded rules and heuristics
painstakingly handcrafted by human experts over years of work. By
contrast, AlphaZero is nothing like these programs. It is entirely self-
taught and learns to play chess completely from first principles.
Given just the rules of the game, AlphaZero starts from totally
random play, and gradually improves through a sophisticated version
of a trial and error process, by playing several million games against
itself and incrementally learning from its mistakes.
When we started the AlphaZero project it was far from clear that a
program of this type could possibly hope to compete with the
specialist handcrafted chess engines that had decades of cumulative
effort spent on them from some of the best computer scientists and
chess grandmasters in the world. In fact I remember discussing this
very question with Murray Campbell, one of the original engineers of
Deep Blue, at a conference in early 2016, before the Lee Sedol
match and before we had started AlphaZero. Had modern chess
engines already reached the absolute upper limit that chess could be
played at – could they be beaten? Was there enough room in the
game to find something more, some new dimension? Both of us
were unsure of the answers, and in my experience, these kinds of
scientific questions, where either outcome would be interesting, are
the most worthwhile ones to pursue.

Incredibly, it turned out the answer to these questions was a
resounding yes! And after just a few hours of training (albeit utilising
a big cluster of computers) AlphaZero reaches the phenomenal
strength you will see in the games in this book, to arguably become
the strongest chess program in history. When I first saw some of
AlphaZero’s games I was blown away by how it played, and I hope
you will be too. From the outset, it was clear that AlphaZero played
very differently to traditional chess engines, with fluid, human-like
attacking play. For me, as somebody who loves chess, there was
something deeply satisfying about witnessing this dynamic and
aesthetically pleasing style of play emerge, reaffirming the game still
has a wealth of secrets left to be discovered.
In this book, Matthew and Natasha have brilliantly elucidated
AlphaZero’s unique style of play. They uncover fascinating new
insights into all facets of chess from piece mobility to king safety to
daring sacrifices and so much more, which I hope will be of interest
and benefit to chess players of all levels. By speaking at length with
the researchers who developed the machine learning techniques
underlying the system, Matthew and Natasha have gained a deep
understanding of how AlphaZero ‘thinks’, and I have been impressed
with the clarity and simplicity of their explanations of the technology.
They have also placed these modern ideas very carefully into their
correct historical context, by illuminating the reader with intriguing
analogies to the styles of the great champions of the past.
My hope is that the games and analysis in this book will help to
spark a new era of creativity in chess, and that players will not only
incorporate some of these ideas into their own games, but also be
inspired to find new styles of their own. I can certainly attest that
through this project my own passion for chess has been rekindled,
and it has been thoroughly enjoyable to revisit an old realm I once
knew well, but now see through an entirely new lens.

Of course this book is not just about the beauty of chess, but also
the incredible potential that AI holds. I hope that after reading it you
will get a sense for some of the wonder and marvel we all feel,
thinking about and working on these enthralling topics every day.
AlphaZero is just the beginning for us. I hope it has given you a
glimpse into a bold and bright future, where we have a myriad of
AlphaZero-like learning systems helping us as a society to find new
breakthroughs in critical areas of science and medicine, just like I
once dreamed of as a small boy in a vast chess hall, half a lifetime
ago.
Demis Hassabis
London, October 2018

Preface
This book is about an exceptional chess player, a player whose
published games at the time of writing total just 10, but whose
name already signifies the pinnacle of chess ability. A powerful
attacker, capable of defeating even the strongest handcrafted chess
engines with brilliant sacrifices and original strategies; and a player
that developed its creative style solely by playing games against
itself.
That player is AlphaZero, a totally new kind of chess computer
created by British artificial intelligence (AI) company DeepMind.
Through learning about AlphaZero we can harness the new
insights that AI has uncovered in our wonderful game of chess and
use them to build on and enhance our human knowledge and skills.
We talk to the people who created AlphaZero, and discover the
struggles that brilliant people face when aiming for goals that have
never before been achieved.
The authors feel extremely privileged to have worked with the
creators of AlphaZero on this project. We recognise this as a defining
moment, being right at the cutting edge of fast-developing
technology that will have a profound effect on all areas of human
life.
Our collaboration arose following the publication of 10 AlphaZero
games during the December 2017 London Chess Classic tournament.
The previous year, Matthew and Natasha had won the English Chess
Federation (ECF) Book of the Year award for Chess for Life, a
compilation of interviews with icons of chess, highlighting themes
and core concepts of their games. We knew we could take a similar
approach to AlphaZero, offering critical insight into how the AI thinks
and plays, and sharing key learnings with the wider chess-playing
community.

Who should read this book?
• keen chess players, looking to learn new strategies
AlphaZero’s chess is completely self-taught, stemming from millions
of games played against itself. Much of its play matches the
accepted human wisdom gathered over the past 200 years, which
makes AlphaZero’s play intuitive, allowing humans to learn from it.
This book brings out AlphaZero’s exquisite use of piece mobility and
activity, with guidance from Matthew through the simple, logical,
schematic ways in which AlphaZero builds up attacks against the
opponent’s king’s position. We believe these techniques will inspire
professionals and club players alike.
• artificial intelligence enthusiasts
As Demis Hassabis, CEO of DeepMind, explains, the application of AI
to games is a means to something greater: ‘We’re not doing this to
just solve games, although it’s a fun endeavour. These are
challenging and convenient benchmarks to measure our progress
against. Ultimately, it’s a stepping stone for us to build general-
purpose algorithms that can be deployed in all sorts of ways and in
all sorts of industries to achieve great things for society.’
Our interviews with the creative people who designed and built
AlphaZero are full of insights that, using chess as an example, help
us to better understand the opportunities and challenges afforded by
AI.
• chess enthusiasts
As well as providing instructional material, this book is also a
collection of fascinating games of astonishing quality, featuring
dashing attacks, unexpected strategies, miraculous defences and
crazy sacrifices. Matthew compared playing through these games to
uncovering the lost notebooks of a great attacking player of the
past, such as his hero Alexander Alekhine, and finding hundreds of
hitherto unpublished ideas.
How to read this book

The chess content of this book is arranged in discrete chapters and
designed to be read out of sequence, so it is perfectly possible to
pick a theme you are interested in and start in the middle of the
book. The chess content is not too heavy, with an emphasis on
explanations rather than variations. We would recommend playing
through the games with a chessboard. In our opinion, this promotes
a measured pace of reading most conducive to learning.
Acknowledgements
We would like to thank DeepMind, and in particular Demis Hassabis,
for the wonderful opportunity to study the games of AlphaZero, and
for his personal involvement in making this project a success. We
would like to thank Dave Silver, Lead Researcher on AlphaZero, as
well as Thore Graepel, Matthew Lai, Thomas Hubert, Julian
Schrittwieser and Dharshan Kumaran for their extensive technical
explanations and their assistance in running test games and test
positions on AlphaZero. Nenad Tomasev deserves a special mention
for reviewing the chess content and giving us plenty of great
feedback!
A big debt of gratitude is owed to Lorrayne Bennett, Sylvia
Christie, Jon Fildes, Claire McCoy, Sarah-Jane Allen and Alice Talbert
for all their amazing work in keeping this project running and helping
us with all the things we needed (and the things we didn’t know we
needed!). We’d also like to thank everybody at DeepMind for making
us feel so welcome during our visits to the London office.
Thanks are also due to Allard Hoogland and the team at New in
Chess who have published this book. They have supported our
unique project and have ensured that the book is beautifully
presented.
We would like to thank our families for their enthusiasm and support
and, in the case of Matthew Selby, also for his technical expertise in

extracting whatever we wanted from our data files.
All of these amazing people contributed to what has been a madly
enjoyable and memorable project.

•
•
Introduction
On 5th December 2017, London-based artificial intelligence company
DeepMind published ‘Mastering Chess and shogi by Self-Play with a
General Reinforcement Learning Algorithm’. The paper described the
company’s self-learning AI AlphaZero, which, within 24 hours of
starting from random play and with no domain knowledge except
the game rules, achieved a superhuman level of play in the games of
chess and shogi (Japanese chess) as well as Go. It convincingly
defeated a world-champion program in each case. In the case of
Chess, that was Stockfish1.
This was the first time a chess computer had reached
superhuman strength from being entirely self-taught. It is
momentous for chess players because, for the first time, we can
learn from a powerful intelligence which built its chess strategy
independently of our own rich history of chess development. It is
also far-reaching for AI developers, with AlphaZero achieving
superhuman strength in a matter of hours without the team needing
to provide any domain-specific knowledge. This opens up the
possibility of using these AI techniques for applications where
human domain-specific knowledge is limited.
In an interview later in this book, Demis Hassabis describes how
the success of AlphaZero builds on DeepMind’s earlier work creating
AlphaGo, a neural network based system that applied deep learning
to successfully defeat Go legend Lee Sedol in 2016, and how both
are milestones in the company’s mission to use AI for the benefit of
mankind. DeepMind plans to positively transform the world through
AI. Among other things, it seeks to:
help address the problems of climate change and energy;
enable medical advances in diagnostics to make excellent medical
care more widely available;

•
accelerate scientific research to arrive more quickly at solutions
crucial to human well-being.
The importance of the AlphaZero story has impact far beyond
DeepMind’s own work. Seeing the results of machine learning in the
fields of chess and Go, developers around the world have been
motivated to invest in similar techniques in other fields. Already,
others have adopted the techniques that created DeepMind’s
AlphaGo to produce publicly available professional-strength Go
playing machines, in what many consider to be a tipping point for
public participation in the advancement of AI. In recent months the
open-source Leela Chess Zero was developed based on the
AlphaZero paper, and is now a dangerous challenger to the
traditional ‘Big Three’ engines: Stockfish, Houdini and Komodo. Of
course, it’s of little surprise to us chess players (who have always
known that there is something uniquely important about our game)
that chess should play such a central role in the development of this
critical technology!
This new approach to machine self-learning in chess has given us
a strong chess player with a new style and approach, and that is the
crux of this book. AlphaZero has independently developed strategies
that possess many similarities to human wisdom, and many that are
further developed or show situations where our well-established
positional ‘rules’ are ‘broken’.
In 2018, AlphaZero cannot yet explain to us directly what it has
learnt (although Demis is confident that a number of technologies
and tools that DeepMind and other groups are developing will make
this possible in the future). Instead, top grandmaster Matthew
Sadler guides us through the main differentiating factors in
AlphaZero’s game, compared with the top human praxis; and
through detailed explanations based on illustrative games from
AlphaZero’s match with Stockfish, also shows us how AlphaZero’s
ideas can be incorporated into our own games.

•
•
•
•
•
•
•
This book explores the following chess themes:
Outposts (Chapter 7): we examine the variety of ways in which
AlphaZero secures valuable posts for its pieces, from the knight
and bishop all the way up to the king itself.
Activity (Chapter 8): AlphaZero is skilled in maximising the
mobility of its own pieces and restricting its opponent’s pieces.
We pay particular attention to the ways that AlphaZero restricts
the opposing king.
The march of the rook’s pawn (Chapter 9): AlphaZero
frequently advances its rook’s pawn as part of its attack and
plants it close to the opponent’s king.
Colour complexes (Chapter 10): Matthew explains
AlphaZero’s fondness for positions with opposite-coloured
bishops.
Sacrifices for time, space and damage (Chapter 11):
AlphaZero makes many brilliant sacrifices for long-term positional
advantage.
Opposite-side castling (Chapter 12): we consider some
stunning examples in which castling queenside was the prelude to
a dangerous AlphaZero attack.
Defence (Chapter 13): we learn about the contrasting
defensive techniques of AlphaZero and Stockfish.
In addition, we have looked at the ways in which the thinking
process of AlphaZero differs from that of chess engines such as
Stockfish, and the resulting effects on its play. This will be invaluable
to anyone who regularly uses engine assessments in their chess
studies. We explore AlphaZero’s use of a probabilistic assessment to
guide its choices (which we believe gives it the ability to head for
generally promising positions, leading to a style of play that feels
intuitive to humans). The insights we have gathered have also
revealed to us some features of engine analysis that we were not
fully aware of before (e.g. the prevalence of 0.00 evaluations when

analysing with Stockfish and other engines), and this knowledge
should better equip chess engine users to understand their
assessments.
In the process of writing this book, we had access to previously
unpublished games2 and evaluations from AlphaZero. We believe
that there is a large amount of new and instructive material in this
book that we hope you will thoroughly enjoy reading and trying out
in your games.
Matthew Sadler and
Natasha Regan,
London, November 2018

PART I
AlphaZero’s history

CHAPTER 1
A quick tour of computer chess competition
Before we embark on chess training with our AI hero, AlphaZero, for
the match against its formidable opponent, Stockfish, we take a
moment to remind ourselves of the beginning of computer chess and
just how far it has developed in recent history.
Games playing – and chess in particular – has a long and illustrious
association with the development of artificial intelligence. In 1950,
Claude Shannon, widely acknowledged as the founder of Information
Theory, published the paper ‘Programming a Computer for Playing
Chess’.
In 1951, Alan Turing – the father of theoretical computer science –
wrote the code that would allow a machine of the future to play
chess (former World Champion Garry Kasparov even played a game
against a reconstruction of this engine in 2012).
Mikhail Botvinnik, World Champion for most of the period from 1948
to 1963 and an engineer by profession, was interested in designing
computers to play chess. He was arguably ahead of his time as the
hardware wasn’t good enough to support his approach, and he
worked fruitlessly for many years to create a strong computer
program that didn’t use brute force. In the end his Pioneer program
was instead used in maintaining USSR power stations!
Computer chess competition took a leap forwards in 1974 – the year
of Matthew’s birth – with the first World Computer Championship
held in Stockholm, Sweden. Thirteen engines competed against each
other and the program Kaissa emerged as victor. I (Matthew)
recently saw a game played by the winner in that championship and
the level was gloriously horrific, but some research on the
chessgames.com website delivered this game, which was very
entertaining!

Kaissa
Chaos
World Computer Championship, Stockholm 1974
1.e4 c5 2.♘f3 ♘c6 3.c3 d5 4.exd5 ♕xd5 5.d4 ♗g4 6.♗e2 e6 7.0-0 ♘f6
8.♗e3 cxd4
9.♗xd4
After a well-played opening, this is the first odd move: either 9.cxd4
(to follow up with ♘c3, attacking the black queen) or 9.♘xd4
(forcing a response from Black by uncovering an attack against the
bishop on g4) have been the main lines in this position. 9.♗xd4
doesn’t serve any developmental purpose for White.
9…e5
A tactical blunder…
10.h3
… which White misses. 10.♘xe5 ♘xe5 11.♗xe5 ♕xe5 12.♗xg4
would have won a pawn.
10…exd4 11.hxg4 ♗d6 12.cxd4
12.g5 looks stronger, preparing to take the pawn on d4 without
allowing the black queen to h5.
12…♘xg4 13.♘c3 ♕h5 14.g3

A critical moment. Castling kingside is the sensible option, with a
balanced game, but Black goes crazy instead!
14…♔d7 15.♘h4 f5
Modern engines are already on +5 in this position, which is more
lost than I’d realised.
16.♕b3 is awkward for Black as 16…♖ab8 17.♘b5 leaves him
facing all manner of unpleasant threats. Kaissa takes a more scenic
route.

16.d5 ♘ce5 17.♕c2 ♖hf8 18.♗d3
A slow move which gives Black chances for a counterattack.
18…♘xd3 19.♕xd3 ♖ae8
19…g5 20.♘f3 ♕h3 is dangerous, with the threat of 21…♗xg3,
forcing a draw.
20.♘b5
A good move, trying to expose the black king still further.
20…f4 21.♘xd6 ♔xd6 22.♕a3+ ♔c7
23.♕xa7
Kaissa doesn’t find the quickest win, but the point is never in doubt.
23…♕f7 24.♖fc1+ ♔d6 25.♕c5+ ♔e5 26.d6+ ♔e6 27.♖e1+ ♘e3
28.gxf4 ♕d7 29.f5+ ♔f6 30.♖xe3 ♖d8 31.♖e7 ♕a4 32.♕e5+ ♔g5
33.♘f3+ ♔g4 34.♖xg7+ ♔h5 35.♕h2+ ♕h4 36.♕xh4# 1-0
Not bad at all for 1974!
By 1985 I was playing chess regularly and commercial chess
microcomputers had reached about 1800 Elo3, which was perfect for
me at the time. I spent many hours as a kid playing on the beautiful
wooden board of the Mephisto Modular System! Natasha worked for
a while at ‘Countrywide Computers’ and produced promotional
material of annotated games she played on equal terms against the
state-of-the-art Mephisto Lyon and the Mondial Dallas.
How did chess computers improve? It was a combination of faster
technology and better programs. Over time chess computers would
take account of more positional features to more accurately evaluate
positions. Strong players worked with developers to refine which
factors were considered. This fine-tuning (or ‘hand-crafting’) allowed
iterative improvements in playing strength as different set-ups were
tested. We explore computer thinking further in the chapters ‘How
AlphaZero thinks’ and ‘AlphaZero’s style – meeting in the middle’.
For many years, advances in computer chess occurred mainly on
supercomputers. For example, Cray Blitz, a program running on the
Cray supercomputer, won the World Computer Championship in 1983

and 1986, while Deep Thought, the precursor to Deep Blue, won in
1989. Most of my professional chess career (which started in 1990)
was conducted without the aid of a computer. I remember working
with the top French player Joel Lautier in 1996. A consummate
professional, Joel was always abreast of the latest developments and
with great pride produced his new Notebook (laptop) with
Chessbase. I then produced my own notebook (paper) with my
hand-written annotations. I’m sure that I was faster retrieving my
analysis than he was! However, around 1997 things changed for me,
and equipped with a laptop with a Pentium I 166Mhz processor, I
discovered that the Fritz engine could achieve a surprising level in
tactical positions! When I stopped playing chess professionally in
1998, one of my reasons for stopping – though certainly not the only
one – was that computers were going to be stronger than humans in
the foreseeable future and that no one would be interested in chess
anymore.
One part of this prophecy came true: after IBM Deep Blue’s ground-
breaking defeat of Kasparov in a six-game match in 1997, human
resistance gradually crumbled, and man vs machine matches
essentially stopped after 2006 when Deep Fritz beat the World
Champion Vladimir Kramnik 4-2. Thankfully the second part of the
prophecy didn’t materialise, as top-level chess is thriving. This is due
in no small part to the live broadcasting of top-level games with
strong online chess engines providing real-time evaluations, which
has made watching chess less mysterious to the average player.
Engines being stronger than humans does not seem to have
negatively affected the interest in watching the world’s best human
players compete against each other.
Humans and engines
Learning to play chess well is learning about the past. A human
player cannot navigate the myriad possibilities in chess through
ingenuity alone. Hundreds of years of recorded play has produced a

vast repository of plans, schemes and evaluations. Familiarity with
such knowledge assists an experienced player to select a plan or to
anticipate the opponent’s options without the need for exhaustive
calculation. Even today, when concrete chess engine-assisted
variations permeate the annotations of strong players, it isn’t
unusual to justify a plan by referring to a model game played 50 or
100 years earlier.
Another traditional source of inspiration is the style of the world’s
strongest player, typically the World Champion. Garry Kasparov’s
razor-sharp opening preparation and aggressive, dynamic
middlegame play moulded a generation of players during his 15-year
reign (1985-2000), while Magnus Carlsen’s fighting spirit, flexible
openings and endgame technique is doing the same for current
players.
Since the beginning of this century however, a new influence has
gained the ascendancy in shaping the way we think about chess: the
commodity superhuman-strength chess engine. The calculating
power of the strongest chess engines has redefined the boundaries
of what we consider to be ‘good’ chess. This calculating power has
manifested itself most notably as extreme defensive prowess which
has proved time and again that the most dangerous-looking position
can be held together by ‘ugly’ moves and sustained superhuman
accuracy. In this fashion, many sharp opening variations have been
neutralised by precise machine calculation while brilliant attacks from
the past and present have been refuted after verification by chess
engines.
Since chess engines are now available to any amateur, players of all
strengths have been confronted with this power. Modern players
have become progressively more sceptical of attacking, sacrificial
play, while the opening choices of top players have gravitated to
non-forcing lines which delay the first engagement of forces until the
middlegame stages (out of the range of chess engine preparation).

The downside is that in top-level games, any conflict taking place
between two well-mobilised forces will most likely end in a draw.
The human attitude to engines has matured to one of acceptance.
Former World Top-10 player Judit Polgar explained it very well when
we interviewed her for our earlier book, Chess for Life:
‘I realised in 2003/4 that there was no other way: I admitted that I
had to actively use engines for my preparation. This was something
that was very difficult for me and I was resisting for some time. I
guess it’s in large part because my game is very creative: I like being
creative and to shuffle things and to have my creative point of view.
This isn’t always successful against computers.
So that was my struggle but then I said OK this is the way it is, this
is modern preparation, it’s better to use engines. And then of course
all these engines became stronger, and there are different engines –
one is better in one type of position, another is better in another
type of position. It’s not something you can choose to use or not:
like it or not, it’s there and you have to use it.’
As Judit says, players of her generation and older shrug their
shoulders and say ‘if you can’t beat ‘em, join ‘em’, all the while
remaining slightly nostalgic for the good old days when you could
analyse a position for two weeks and still not have a clue what the
evaluation was! Young players just look at you as if you are crazy if
you mention those times: they have not known anything else and
strong engines have been an integral part of their preparation since
the very beginning.
That’s not to say that strong human players unequivocally believe
the engines. Whilst no human could beat a strong engine over a
series of practical games, when it comes to finding the best move in
a specific position then the engine’s opinion should not be accepted
without question.
In general, my feeling is that two minutes’ analysis of a position on
an engine is worth one or two hours of analysis with a strong human
player. In a few seconds, an engine like Stockfish is capable of

unravelling tactical details in a position with a precision that would
cost a strong human player much time to replicate. However, I
would rather have six hours of analysis and discussion of a position
with a strong human player than six hours of deep analysis from an
engine!
This illustrates the basic difficulty that humans have with engines as
a teaching tool. The engine can show the moves that it would play
and beat you with, but you won’t necessarily get clear guidance in
the position.
Another well-known problem is the value of an evaluation to a
human player. A Stockfish assessment of +1.00 might indicate a
clear stable advantage, but might also indicate the first step on a
tortuous tactical path where everything hangs by a thread. The
former is human-playable, the latter is much more difficult.
Engines vs engines
Since 2010, the focus in computer chess competition has gradually
shifted away from the World Computer Chess Championship to the
TCEC (Top Chess Engine Championship), now sponsored by the
Chessdom website. Whereas the participation of the top chess
engines in the World Computer Chess Championship is somewhat
patchy, Stockfish, a star in this book, as well as big guns Houdini and
Komodo, are regulars at the TCEC. Thirty engines with an Elo above
2800 take part in the competition that features five Divisions (with
promotion and relegation) and a Superfinal between the two top
engines in the First Division. All the engines run on identical high-
end hardware and the Superfinal is a marathon of 100 games played
at a time control of 120 minutes for the game with 15-second
increments. An interesting feature of the Superfinal is that 50
openings are pre-selected, and each engine gets a chance to play
each opening with white and black.
In season 11, the TCEC Superfinal (played in March-April 2018) was
contested between Stockfish build 260318 (Elo: 3546) and Houdini

6.03 (Elo: 3489).
The Season 11 Superfinal: Stockfish vs Houdini
Chess games between computers sometimes have the reputation of
being long, boring and incomprehensible. This isn’t completely
unjustified as many computer games in fixed structures do have
extended periods of shuffling (49 moves to be precise) before one of
the sides ventures a pawn move to avoid the 50-move rule… when
the whole process begins again!
And indeed, the Stockfish-Houdini match did have such episodes.
However, there were also some very interesting games. In this
match Stockfish seemed to be much quicker out of the starting
blocks than Houdini, establishing and implementing a dynamic plan
and pushing Houdini onto the defensive. By contrast, in similar
positions with colours reversed Houdini seemed to dither and allow
Stockfish to steady the ship.
The following game played early in the final is a good illustration of
this:
Stockfish 260318
3546
Houdini 6.03
3489
TCEC Season 11 – Superfinal 2018 (5)
1.d4 ♘f6 2.c4 g6 3.♘c3 ♗g7 4.e4 d6 5.f3 0-0 6.♗e3 e5 7.d5 ♘h5 8.♕d2
♕h4+ 9.g3 ♘xg3 10.♕f2 ♘xf1 11.♕xh4 ♘xe3

This creative invention of the great Russian player David Bronstein
has a poor theoretical reputation nowadays, so it was an interesting
choice for a starting position for this TCEC game.
Black gains two pieces and two pawns for the queen, the bishop pair
and a smooth pawn structure (in comparison to White’s ragged
pawn structure). However, Black’s development is lagging and the
marauding knight is likely to become a target.
White has to act quickly while Black’s forces are undeveloped and
uncoordinated. If White waits too long, it might find the black
position too tough to break through.
12.♕f2
Already an unusual choice at this juncture. 12.♔e2 ♘xc4 13.♖c1
♘a6 14.♘d1 ♘b6 15.♘e3 is a strong plan played by both Karpov
and Kasparov, when the knight is ready to jump into f5 after further
preparation.
But Stockfish’s line is also very strong.
12…♘xc4 13.h4 h5

The inclusion of h2-h4 and …h7-h5 dissuades Black from attempting
rapid counterplay with …f7-f5: the g6-pawn would be weak and
White would also gain the strong g5-square for its knight.
14.♕e2 ♘b6 15.♘b5
Although the move order is slightly different, Stockfish is following a
plan played by Russian grandmaster and trainer Yuri Razuvaev.
White’s goal is to extract concessions from Black by striking at the
three exposed points in Black’s position:

1.
2.
3.
The pawn on g6 (from which White has already extracted the
concession …h7-h5 and a good potential outpost on g5 for the
white knight). Note also that after Black has played …h7-h5, it no
longer has a path to the f4-square for the b6-knight via d7-f6-h5.
The pawn on c7, which is vulnerable to pressure from a white
knight on b5 and a major piece on the half-open c-file.
The knight on b6, which still has not found a good resting place
and which will only interfere with the rest of Black’s development
if it seeks to redeploy via d7.
15.♘h3 ♘a6 16.♘g5 ♗h6 17.♖g1 ♗d7 18.a4 ♖ae8 19.a5 ♘c8
20.♕c4 ♖e7 21.b4 ♗e8 22.♖a2 ♗g7 23.♔d1 ♘b8 24.♘b5 c6
25.♘c3 a6 26.♖c2 ♔h8 27.♔c1 ♖g8 28.♔b1 ♗h6 29.f4 exf4
30.♕f1 ♗g7 31.♕xf4 ♘d7 32.dxc6 bxc6 33.♘d5 cxd5 34.♖xc8
♘e5 35.exd5 ♖b7 36.♖d1 ♗d7 37.♖xg8+ ♔xg8 38.♔a2 ♗f5
39.♘e4 ♖c7 40.♘xd6 ♖c2+ 41.♔b3 ♗d3 1-0 was the game
Razuvaev-Shchekachev, Zaragoza 1996.
15.0-0-0 a5 was Houdini’s choice in its game with white. It has been
played by a strong grandmaster, but it is insufficiently incisive.
Stockfish takes the opportunity to set up a solid queenside structure,
after which White will find it very difficult to progress: 16.♘h3 ♗d7
17.♔b1 ♘a6 18.♖h2 ♘a4 19.♘xa4 ♗xa4 and Stockfish had no
problems, even coming close to winning in Houdini’s time trouble.
15…♘a6 16.♘h3 ♗h6
Preventing 17.♖c1.
17.a4

This energetic move, targeting the b6-knight, hits the spot
completely. In order to free its development and to stop the king’s
knight arriving on g5, Houdini feels compelled to give up its bishop
pair. White now fears the position opening up much less than before
as Black would be missing a dangerous attacking component: the
two bishops.
17…♗xh3 18.♖xh3 ♘d7 19.a5 ♘dc5 20.♕c4

With very similar ideas to the Razuvaev game. If Black does not
react, White will play ♔e2 and b2-b4 when Black will be completely
tied up. Houdini drums up some counterplay but Stockfish has a
phenomenal sequence in mind.
20…f5 21.♔f1
21.b4 ♘xb4 would be embarrassing.
21…fxe4 22.b4 ♘d7 23.♘c3
An amazing move! Once the knight reaches e4, Black will face new
problems on the queenside: ♕b5 is going to be very nasty, attacking
the knight on d7 and the b7-pawn. Once the b7-pawn falls, the
knight on a6 will also be in trouble. This centralisation costs White
two additional pawns though!
23…exf3 24.♘e4 ♘f6
24…♖f4 seemed tempting to me, but Stockfish is unmoved: 25.♖g3
♔h7 26.♕b5 ♖d8 27.♖e1 and White is powering through with
♕xb7 and ♕xa7.
25.b5 ♘c5 26.♘xc5 dxc5 27.d6+ ♔h7 28.dxc7 e4

This looks threatening, but not to a calculating monster like
Stockfish!
29.♖e1 ♖ae8 30.♖xf3 ♖c8
30…exf3 31.♖xe8 ♖xe8 32.♕f7+ ♗g7 33.♕xe8 wins for White.
31.♖f2 ♖xc7 32.♔e2 e3 33.♖f3 ♗g7
34.♖ef1 ♖d7 35.♖d1 ♖e7 36.♖f4 ♘e4
An amazing defensive idea. I had to wait until the follow-up was
played on the board before I grasped the idea!
37.♖xe4 ♖f2+ 38.♔xe3 ♖ef7

Threatening 39…♖ff3 mate. It looks too good to be true… and it is!
39.♖e8 ♖7f3+ 40.♔e4 ♖f4+ 41.♔d5 ♖xc4 42.♔xc4 ♖c2+ 43.♔d3 ♖a2
44.♖e7 ♔h6 45.♖f1 c4+ 46.♔xc4 ♖a4+ 47.♔c5 ♗d4+ 48.♔d5 ♗c3
49.♖xb7 ♖d4+ 1-0
A fantastic game by Stockfish.
That brings us just about up-to-date until December 2017, when the
chess world first heard about a new approach for chess computers –
the successful implementation of a very strong, and completely self-
taught machine. Enter AlphaZero.

CHAPTER 2
ZeroZeroZero
The end of 2017 saw the release of 10 games from a match
between the strongest superhuman-strength chess engine –
Stockfish – and DeepMind’s AlphaZero. The match result was a
comprehensive victory for AlphaZero.
More startling than the score, however, was the manner in which
AlphaZero achieved its victories. It was the first time a computer had
reached this level by teaching itself – without learning established
human wisdom on chess strategy. And AlphaZero’s play recalled the
glory days of Kasparov, appearing to target the opponent’s king
directly from the opening moves and sacrificing material freely to
achieve its attacking goals. For chess players, these games sparked
the tantalising thought that a new style of play had been discovered
– or, perhaps more accurately, that an existing style of play had been
refreshed and expanded – capable of overcoming the extraordinary
calculating and defensive capabilities of the world’s hitherto
strongest chess engine. If this were true, current assessments of
some complicated opening variations and middlegame positions –
based largely on the results of analysis by chess engines such as
Stockfish – might also be overturned. However, with only 10 games
as analysis material, it was difficult to form a definitive impression.
At the beginning of 2018, I was invited to the DeepMind offices at St
Pancras in London to study 210 games from the newest series of
matches between Stockfish and AlphaZero. I would describe my
mood on that day as enthusiastic but apprehensive. As a chess fan, I
was hoping to discover something original and fantastic; as a strong
player I was prepared to be modestly disappointed by the style of
play. I fully expected to see a small number of good (attacking)
games, but I was also convinced that many games would be of

limited interest (a common feature of matches between strong chess
engines).
I was provided with two files: a file of 110 games played without an
opening book from the starting position, and a file of 100 games
starting from various pre-determined opening positions (the
positions used in the 2016 TCEC World Championship). The games
in each file were grouped by colour so that I first played through
AlphaZero’s Black games, and then its White games. I like to play
through games with the fast-forward button held down, which
means that a full game flashes before my eyes in about 10 to 15
seconds. It’s enough to get a feel of the outline of the game, and a
sense of whether something unusual happened.
For the games starting from the initial board position, one game was
selected at random for each unique opening sequence of 30 plies; all
AlphaZero losses were also included. For the TCEC match, one game
as White and one game as Black were selected at random from the
match, starting from each opening position.
I whizzed through the first 10 games, gradually acclimatising to the
play of both protagonists. I noted some unexpected kingside pawn
pushes and subtle knight manoeuvres from AlphaZero, but nothing
yet to make me stop and gasp. The 11th and 12th games did. As the
11th game flashed before my eyes, it suddenly registered that
AlphaZero as Black had already sacrificed three pawns and had just
played a quiet move 22…h6 on the kingside.
Game: ‘Raking bishops’
Stockfish 8
AlphaZero
London 2018 (11)
1.e4 e5 2.♘f3 ♘c6 3.♗c4 ♘f6 4.♘g5 d5 5.exd5 ♘a5 6.♗b5+ c6 7.dxc6
bxc6 8.♗d3 ♘d5 9.♘f3 ♗d6 10.0-0 ♘f4 11.♖e1 ♘xd3 12.cxd3 0-0

13.♘xe5 c5 14.♘c3 ♗b7 15.b3 ♖e8 16.♘c4 ♘xc4 17.♖xe8+ ♕xe8
18.bxc4 ♕e6 19.♗b2 ♖b8 20.♘b5 ♕g6 21.♕f1 ♗f4 22.♘xa7 h6
I checked the result: AlphaZero had won on the 48th move! On
move 25, Stockfish had bailed out to a losing endgame with 25.♕d1
instead of keeping its extra material with 25.♘b5, but I wasn’t sure
why… and none of my engines was helping me either.
23.♗c3 ♕h5 24.h3 ♖a8

25.♕d1 ♕xd1+ 26.♖xd1 ♖xa7 27.♖a1 ♗c6 28.a4 ♖xa4 29.♖xa4 ♗xa4
30.♔f1 ♗b3 31.♔e2 ♗d6 32.♔e3 ♗e7 33.♗e5 f6 34.♗c7 ♔f7 35.♗b6
♔e6 36.♔e2 ♔d7 37.♔e1 ♔c6 38.♗a5 h5 39.♔f1 ♔d7 40.♗b6 ♗c2
41.♔e2 ♔c6 42.♗a5 ♗d6 43.d4 cxd4 44.d3 ♗a4 45.h4 ♔b7 46.♔f1 ♗d7
47.♔e2 ♔a6 48.♗d8 ♗f5 0-1
Interesting and confusing! If you fancy testing your tactical play, try
and work out Black’s answer to 25.♘b5. The answer is given in the
annotations to the game ‘Raking Bishops’ in the ‘Sacrifices for
time, space and damage’ chapter.
I filed the game away mentally for further study and moved on to
the 12th game. At move 17 I burst out laughing: ‘This AlphaZero is a
lunatic!’
Game: ‘Take my knight!’
Stockfish 8
AlphaZero
London 2018 (12)
1.e4 e5 2.♘f3 ♘c6 3.♗c4 ♗c5 4.d3 a6 5.♘g5 ♘h6 6.0-0 d6 7.a4 ♗g4
8.♘f3 0-0 9.h3 ♗h5 10.c3 ♔h8 11.♗xh6 gxh6

12.♘bd2 ♗a7 13.♗d5 ♘e7
14.♗xb7 ♖b8 15.♗xa6 f5 16.♔h1 ♘g6 17.exf5 ♘f4
On the Black side of a Giuoco Piano (literally, ‘Quiet Game’), within
17 moves, AlphaZero had sacrificed everything – three pawns and its
kingside structure – to open lines all over the board.
18.d4 ♖xf5 19.♕c2 ♖f8 20.♖ae1 ♕f6 21.♖e3 ♕g7 22.♖g1 ♘d5
23.♗b5 ♗g6 24.♕c1 ♘xe3 25.fxe3 ♗f7 26.♖f1 ♗d5 27.♗c4 ♗a8 28.a5
e4 29.♘h2 ♕g5 30.b4 ♕xe3 31.♘g4 ♕g5 32.♕e1 h5 33.♘e3 h4 34.♗e6

♗c6 35.♗c4 d5 36.b5 ♗b7 37.♗b3 ♖bc8 38.a6 ♗a8 39.♗a4 ♗b6
40.♔g1 ♕g3 41.♕xg3 hxg3 42.♖a1 ♖f2 43.♘df1 ♖e2 44.♘f5 ♖g8
45.♘1xg3 ♖d2 46.♖f1 ♗a5 47.♖f2 ♖xf2 48.♔xf2 ♗xc3 49.h4 ♖f8
50.♔e3 ♗e1 51.♔e2 ♗xg3 52.♘xg3 ♖g8 53.♔f2 ♖g4 54.♗d1 e3+
Stockfish had defended as only it can, but activity won through in
the end with AlphaZero completing a win in 97 moves.
The total effect of those first 110 games was overwhelming. Firstly, I
had witnessed a series of magnificent games played in a distinctive,
individual style that appealed to me. Secondly, when I tested key
positions on the chess engines I use for analysis, I saw that
AlphaZero’s assessment was different to that of the engines. In fact,
AlphaZero’s assessments were closer to my intuitive (human) feeling
about the position. The attacking raw materials of open files and
diagonals against the king and a lead in development seemed to
matter again and could no longer be neutralised by a series of ugly
but accurate moves, or a miraculous and undeserved tactic.
This dual feeling – that there is much to learn from the way
AlphaZero plays, and that the AlphaZero style of play is such that
both amateurs and professionals could intuitively grasp it and apply
at their own level – was an inspiration for this book.
How is AlphaZero’s play so different to that of other engines? The
clues are in its construction, and we will explore the link between
construction and playing style in more depth in the chapter
‘AlphaZero’s style – meeting in the middle’.
In this chapter we zoom in on one mysterious aspect of engine
evaluations that I first became consciously aware of on the day that
I first analysed with AlphaZero.
0.00
A couple of months ago, I was reviewing an excellent middlegame
book of extremely complicated positions analysed by a world-class

grandmaster. The author mentioned a few times when the crisis in a
particular position was at its highest that his engines were assessing
the position as 0.00. Judging from his comments, he wasn’t
completely sure what to make of such an assessment which didn’t
always tally with his intuitive or practical feeling about the position.
Any chess player who has analysed complicated positions seriously
with an engine running in the background will recognise this
scenario. You summon your inner genius, think up a brilliant double-
pawn sacrifice to set the board on fire… and your engine responds
with an evaluation of 0.00 and a best line ending in you forcing a
bizarre repetition of moves. And it’s not just one engine: they all
want you to force a repetition (though the ways to do so often vary).
It’s perhaps the most irritating and obstructive thing that these
otherwise fantastic engines do during analysis. If an engine thinks
that a draw by repetition is the best course, it’s not going to chip in
with interesting suggestions anymore. It’s all on you to think of
something and challenge the engine and force it to look outside its
closed path.
The meaning of these 0.00 evaluations is something puzzling. At the
point when the possibilities should be boundless, a draw by
repetition is apparently the best option. However, if you attempt to
take on the engine and prove it to be wrong, then you often end up
losing… or discovering more repetitions. The engines are just too
strong and can usher away any of your objections.
You can imagine therefore that I was intrigued when playing through
games between AlphaZero and Stockfish to see many 0.00
evaluations whizzing past my eyes as my engines analysed in the
background. Even more interestingly, AlphaZero’s was normally the
only dissenting voice: in positions assessed at 0.00 by the engines,
its evaluation was often positive for itself.
Putting that together with the score AlphaZero was making in such
positions, it made me wonder whether a new chapter had been
opened on 0.00 evaluations. In any case, it seemed well worth

bringing together some of these positions to understand what we
could learn from AlphaZero and the engines.
We’ll examine a series of positions in which AlphaZero’s evaluation
and that of Stockfish and other top engines varied significantly. In
each position, we will try and understand the reason for the
evaluation of both sides, attempt to assess the position (both
objectively and from the human perspective) and also attempt to
assess what effect the evaluation might have on subsequent play.
Before we start, a few words on how AlphaZero evaluates. Rather
than expressing a position advantage as an equivalent to a number
of pawns (in the way that traditional engines do), AlphaZero
evaluates by estimating its expected score from the position (wins
counting as 1 and draws counting as 0.5). In our annotations we’ve
expressed this as a % between 0% and 100%. An AlphaZero
evaluation of 50% would mean a win is as likely as a loss (and
draws could be possible too).

Section A – 0.00 and slow-burning attacks
Our first example also features in the ‘AlphaZero’s style – meeting in
the middle’ chapter.
Game: ‘Python squeeze’
AlphaZero
Stockfish 8
London 2018
1.d4 ♘f6 2.♘f3 e6 3.c4 b6 4.g3 ♗b7 5.♗g2 ♗b4+ 6.♗d2 ♗e7 7.♘c3 c6
8.♗f4 0-0 9.e4 d5 10.e5 ♘e4 11.cxd5 cxd5 12.0-0 ♘xc3 13.bxc3 ♗a6
14.♖e1 ♘c6 15.h4 ♖c8 16.♖e3 ♖c7 17.♘g5 h6 18.♘h3
Let’s start by assessing the position. White has a central space
advantage due to the pawn chain c3/d4/e5. The pawn on e5 gives
White an outpost on d6 and also takes away the defensive square f6
from the black pieces.

Looking at the distribution of forces on the board, we can see that
White has five pieces within easy reach of the kingside: queen, rook,
bishops and knight. The only downside from an attacking point of
view is that the light-squared bishop is not on the b1-h7 diagonal;
with Black’s bishop on a6 preventing ♗f1-d3, this is not likely to
happen quickly either.
Black has only two defenders on the kingside: the bishop on e7 and
rook on f8. The demarcation lines are clear: White will attack on the
kingside!
As the centre is blocked, Black will look to the queenside for
counterplay. Black’s situation there is not too bad: White’s queenside
structure is damaged and the pawn on c3 – backward on a half-open
file – is a nice starting point to unravel White’s defences there. Black
should not tarry too much, however, as White has already started to
loosen Black’s kingside defences with the manoeuvre ♘f3-g5-h3.
It looks strange to place the knight on h3, but White has teased out
the target h6 from Black and freed the d1-h5 diagonal for White’s
queen to enter the kingside. Moreover, the white knight has a good
future post on h5 (via f4). Such a knight manoeuvre, dedicating time
to bring the knight close in to the opponent’s king, is a typical
attacking feature of AlphaZero’s.
I’d like now to give a summary of the main lines and evaluations of
five engines. All engines were given one minute to analyse the
position. These were the results:
Houdini 6.02: top three lines after one minute of
analysis
Evaluation
First line
18…♖e8 19.♖f3 ♘a5 20.♗d2 ♕d7
21.♘f4 ♖ec8 22.a4 ♘c4 23.♗c1 ♘a5
24.♗d2
0.00
Second line
18…♕d7 19.♕g4 ♔h7 20.♕h5 ♗d8
21.♕d1 ♔g8 22.♖f3 ♘e7 23.♗d2 ♘g6
0.00
Third line
18…♔h7 19.♕h5 ♖c8 20.♘g5+ ♔g8
21.♘h3
0.00

Stockfish 8: top three lines after one minute of
analysis
Evaluation
First line
18…♖e8 19.♖f3 ♘a5 20.♗d2 ♕d7
21.g4 ♕b5 22.g5 hxg5 23.♖xf7 ♔xf7
24.♕h5+ ♔f8 25.♕h8+ ♔f7 26.♕h5+
0.00
Second line
18…♘a5 19.♕h5 ♔h7 20.♘g5+ ♔g8
21.♘h3
0.00
Third line
18…♔h7 19.♕h5 ♘a5  20.♘g5+ ♔g8
21.♘h3
0.00
Stockfish 9: top three lines after one minute of
analysis
Evaluation
First line
18…♖e8 19.♖f3 ♘a5 20.♕c2 ♗f8
21.♗d2 ♗b5 22.♘f4 ♕d7 23.a4 ♗c4
24.♖b1 ♕e7 25.♗c1 ♗a6 26.♗d2
♖ec8 27.♗h3 ♘c4
-0.14
Second line
18…♕d7 19.g4 ♗d8 20.h5 ♘e7
21.♖b1 ♗c4 22.♖b2 ♗a6 23.♖b1
0.00
Third line
18…♕e8 19.♖f3 ♘a5 20.♗xh6 gxh6
21.♖f6 ♗xf6 22.exf6 ♔h7 23.♕c2+
♔h8 24.♕d2 ♔h7 25.♕c2+
0.00
Komodo 11.2.2: top three lines after one minute of
analysis
Evaluation
First line
18…♖e8 19.♖e1 ♕c8 20.♕g4 ♔h8
21.♗d2 ♘a5 22.♕f3 ♗f8 23.♘f4 ♘c4
24.♗c1 ♘a3 25.♗xa3 ♗xa3 26.c4 ♗b2
27.cxd5 ♗xa1
-0.43
Second line
18…♔h8 19.♕h5 ♔h7 20.♘g5+ ♔g8
21.♘h3 ♕d7 22.♗xh6 gxh6 23.♕xh6
♖fc8 24.♖f3 ♗f8 25.♕g5+ ♗g7
26.♘f4 ♕e7 27.♕g4
0.00
Third line
18…♘a5 19.♕h5 ♔h7 20.♘g5+ ♔g8
21.♘h3
0.00

1.
2.
3.
Komodo 11.3.1: top three lines after one minute of
analysis
Evaluation
First line
18…♕d7 19.♕g4 ♔h7 21.♕h5 ♗d8
21.♗g5 ♘a5 22.♘f4 ♘c4 23.♖ee1
♘a3 24.♖ac1 ♗c4 25.♗f1 ♗xf1
26.♖xf1 ♘c4 27.♗xd8
-0.31
Second line
18…♗b5 19.♕g4 ♔h7 20.♕d1 ♗c4
21.♖e1 ♗a3 22.♗d2 ♕e7 23.♕c2+
♔g8 24.♘f4 ♖fc8 25.♘h5 ♗a6 26.♘f4
♘a5 27.♖ab1 ♕f8
-0.28
Third line
18…♖e8 19.♖f3 ♘a5 20.♕c2 ♖f8
21.♗c1 ♕d7 22.♘f4 ♖fc8 23.a4 ♘c6
24.♕d2 ♗f8 25.♕d1 ♗c4 26.♕c2 ♕e8
27.♗d2 g6 28.♗c1
-0.22
The top three lines of analysis are given with the evaluation of each.
This is quite a lot of information, so I’ve pulled out some key points:
Houdini and Stockfish seem to be trying to prove forced draws by
repetition in many lines.
Only Komodo takes a real view on the position and considers one
side (Black) to be better.
Many of the lines suggested are somewhat strange.
The lines struck me as quite odd, with mysterious repetitions and
retreats. Stockfish and Houdini especially are great attacking
engines: where is the power and the conviction to make something
work beyond a quick spurious repetition or a sacrificial perpetual? At
crucial moments these engines seem to be cutting out half-way as if
there was nothing to believe in on the kingside.
These evaluations were not significantly altered by letting the
engines run for a longer period of time. After a six-hour stint of deep
analysis on this position, both Stockfish’s and Komodo’s main lines
ended with an evaluation of 0.00, while Houdini bucked the trend a
little with an evaluation of 0.14.

Now let’s look at AlphaZero’s evaluation at move 18: a 66.5%
expected score for White, which is rather more positive than 0.00.
Who is right? The position reminds me of the King’s Indian Attack
against the French, which I play frequently with white.
King’ s Indian Attack: 1.e4 e6 2.d3 d5 3.♘d2 c5 4.g3 ♘c6 5.♗g2
♘f6 6.♘gf3 ♗e7 7.0-0 0-0 8.♖e1 b5 9.e5 ♘d7 10.♘f1.
You see here a similar structure to our featured game: White has
established a pawn on e5, not much is happening in the centre, and
Black’s strength is concentrated on the queenside. Objectively the
chances in this line are balanced. However, the fact that White’s
attack is aimed at Black’s king and that White’s king is safe from
Black’s attack makes Black’s position riskier and more difficult to
handle in a practical game than White’s.
Coming back to our game, the same remarks apply. I wouldn’t be
completely astounded if Black were able to neutralise White’s
kingside potential by a precise sequence of piece shuffling on the
queenside. However, this is an approach fraught with danger, and a
much narrower path than the surrounding 0.00 evaluations and
draws by repetitions might make you suspect.

I had previously tended to assume that: a) there is a correct narrow
single path in such positions, and b) the engines find it and the 0.00
evaluations are an accurate reflection of the position. However, the
AlphaZero-Stockfish games have sown doubt in that conclusion, at
least in my mind.
Comparing the forcefulness and vigour with which AlphaZero brings
its pieces into play on the kingside, and the somewhat colourless
variations produced by the other engines in these types of position,
it seems that not all long-term attacking resources for the opponent
are being properly considered. It would then be unsurprising if a
percentage of such narrow 0.00 paths were in fact better for the
attacker, and not holding for the defender. It seems to take an
AlphaZero to prove it however!
From a human perspective, a line such as 16…♗c4 (instead of 16…
♖c7) followed by …b5-b4, possibly combined with some
strengthening moves on the kingside like …♖e8 and …♗f8, would
be the most obvious way to play, ensuring that Black’s counterplay
on the queenside touches White’s structure there. By playing only
with pieces, the engine lines run the risk of having simply wasted
time if the calculated fraught defence turns out to be unsatisfactory.
Fast-forward the game by 15 moves and you might wonder whether
Stockfish had been switched off for that period: AlphaZero has
increased its kingside potential substantially whereas Stockfish’s
queenside counterplay has barely started. This scenario arises
frequently in the games between AlphaZero and Stockfish, and we
gave it the name ‘slow-burning attacks’.
18…♔h7 19.♖f3 ♘a5 20.♕c2+ ♔g8 21.♖e1 ♔h8 22.♕d1 ♘c6 23.♗e3
♗c4 24.♕d2 ♔h7 25.♘f4 ♕e8 26.g4 ♖h8 27.♘h5

AlphaZero has reached an 85.2% expected score. Stockfish 8 starts
off at 0.00 but moves to an unconcerned 0.27 (indicating the game
continuation) after about 1.5 minutes. From a human perspective,
it’s clear that one side is making huge progress: since move 18,
Stockfish has made four moves with its king, and moved its knight to
a5 and back to c6, whereas AlphaZero’s storm is gathering on the
kingside!
27…♔g8
27…♗xh4 28.♖h3 ♕d8 29.♗xh6 gxh6 30.♘f6+ leads to immediate
disaster.
28.♖h3 ♖b7 29.♗f4 ♗f8 30.♕d1 ♘e7 31.♗c1 b5 32.f4

A eureka moment for me. I have played a number of similar
positions from the King’s Indian Attack against Stockfish in training
games in which I built up a strong kingside attacking structure while
Stockfish sat back with an unconcerned smile on its lips and an
eyebrow raised in amusement.
White’s original plan – if Black did nothing – was to break through
with g4-g5. However Stockfish has taken measures by
prophylactically placing the rook on h8. Once g4-g5 happens, then
Black will have some power on the h-file to counter White’s initiative.
Normally, short of time, feeling the pressure, hoping against hope
that this is the game where I repay Stockfish for all its victories
against me, I press on regardless with g4-g5 and in
incomprehensible fashion I get mated on the h-file 15 moves later!
AlphaZero’s method of converting such positions is extremely
instructive. Rather than try to finish the game with a mating attack,
it turns the currently passive rook on h8 into the centrepiece of its
strategy and switches to ensuring that this piece never moves again.
Once this is done, AlphaZero will exchange off Black’s active pieces
and win just by being a rook up. It’s a completely controlled way of
winning that offers Stockfish no chance to display its prodigious
ability for tactical defence in desperate situations.

32…♖b6 33.♗a3 ♘g6 34.♗xf8 ♘xf8 35.♕d2 ♕c8 36.♖f3 ♕d8 37.♕f2
b4 38.cxb4 ♖xb4 39.f5 ♕c7 40.♖d1 ♕b7 41.♖d2 ♕c7 42.♕g3 ♗b5
43.♔h2 ♗d7 44.♕f2 ♖b6 45.♖c2 ♖c6 46.♖b2 ♖b6 47.♗f1 ♕b8
48.♖xb6 axb6 49.f6 g6 50.♘g3 ♗e8 51.♕b2 ♕d8 52.h5 ♘d7 53.♔g2 g5
There we are! AlphaZero has ended up playing this kingside pawn
storm with the aim of incarcerating the black pieces… and you might
say that it has succeeded. By avoiding g4-g5, White has kept the h-
file closed and left Black’s rook on h8 useless in the corner. White
could now light up a cigar and relax by the fireside as Black barely
has a move. AlphaZero’s next move is a bit strange, allowing a
desperate piece sacrifice that gives Black some freedom. However, it
doesn’t help Black to stave off the inevitable defeat.
54.♖c3 ♘xf6 55.exf6 ♕xf6 56.♖f3 ♕d8 57.♕b4 ♔g7 58.♗e2 ♗c6
59.♖b3 ♗d7 60.♕d6 ♗a4 61.♕xd8 ♖xd8 62.♖xb6 ♔f8 63.♔f2 ♖c8
64.♖a6 ♗d7 65.♖a7 ♔e8 66.♗d3 ♖c3 67.♔e2 ♔d8 68.♔d2 ♖c7
69.♖xc7 ♔xc7 70.♔c3 ♗a4 71.♔b4 ♗d1 72.♗e2 ♗c2 73.♘f1 1-0

1.
a)
b)
c)
 
Section B – 0.00 and open lines
Our next example also features in the chapter ‘Colour complexes’.
Game: ‘The matrix’
AlphaZero
Stockfish 8
London 2018
Let’s start by assessing the position: it’s crazy! Black is two pawns up
but has a number of serious problems:
Passive pieces:
the queen’s rook is tied to a6 for the moment to prevent White’s
queen from entering on b6 or a7.
the bishop is glued to e6 to block White’s rooks from invading
along the e-file.
two of Black’s major pieces are tied to the defence of the bishop
on e6.

2.
3.
Vulnerable king: Black’s entire pawn structure is a mass of holes,
which means that the black king has no safe place anywhere on
the board. The black king will have to rely completely on its own
pieces to defend it, as the pawns have already left home!
White entry points: By pushing the h-pawn to h6, White has
given itself an advanced entry point for its queen with ♕g7
(White might even consider a manoeuvre like ♖h1-h5-g5-g7!).
Together with the doubled rooks on the e-file attacking the bishop
on e6, ♕g7 causes Black some anxiety.
And yet, for all that, Black is by no means lost. White has no easy
way to open up the position further. A move like b2-b3 on the
queenside is possible, but White must be careful of its own king’s
safety. A typical idea for White would be to move its king over to the
kingside – for example to g1 – to be able to make pawn moves more
freely on the queenside, but it takes a fair amount of organisation
and of course the kingside – with the exposed pawn on h6 – is not
completely safe! For now Black has sufficient resources to defend its
extended territory.
Let’s see what the engines think:
Houdini 6.02: top three lines after one minute of
analysis
Evaluation
First line
55…♖e8 56.♗f4 ♕d7 57.♕g7 ♔c8
58.♕d4 ♔b7
0.00
Second line
55…bxa3 56.bxa3 c3 57.♔a1 ♕c4
58.♕f6 ♖f7 59.♖b1+ ♔a8 60.♕h8+
♕c8 61.♕e5 ♕c7 62.♕h8+ ♕c8
0.00
Third line
55…♕d7 56.♗f4 ♖e8 57.♕g7 ♔c8
58.♕d4 ♔b7
0.00

Stockfish 8: top three lines after one minute of
analysis
Evaluation 
First line
55…bxa3 56.bxa3 f4 57.gxf4 ♗f7
58.♗g1 ♖xe2 59.♖xe2 c3 60.f5 ♔c8
61.♔a1 ♕c4 62.♖e7 ♖f6 63.♕xf6
♕f1+ 64.♔a2 ♕c4+ 65.♔a1
0.00
Second line
55…♖e8 56.♗f4 ♕d7 57.♕g7 ♔c8
58.♕e5 ♖b6 59.a4 ♔b7 60.♕g7 ♖e7
61.♕f8 ♕e8 62.♕f6 ♕d7 63.♕f8
0.00
Third line
55…♕d7 56.♗d2 bxa3 57.bxa3 ♔a8
58.♔a2 ♕c8 59.♗f4 ♖b7 60.♕f6
♖bb6 61.♗e3 ♖b7 62.♗f4
0.00
Stockfish 9: top three lines after one minute of
analysis
Evaluation 
First line
55…♕d7 56.♗d2 ♖e8 57.axb4 axb4
58.♗xb4 ♖ea8 59.♔c1 ♖c8 60.♖e3
♖c7 61.♔b1 ♕a4 62.♗a3 ♕d7
63.♗b4
0.00
Second line
55…♖e8 56.♗f4 ♕d7 57.♕g7 ♔c8
58.♕e5 ♖b6 59.axb4 axb4 60.b3 ♔b7
61.♕g7 ♖e7 62.♕f8 ♖e8 63.♕g7
0.00
Third line
55…bxa3 56.bxa3 c3 57.♔a1 ♕c4
58.♕f6 ♖f7 59.♖b1+ ♔a8 60.♕h8+
♕c8 61.♕e5 ♖b7 62.♖xb7 ♕xb7
63.♕xc3 ♖c6 64.♕xa5+ ♕a6
0.00

1.
2.
Komodo 11.2.2: top three lines after one minute of
analysis
Evaluation 
First line
55…bxa3 56.bxa3 ♔a8 57.♔a2 ♕c8
58.♗f4 c3 59.♖b1 ♖b7 60.♖xb7 ♔xb7
61.♕h8+ ♔a7 62.♕d4+ ♕b6 63.♕g7+
♕b7 64.♕d4+
0.00
Second line
55…♕d7 56.♗f4 ♖e8 57.♖e3 ♔a8
58.♕g7 ♖e7 59.♕e5 ♖e8 60.♕d4
♕b7 61.♕f6 ♕d7 62.♖d1 ♕c6
63.♖de1 ♕c8 64.♕d4 ♕b7
0.00
Third line
55…♖e8 56.♗f4 ♕d7 57.♖e3 ♔a8
58.♕g7 ♖e7 59.♕e5 ♖e8 60.♕d4
♕b7 61.♕f6 ♕d7 62.♖d1 ♕c6
63.♖de1 ♕c8 64.♕d4 ♕b7
0.00
Komodo 11.3.1: top three lines after one minute of
analysis
Evaluation 
First line
55…bxa3 56.bxa3 ♔a8 57.♔a2 ♕c8
58.♗f4 c3 59.♖b1 ♖b7 60.♖xb7 ♕xb7
61.♕h8+ ♔a7 62.♕d4+ ♔a8
0.00
Second line
55…♕d7 56.♗f4 ♖e8 57.♖e3 ♔a8
58.♕g7 ♖e7 59.♕d4 ♕c8 60.♖xe6
♖exe6 61.♕xd5+ ♔a7 62.♗e3+ ♔b8
63.♗f4 ♔a7
0.00
Third line
55…♕c8 56.♗g5 ♖c7 57.a4 ♔a8
58.♖e5 ♖b7 59.♗f4 ♖c6 60.♖5e2
♖e7 61.♗g5 ♖b7 62.♖e5 ♖bb6
63.♗e3 ♖b7 64.♗f4 ♖d6
0.00
Again, I’ve pulled out a few key bits of information from all these
variations:
The engines assess two fundamentally different options in the
same way: opening the queenside with 55…bxa3 and keeping the
queenside closed with 55…♕d7 or 55…♖e8.
Stockfish has a concrete follow-up planned against 55…bxa3
56.bxa3.

3.
1.
2.
None of the engines spot AlphaZero’s (phenomenal) active idea
56.♔a2 after 55…bxa3 (see the ‘Colour complexes’ chapter for an
in-depth examination of this fantastic idea).
Once again, after six hours of deep analysis, the results were
comparable: the main line for both Stockfish 9 and Komodo 11.3.1
were evaluated as 0.00, while Houdini was a slight trend-breaker
with -0.14.
Let’s start with the last point. AlphaZero’s reply to Stockfish’s 55…
bxa3 in the game (56.♔a2) was a total shock for me, so it isn’t
amazing that engines would not discover such an idea after running
for just one minute. However, the first point intrigued me greatly.
The engines are considering two radically different approaches: 55…
bxa3 opens up the queenside, looking for counterplay against the
white king, but also potentially opening up lines against the black
king: it is a very high-risk continuation. 55…♖e8 and 55…♕d7
maintain the status quo and put the onus on White to puzzle out a
way to prise open Black’s position: these are the conservative
options.
Isn’t it amazing that the engines think that two such radically
different approaches are completely equivalent? White’s
compensation for the two pawns is its enormous activity, the
passivity of Black’s pieces and the vulnerability of Black’s king. From
a human perspective it’s hard to believe that Black should have so
much leeway in this position!
From an engine perspective, you wonder whether two things might
happen:
An engine might keep the position closed for a while and then
suddenly decide to open the position: if everything is equal, what
difference does it make?
An engine might play riskily and give its opponent a chance to
find a hole/an unexpected resource in some fraught analysis,

rather than keeping things tight and forcing the opponent to
engineer a break.
This is in fact what happens in the game: after the risky 55…bxa3,
Stockfish has a concrete idea in mind to justify the risk involved in
opening the b-file against the king. However, AlphaZero is looking at
the position with a specific, attacking mindset: no concern for
material, the desire to add an open file pointing towards the black
king to its total control of the a7-g1 diagonal, and a keen desire to
maximise its own activity and restrict its opponent’s activity to the
maximum degree. This mindset enables it to find an unexpected
resource.
It’s hardly the end of the game after this – in fact AlphaZero’s
evaluation drops slightly from 62.9% after 55.♗e3 to 60.0% after
56.♔a2 and stays at that level until 67.♗g1, when AlphaZero’s
evaluation starts climbing until the end. However, 56.♔a2 ensures
that Stockfish does not get the concrete, forced play it was looking
for when taking on a3, and makes the defensive task much more
perilous.
From my perspective, having seen what happens when AlphaZero
gets open lines to work with, I would always prefer solid moves like
55…♕d7 and 55…♖e8. With Stockfish on the black side, nothing is
decided yet after 55…bxa3, but AlphaZero is in its element. The rest
of the game is thoroughly annotated in the ‘Colour complexes’
chapter.

1.
2.
3.
 
Section C – 0.00 and quiet positions
The following game is another epic struggle. Unfortunately, there is
a period in the middle in which AlphaZero seems determined to
enjoy its position without taking immediate action, which makes it
rather long! We analyse it in depth in the ‘Outposts’ chapter, so we
will restrict ourselves to the main events in this chapter.
We start with a sequence of positions from the game. Stockfish is
White, AlphaZero is Black. After each position, we consider the
following questions:
Has anyone made progress? If so, who?
What is AlphaZero’s evaluation?
What are the evaluations of Stockfish 8, Stockfish 9 and Houdini
6.02?
Game: ‘The file that matters’
After Black’s 36th move:
Stockfish 8
AlphaZero
London 2018

After Black’s 41st move:

After White’s 70th move:
After Black’s 75th move:
What do you think? These were our results:

Move
36
Human assessment
The position is equal.
Houdini 6.02
0.00 (first three lines)
Stockfish 8
0.00 (first three lines)
Stockfish 9
0.00 (first three lines)
AlphaZero
53.4% expected score for Black
Move
41
Human assessment
The position has moved Black’s way. The risk in White’s
position is higher due to the pawn on g3 that inhibits the
movement of White’s king.
Houdini 6.02
0.00 (first three lines)
Stockfish 8
0.00 (first three lines)
Stockfish 9
0.00 (first three lines)
AlphaZero
59.8% expected score for Black
Move
70
Human assessment
Black is clearly on top after the horrible move 70.f4,
conceding the e4-square and blocking the c1-h6 diagonal
(and thus giving the black king a safe square on h6).
Houdini 6.02
0.00 (first three lines)
Stockfish 8
0.00 (first three lines)
Stockfish 9
0.00 (first three lines)
AlphaZero
63.2% expected score for Black
Move
75
Human assessment
It took me quite some time to understand Black’s pawn
sacrifice 74…a4, but I think that it was very strong.
White seems to be so stretched (due to the poor move
70.f4) that White loses a pawn back by force.
Houdini 6.02
0.00 (first three lines)
Stockfish 8
0.00 (first three lines)
Stockfish 9
-0.68 first line, with a line similar to AlphaZero’s
continuation
AlphaZero
67.7% expected score for Black

As you can gather, my feeling when playing through the game was
that Black was making steady progress. I felt that AlphaZero was
playing well, but I felt that the main progress was due to needless
concessions from Stockfish. Even if the positions after move 41
(when Black pins the white king to the back rank with the g3-pawn)
and move 70 (after White has given away the e4-square to a black
knight) were objectively equal (which I don’t believe) White’s
position would still have become considerably riskier than on move
36 (when AlphaZero’s preference for Black seemed to me more like
bravado than objective fact). Interestingly, Stockfish 9 was first to
realise that it was slipping into trouble (though still a little too late).
I spent some time thinking about this loss as I had not expected
AlphaZero to be able to defeat Stockfish from such an equal position.
It was intriguing that another superhuman strength engine exactly
shared Stockfish’s evaluations of the position. In some way I felt that
the evaluation of many different lines as 0.00 had led Stockfish to
drift, and perhaps at points in the game to choose an inferior one of
the ‘equal’ lines on offer.
However, that didn’t feel like the whole story. It suddenly occurred to
me when looking at Stockfish’s and Houdini’s main lines during the
game that AlphaZero had done something remarkable.
Houdini and Stockfish 8 and 9 are expecting Black throughout the
game to challenge for the only open file currently on the board – the
e-file –, which would lead to an exchange of rooks, and – due to the
reduction in material – a reduction in the danger to the white king.
However, this is the one thing that AlphaZero is not intending to do,
evaluating that it can make use of the rook elsewhere at a later
stage of the game (it later sacrifices the a-pawn with …a5-a4 to
create another open file on the board). In our ‘AlphaZero style –
meeting in the middle’ chapter, we hypothesise that the ‘self-taught’
AlphaZero might, when appropriate and necessary, be able to break

general rules more easily than a handcrafted engine like Stockfish,
and this may be such an example.
My feeling is that a large part of Stockfish’s 0.00 evaluation is based
on its occupation and control of the e-file (together with access to
an advanced outpost on e6 along that file) and that this dulls its
evaluation to other concessions it is making.
For me, the reason for Stockfish’s defeat lies somewhere in this area.
AlphaZero was able to put a good general rule (occupying open files)
aside in a specific situation, seemingly with a long-term view about
what might happen in the game (based heavily I suspect on the
restricted position of White’s king after 41…hxg3). Stockfish seemed
to continually expect an exchange of rooks, which would minimise
the danger of its position, and ended up on the wrong foot, making
concessions which would eventually prove to be painful in a position
with rooks still on.
The interesting point about these observations is that positions with
0.00 evaluations don’t occur just in computer chess: 0.00
evaluations occur very frequently when analysing complex struggles
in human games with engines, or when preparing openings against
prospective opponents. The following thrilling struggle from the 2018
Berlin Candidates is a case in point:
Vladimir Kramnik
2800
Levon Aronian
2794
Berlin Candidates 2018 (10)
1.e4 e5 2.♘f3 ♘c6 3.♗c4 ♗c5 4.♘c3 ♘f6 5.d3 a6 6.♘d5 ♘xd5 7.♗xd5
d6 8.♗e3 ♗xe3 9.fxe3 0-0 10.0-0 ♘b8 11.b4 ♘d7 12.♕d2 c6 13.♗b3 a5
14.a3 ♘f6 15.h3 h6 16.♖ab1 b5 17.♕c3 ♗d7 18.♖f2 ♕b6 19.♖e1 ♖fe8
20.♘h4 c5 21.♖ef1 cxb4 22.♕e1 d5

A quiet opening from Kramnik had exploded after Aronian’s
ambitious queenside play.
Vladimir Kramnik: a thrilling struggle with Levon Aronian in the Berlin Candidates.
A noteworthy feature of the online computer analysis during the
game was that the evaluation stayed at 0.00 or thereabouts until
Aronian’s blunder 36…♕c7. I first of all let my engines loose on the

position after move 23 for about 12 hours each and then asked
AlphaZero for its opinion: the results were very interesting.
23.axb4 dxe4 24.bxa5 ♖xa5 25.♘g6
Kramnik’s move is not considered seriously by AlphaZero, which
focuses instead on 25.dxe4 and the immediate exchange sacrifice on
f6. The majority of my engines follow AlphaZero’s approach after
many hours of analysis.
25.♖xf6.
Played with an expected score of 62.8% for White.
25…gxf6 26.dxe4 ♔f8 (26…♖a6 27.♔h2 ♔f8 transposes to the
main line; 26…♖a7 via the move order 25.dxe4 ♖a7 26.♖xf6 gxf6
is Stockfish’s choice after 6 hours of analysis: 27.♖f3 ♔f8 28.♕b4+
♖e7 29.♗d5 ♔e8 30.♔h2 ♖a6 31.♕e1 ♕c5 32.♕g3 ♔f8 33.♕f2,
which it assesses as 0.00!) 27.♔h2 ♖a6 28.♕e2 f5 (28…♖e7
29.♕f3 ♕d6 is the end of AlphaZero’s line which it assesses as a
62.9% expected score for White) 29.♘xf5 ♗xf5 30.♖xf5 ♖e7

and the last move of AlphaZero’s line ends in a 61.9% expected
score for White.
Comparing the analysis of these strong engines and AlphaZero, the
‘raw materials’ – the ideas – are almost identical in this position, but
the evaluation is significantly different. From the engines’ evaluation,
I would conclude that this position is simply equal and not worth
trying; AlphaZero’s evaluation is a definite encouragement to enter
this line. Who is right? Whilst I would imagine that the correct result
with best play is a draw, I think that AlphaZero’s assessment better
captures the relative balance of chances after the exchange
sacrifice: White’s king’s position is impregnable and there is little
chance of Black developing counterplay whilst White can move his
pieces around, gain territory and attempt to eke out a mistake based
on Black’s weak pawns, open king and slightly passive major pieces.
25…♗e6 26.♘xe5 exd3 27.♖xf6 gxf6 28.♖xf6 d2 29.♕g3+ ♔f8 30.♖f1
♖a7 31.♘g6+ ♔g7 32.♘f4+ ♔h8 33.♘h5 f6 34.♘xf6 ♖f8 35.♕f4 ♖h7
36.♕e5

36…♕c7
A real shame that a game played with so much imagination by both
players should end with a blunder.
Things look very fraught for Black but the following engine
suggestion keeps a – yes, you’ve guessed it – 0.00 evaluation! 36…
♖g7 37.♗xe6 ♕c6 38.e4 ♖g5 39.♘d7+ ♖xe5 40.♖xf8+ ♔h7
41.♖f7+ is a sample draw by perpetual that really appealed to me!
37.♘e8+ 1-0
… was the dramatic conclusion.

CHAPTER 3
Demis Hassabis, DeepMind and AI
DeepMind was set up to solve intelligence and use it to solve
everything else. Spending time with the DeepMind team, the authors
were struck by the depth and diversity of challenges being met by
the company. We both first knew DeepMind CEO Demis Hassabis as
an up-and-coming chess talent in the English junior chess circuit,
and as a frequent medal winner in London’s Mind Sports Olympiad,
an international festival with over 60 different board game
competitions. That early experience would ultimately prove the
cornerstone of one of modern science’s most fascinating careers.
After a degree in computer science from Cambridge, and several
successful ventures in computer games development – including
helping program and design the best-selling title Theme Park and
setting up the developer Elixir Studios – Demis went on to complete
a PhD in neuroscience at UCL and conduct research at top labs
including at MIT and Harvard. In 2010 he founded DeepMind, having
acquired the relevant expertise in neuroscience, computing and
business.
Demis Hassabis, CEO of DeepMind.

Here Demis tells us about his unique journey, as well as the origins
of AlphaZero, the thinking behind it, and how, one day, it might be
used to assist humanity in making crucial scientific discoveries.
When did you start down the path that would lead you to becoming
CEO of DeepMind?
Thinking back, chess is a core part of my identity in many ways. Like
with a lot of chess players who started young (I was about four
years old), chess became a key element of the way I think and
approach problems. I was quite an introspective kid who spent a lot
of time trying to improve my chess, like all junior players. I liked the
competitive aspect from winning tournaments, but the most
satisfying thing was measuring your own self-improvement and
seeing how far you can push yourself to reach your true potential.
But I was also spending a lot of time reflecting on what my brain
was doing. During a game I would often wonder, ‘How’s my brain
doing this? How’s it coming up with these plans at that moment?
What is this process of thinking?’ That got me interested in the
mind, the muscle we were using to play chess, how it works and
how to improve it. I really believe you can try and understand this
process mechanistically.
Then around the age of eight I got my first computer, a ZX Spectrum
48k, and I loved it from the moment I unwrapped the box. Even that
was indirectly influenced by chess. I can’t remember any of my
friends having computers at that time and my parents are complete
technophobes so I don’t know where I got the idea. But I decided
I’d like a computer and my parents couldn’t object because I used
my winnings from an under-10s chess tournament to buy it – it cost
about a hundred pounds. I bought some programming books as well
and just started playing and modifying games that came with the
computer.

When did your interest switch to computers?
It was already starting to switch quite quickly. At that time, I was
equally obsessed with chess and computers. I was teaching myself
how to program from books. In those days you could readily access
the code to a game to start tinkering with – giving yourself extra
lives, changing the sprites, things like that – and before you knew it,
you had a different game. From there it’s a small leap to creating
your own games from scratch.
What were your first steps with AI?
I started my journey into AI when I was about 12. I bought a
Commodore Amiga 500, which was an amazing machine that you
could write a lot more complex and demanding programs on. I got
one of my first books on AI, the Computer Chess Handbook by David
Levy, which explained concepts like alpha-beta search and evaluation
functions, and I used the ideas in it to program my Amiga to play
Othello4. I tested it on my kid brother, George, and it managed to
beat him. Admittedly he must have only been about 6 at the time!
But it was still a huge thrill and it started me thinking about both the
potential of AI and using games as a testing ground for it.

As I got progressively more drawn into computer games
programming, my desire to become a professional chess player
diminished. I loved playing chess and I still do, but I felt it would
have been too narrow a pursuit to spend my entire career on. There
are so many exciting things in life to discover, learn about and
master! Even just in the domain of games there are so many brilliant
ones with ingenious game designs and mechanics. A lot of chess
player friends I know only like chess, whereas I’ve always liked a
whole range of games from board games such as Go, shogi,
Diplomacy, poker, Settlers of Catan, to computer games like
Civilization and Starcraft… I’m yet to see a good game I didn’t enjoy!
Then at 16 I got my first job as a professional programmer at
Bullfrog Productions, which I would say was the number one games
development house in Europe at the time. Theme Park was my first
big game and it became a no.1 best-selling title and a huge
commercial success. Among other things, I wrote the AI that ran the
simulation and characters. The idea behind the game was that you
designed and built a complete amusement park and then thousands
of little people would come to play on the rides. If they enjoyed
themselves they would ‘tell their friends’ and that would result in
more visitors and revenue, which you could then use to buy bigger
and better rides. You played how you liked and the game would
adapt to the way you played. And it was sort of magical because the
game experience would be different and individual for every player
even though it was the same program. And that already really struck
me as something quite interesting and powerful about emergent
simulations and AI.
How did you plan your career?
My time at Bullfrog was quite formative, there was a very interesting
set of talented people working there from very diverse backgrounds,
led by the mercurial and world-famous game designer Peter
Molyneux.

At the same time I was voraciously reading lots of books like
Douglas Hofstadter’s Gödel, Escher, Bach, Isaac Asimov’s Foundation
series, and Iain Banks’ Culture series, all of which had a big
influence on me. It was during this time that I decided I was going
to dedicate my career to working on AI; it was the most important
and interesting thing I could possibly imagine working on, and I
already had the kernel of the idea for what eventually became
DeepMind.
The rest of my early career was then about collecting the right
knowledge and experience to be ready to run an ambitious project
like DeepMind. That led to my degree in Computer Science at
Cambridge, and after graduation I founded my own games company,
Elixir Studios, which gave me invaluable experience at a young age
of how to run large engineering teams, manage businesses, raise
money and work with big publishers. Following that, I did a PhD in
neuroscience to better understand and get inspiration from how our
own brains work and solve some of the problems we wanted our AIs
to be able to do, connecting back to the thoughts that fascinated me
as a kid playing chess.
What was your PhD about?
I worked on a small but crucial part of the brain called the
hippocampus. We’ve known since the 1950s that it is critical for
episodic memory – the type of memory that helps us recall events in
our everyday lives. But I decided to investigate whether it was also
involved in supporting imagination and planning for the future. It
turned out that – surprisingly – it was, and this ended up becoming
a major finding for the hippocampus and memory field, as well as
opening up imagination (or ‘mental simulation’) as a legitimate
scientific topic of neuroscience study.
Our work demonstrated a systematic connection between the
reconstructive process of memory recall, and the constructive
process of imagination, and the fact that they both rely on the same

underlying mechanisms and are dependent on the fast binding
capabilities of the hippocampus.
I decided to study memory and imagination because they seemed
like two key components of intelligence, and yet we had no idea how
to build and integrate those capabilities into our AI systems at the
time.
In addition to learning about the brain and using it as a source of
inspiration for new types of algorithms, I was also learning about the
scientific method in practice: how to come up with and test your
hypotheses, how to design good experiments with proper controls so
one can draw valid conclusions, how to engage with the scientific
discourse, review the literature, publish papers and present at
conferences. If you’re going to manage the complex research
programmes that we have here at DeepMind, you have to
understand all those processes fully.
I always try to do things for multiple reasons: life’s so short, ideally
you want to do activities that have more than one purpose. My PhD
is a good example, you’re learning about neuroscience to understand
more about the mind, while also learning about how to conduct
good research.
And throughout all of this time, I was making a mental note of all
the amazing people I met who might have useful skills for, and be
interested in, an AI adventure one day – neuroscientists, engineers,
game designers – and we brought them all back together for
DeepMind.
Was developing a strong chess computer something you thought
about a lot in your career?
Early on in my career I actually thought that chess was sort of ‘done’
because of Deep Blue’s achievements in the late 90s. But the game
of Go was something I thought about a lot. It presented a unique
challenge. We could see that the method that worked for chess –
hardcoded heuristics combined with brute force search – just

wouldn’t work for Go because of its incredible complexity and highly
esoteric nature.
Dave Silver (the lead researcher on AlphaGo) and I used to discuss
this a lot back when we were making games at Elixir (in fact we
often played Go in the evenings there!). The possibilities excited us;
we could see the limitations of the hand-coded brute force methods,
and we felt that cracking Go would necessarily involve having to
invent some truly interesting and novel algorithms that might also be
a step towards flexible and general AI. In the end it would be
another 20 years – and long research journeys respectively – before
finally we felt like we were ready to tackle such an immense
challenge. But it was always there, in the back of our minds,
gestating, waiting for the right time and right combination of ideas.
How did you set up your Go playing project?
After DeepMind’s acquisition by Google in early 2014, I gave a talk
about DQN – a system that could learn to play any Atari game just
from observing the pixels on the screen – to Google’s executive
team. One of them asked me afterwards if we could apply these
techniques to Go and how long it would take to beat a world
champion. Without thinking, I said it might take two years.
In a way, saying that out loud served as the final impetus to actually
begin the project that would become known as AlphaGo – the first
computer program to defeat a professional human Go player.
When I got back, I talked to Dave and some of the other members
of the team about what I’d said. There was a collective feeling that
maybe now, nearly 20 years after we had first dreamed about it, we
finally had the right ideas to tackle this incredible challenge. That
was when we decided it was the right time to show the world that it
was in fact possible to build a system that could learn how to play
and master Go.
Initially we started the project very small, with just Dave, Aja Huang,
lead programmer and a computer Go expert, and a single intern,

Chris Maddison, working on it. To begin with we just wanted to
establish whether it was even possible to train a neural network –
later called the ‘policy net’ – to predict what a strong player’s next
move might be in any given board position.
In late 2014, after around 6 months’ work, we got our first big
result. The network was guessing the move of a professional player
correctly with around 55% accuracy, so it was far from perfect but
very promising. This was very exciting as it gave us our first
empirical evidence that a neural net approach could really maybe
work for Go. And we knew, from hard experience acquired through
building these types of self-learning systems many times, that once
you have a foothold like this, usually you can rapidly scale and
improve them through careful optimisation, better algorithms, more
training and more compute power.
The game of Go
Go is a beautiful and elegant strategy game that originated in
China around 3,000 years ago. Players take turns to place black or
white stones on a 19x19 board in an effort to surround more
territory than their opponent. Despite the simple rules, Go is
incredibly complex, with more than 10 to the power of 170 (1
followed by 170 zeroes) possible board configurations, more than
there are atoms in the universe. Go players are ranked using kyu
and dan grades, the same system as used in martial arts.
Beginners progress through kyu grades, which decrease as
playing level increases until a player achieves 1 kyu. These are
followed by the amateur dan grades, which usually increase from
1 dan to 6 or 7 dan. Professional Go players have a separate
ranking system that runs from 1 dan to 9 dan.
What did the AlphaGo project team do?
After that result we really accelerated things. Around another 15
people joined the project, brilliant specialists with a wide array of

skills, and some of the best in the world at what they do, brought
together in what we term internally a ‘Strike Team’. This involves
cross-cutting reporting lines, so that each person reports out of their
normal teams together especially for this one project. It’s like
launching a product even though it’s still research. The momentum
once a project like this gets going is incredible, and it was a really
amazingly creative period.
There are milestones and you have leaderboards to keep track of
how good the estimated strength of the program (Elo rating) is at
every step of the way.
The first milestone was beating the current top handcrafted Go
programs: Zen and Crazy Stone. Both programs were strong
amateur level (around 5 dan amateur), but neither were at pro level.
In fact, famously, no machine had ever beaten a pro at Go. The last
big advance in computer Go had been a decade prior, with the use
of Monte Carlo tree search rather than alpha-beta search, but they
still used handcrafted evaluation functions and had only been
improving very slowly over the past few years. Our next innovation
was creating a second neural network, called the ‘Value Net’, that
learns through experience to estimate the probability of winning
from the current position. We put the Policy Net and Value Net
together with Monte Carlo tree search to create our first fully-
functional Go program.
To our pleasant surprise we reached our first milestone just 6
months after our initial results, so we had the world’s strongest Go
program at that point. AlphaGo continued to rapidly improve with
more training and soon it was able to beat Aja, who is about 6 dan
amateur himself. This was a particularly poignant moment for Aja
personally because he had achieved his lifelong dream of writing a
Go program that could beat him!
We were now ready for our second milestone, which was to take on
and be the first program to beat a professional player. We emailed
the 3-times European Champion Fan Hui, who turned out to be a

truly wonderful and warm human being, and eventually became an
advisor to the team. He was based in France so he could get over
here easily and we could try playing him first behind closed doors.
We won that match 5-0 and with that became the first program to
ever beat a professional at Go. As you can imagine that was an
awesome moment, one that would go down in history, and off the
back of that we submitted a paper to the scientific journal Nature,
chronicling our results so far.
We then turned our attention to the third and final step, attempting
to beat a World Champion. We wanted someone who had been
established at the top of the game for a long time, but was still at
their peak. In the end we decided to challenge the legendary 9-dan
South Korean grandmaster Lee Sedol, winner of 18 world titles, and
acknowledged as the greatest player of the past decade.
We wanted to announce the match at the same time as the
publication of the Nature paper, but this was a big risk as at the time
of making the announcement, we knew that AlphaGo was still
considerably weaker than Lee Sedol, and there would only be about
three months to go. However, the performance graph was rising
inexorably higher, and unless it was to asymptote for some reason,
we predicted it would cross-over to be stronger than Lee Sedol
before the match.
History shows that its rise continued, but how did you rate AlphaGo’s
chances going into that match?
Lee Sedol was pretty confident, and predicted a 5-0 or 4-1 victory
for him, because he had seen the Fan Hui games that we published
in Nature. In the documentary – AlphaGo – that was made about the
matches, he says that he believed that human intuition was still ‘too
advanced for AI to have caught up’.
At that point AlphaGo was better than a 2-dan pro, but it was
nowhere close to his strength. Fan Hui is a top-500 player. Lee Sedol
is a 9-dan pro, and one of the greatest players of all time, he would

have thrashed the version of AlphaGo we played against Fan Hui. I
guess he quite reasonably thought: ‘how much could it really have
improved given it’s only three to four months later?’ Perhaps a few
levels, but surely not 7 dan rankings!
For our part we were quietly confident but also nervous. By the time
of the match, our internal tests were telling us that the program
should be stronger than Lee Sedol overall, but there was a high
degree of uncertainty. AlphaGo was evaluated by testing it against
earlier versions of itself, so in machine learning terms it could have
overfit, in other words it could have learnt to beat itself very
efficiently, but somehow that capability would maybe not generalise
to a totally new opponent, especially someone who was famed for
his creativity and fighting spirit.
Even more worryingly we also knew that AlphaGo suffered from
what we dubbed ‘delusion’ problems. We didn’t know exactly why,
but in certain highly complex fighting situations, where precise
timing was important in a very long sequence of moves, sometimes
the system would misevaluate the position, and thus would
incorrectly assess the position as being good for it, when in fact it
was totally losing.
We tried dozens of things to fix the problem, but we were not able
to fix it in time for the match (we did manage to resolve this
problem in later versions of AlphaGo). Our tests showed this type of
position would occur at a frequency of roughly one time in every five
games, and so based on this we were expecting a 4-1 victory.
Incredibly, that’s exactly what happened, with Lee Sedol managing
to win game four by playing a genius move that was so unexpected
it triggered one of these misevaluations.
And so we had won this historic match, stunning AI and Go experts,
with many proclaiming that the achievement was ‘a decade ahead of
its time’. Of course winning was the main aim, but in fact the most
important thing was the way AlphaGo won. During the match
AlphaGo played many highly original, creative and beautiful moves,

most famously move 37 in game 2, which in many cases overturned
centuries of received wisdom. It wasn’t just regurgitating or copying
human knowledge. Subsequently Fan Hui and our many friends in
the Go world have told us this has revolutionised how the game is
played, and many books have now been written about AlphaGo’s
unique playing style.
It sounds like AlphaGo’s development went reasonably smoothly?
Progress often looks smooth in retrospect, but at the time the
outcome of each step was totally uncertain. A few months into the
project I remember mentioning to Aja that we should be aiming one
day to take on a 9-dan professional, and he thought I’d completely
lost my mind! But that’s how it always is with any truly cutting-edge
research: if you know for sure how a branch of research is going to
go, then it isn’t really research. That’s what is so exciting about
scientific research, every day you wake up and take a step into the
unknown.
Has your approach to AI changed as you developed AlphaGo and
AlphaZero?
It’s very interesting if you stand back and look at the whole body of
work. First, we started with AlphaGo and we were trying to beat this
game that was thought uncrackable for AI. Then, once we had
achieved that, we tried to make the system progressively more
efficient and general.
The original AlphaGo was initially trained using hundreds of
thousands of human amateur games to help it develop an
understanding of what reasonable human play looks like. We also
built in a very small amount of Go-specific information, not major
things like rules or heuristics, but very high-level things like the
board has four-way symmetry.
AlphaGo Zero was the next stage in its evolution, which you can
think of as AlphaGo but without any of those crutches. We removed

any domain knowledge and built a system that learns how to play
the game itself, starting from completely random play with no
human games as input. Amazingly, that also worked, so the next
stage was to build AlphaZero, which also learns from random self-
play but can generalise beyond Go to all sorts of two-player perfect
information games5, including of course chess!
When you decided to build AlphaZero – a more general system than
AlphaGo – was it that you had built up more confidence in how to do
it? Or had you discovered some new techniques along the way?
It’s both of those things. This is why it’s so much easier to follow
than to innovate. Once you land on the moon, then other people can
land on the moon. It’s similar in science: things never work the first
time. The question is then: should I push on this harder, or is this a
brick wall? If someone has done it before then it’s just a question of
pain and effort and the will to do it, because you already know that
it is definitely possible.
Conversely, when something is unknown, it’s not just a question of
will. Because sometimes, the right thing to do is to stop and do
something else. If you just will it, you could end up doing the wrong
thing for 30 years and getting nowhere.
Without belief and perseverance you can’t achieve anything in
science, but you also need to know when you are going in the wrong
direction. That is something that I learned through my earlier career
experiences. It’s a very hard thing to teach. It’s like a smell you get,
a taste. They often say that about scientists: the best scientists have
really good taste. What they mean by that is they know how to hone
into the right problem and what the right complexity of problem is to
tackle next. They know the right question to ask.
Your games playing programs are known for having a creative and
attacking style. What kind of games player are you?

I’m more of an all-round games player these days. Familiarity with
many games means there are strategies and motifs you recognise
and then you start seeing all the connections between the different
games, which can help. It also means that you can learn new games
very quickly.
In most games, I generally have quite a controlled and calm style,
and I always like to have something in reserve in case something
unexpected happens!
Can games help people with real life?
That’s the other cool thing about games. You can think of them as a
gym for the mind. In life, big decision moments happen only rarely
and often they are extremely critical. Where do you get to practise
your decision-making under pressure? In life you usually don’t get a
second chance. Games provide a safe training ground where you can
get immediate feedback on your performance and then use that
information to improve. Then you can draw on all that experience
and training when it’s time to face the real event.
I always used to joke that if I were to design an MBA course I’d
design one around games where you get a world expert in each of
the different major games and you learn the meta-skills trained by
those games.
Can AlphaZero be used to teach humans?
There are certain things that machines do that you can’t learn from.
It depends on why they are better at doing them. Let’s take chess
computers as an example. The top programs are all stronger than
the best human chess player. We can analyse as many of their
games as we want, but we won’t become as strong. The reason is
that they are stronger because they calculate more lines and don’t
make tactical blunders. We, as human chess players, are not
intentionally making tactical blunders, it’s just that our brains aren’t

evolved to do that type of calculation. So those solutions are of
limited help to us.
However, what we are finding with AlphaZero is that some of the
improvements or the advancements are actually strategic in nature,
and that is something we can potentially incorporate in our own
play. Go players already found that with AlphaGo and have
incorporated some of its strategies into their own games. I think the
same will happen with AlphaZero and chess. Maybe this book is the
start of that!
Related to this, we are also trying to build analytical and visualisation
tools that offer an insight into how these systems make their
decisions and allow us to better understand what factors they are
weighing up. Work in this area is still at a nascent stage but I think
we will see huge advances in this, and therefore in our
understanding of these systems, in the next few years.
Is it hard to analyse results (such as from AlphaZero) because the
systems are so complicated?
It’s very complicated, but certainly no more complicated than the
brain. Probably substantially less complicated because these systems
are still a lot smaller in terms of the number of neurons and
connections.
We also have full access and control over every moment-by-moment
thing that the machine is doing, which we don’t even have with
brain imaging. So my argument is, our understanding should be at
least as good as with the brain, and I would argue that we should be
in a better position than we are with the brain, because we have all
these extra controls over what the system is doing.
What are the main differences between the way that humans learn
chess, and the way that AlphaZero learns?
People are able to apply abstract knowledge from various sources,
including books, learning from teachers, or even watching AlphaZero

games.
A person doesn’t have to play millions of games to learn, but this
raw experience is the only way that AlphaZero can learn. It can’t be
taught and it can’t read books, it has to learn from first principles.
But we are trying to build machines that are capable of learning
concepts or abstract knowledge. Nobody in the world has cracked
that yet, that’s one of the next big challenges in AI.
Are the techniques you used for AlphaZero applicable in other areas?
Ultimately the whole point of building general learning systems like
AlphaZero is so they can be applied in all sorts of ways to creating
solutions for real world problems that will be of huge benefit to
everyone in society. Games are a very convenient platform on which
to test AI. In my opinion, they are the perfect proving ground for
developing and testing AI algorithms, and that’s why we love using
them – from board games to computer games and virtual
environments.
There are an almost limitless number of things that general AI could
eventually be applied to, but my personal passion is to use these
kinds of AI systems to help scientists make critical research
breakthroughs and discoveries more quickly, in fields where we
urgently need advances such as climate science, material science
and drug discovery. I believe that machine learning and AI have got
a huge part to play in accelerating science and we want to be at the
forefront of that.
What are the opportunities for applying AI in other sectors?
There are so many opportunities for applying AI to certain sectors.
Think of things like healthcare, logistics, energy, transport,
education, insurance, robotics and many others.
I believe there are multiple multi-billion-dollar businesses to be built
by combining existing sector expertise and optimizing it with what is
now relatively off-the-shelf AI.

We’ve already had a lot of success applying these kinds of
techniques ourselves. For example we used ideas similar to
AlphaZero to control the cooling systems in Google’s huge data
centres, saving a huge amount of the energy they use, which of
course is very valuable commercially in terms of saving money, and
is also great for the environment.
What tools are available for an enthusiastic amateur to get started in
AI?
There’s a big open-source community and you can freely download
almost all the library tools that are built by the big companies and do
quite impressive things out of the box. There are also good books
and tons of great online courses.
If you are motivated enough and you have good maths and
programming skills, then you can dive into that – you could try it in
insurance, Natasha! There is plenty to be done – it’s an incredibly
exciting time!
If you could achieve one thing in AI, what would that be?
I think general AI, to which I have devoted my life’s work, is going
to be the most important technology humanity will ever invent.
There are so many problems in the world that remain intractable,
from climate change to diseases such as Alzheimer’s to macro-
economic problems. Everywhere we look there are huge and
complex challenges for society, and the speed at which we are able
to solve these problems will affect the lives and well-being of billions
of people.
This is where I believe AI can – and will – help society in a profound
way. AI is the meta-solution to all of these problems. General AI will
be a tool that will act as a multiplier for human ingenuity, allowing us
to rapidly discover new knowledge and make progress on these
complex challenges at a rate that we have never seen before.

PART II
Inside the box

CHAPTER 4
How AlphaZero thinks
AlphaZero’s self-learning design is different to handcrafted chess
engines such as Stockfish. In this chapter, we take a quick tour of
the mechanics of AlphaZero’s thinking, as it trains and as it plays.
This chapter uses information from a DeepMind scientific publication
in the journal Science released in December 2018: ‘A general
reinforcement learning algorithm that masters chess, shogi, and Go
through self-play’6. David Silver, Lead Researcher on AlphaZero,
explained the inner workings of AlphaZero and research scientist
Thore Graepel and research engineer Matthew Lai were on hand
to answer our questions.
The AlphaZero team (l-r): Tim Lillicrap, David Silver, Thomas Hubert (back),
Matthew Lai (front), Thore Graepel, Demis Hassabis, Julian Schrittwieser, Ioannis
Antonoglou.
Not pictured: Arthur Guez, Marc Lanctot, Laurent Sifre, Dharshan Kumaran and
Karen Simonyan.
Different communities will benefit from understanding AlphaZero’s
thought process, including:

Professional chess players:
Professional chess players now use engines for all of their pre- and
post-game analysis, frequently switching engine according to the
type of position they wish to analyse. By better understanding the
skill sets of the various engines, professionals can make better use
of them. Understanding AlphaZero’s thought processes can provide
fresh insight into the strengths and weaknesses of traditional
engines and help professional players to optimise their use of them.
Amateur chess players:
AlphaZero’s thought processes are more human-like than traditional
chess engines and we can pick up tips from how it makes its
decisions.
Chess program developers:
Understanding AlphaZero’s thought processes gives pointers for
making traditional engines stronger. In addition, developers are
increasingly experimenting with using AI.
AI developers:
The architecture of AlphaZero is general and its combination of
computational reasoning and intuition extends to many important
problem domains beyond game play.
In this chapter we illustrate the AlphaZero thought process by taking
a look under the bonnet at its analysis at a critical moment in the
game – how deeply and widely it searches, what moves it considers,
and how it evaluates the resulting positions.
In the next chapter, ‘AlphaZero’s style – meeting in the middle’, we
relate the design of AlphaZero to its play and advance several
hypotheses about AlphaZero’s playing style and evaluations. We then
attempt to validate these hypotheses by observing AlphaZero’s
games against Stockfish.

How AlphaZero works – the theory
AlphaZero’s architecture is informed by the four principles that
govern DeepMind’s approach to artificial intelligence as a whole:
1. Learning rather than being programmed
The algorithm learns its strategy from examples rather than drawing
on pre-specified human expert knowledge.
2. General rather than specific
The algorithm applies general principles and hence can be applied to
multiple domains, e.g. shogi, Go, and chess.
3. Grounded rather than logic-based
Learning is based on concrete observations rather than preconceived
logical rules.
4. Active rather than passive The machine explores the game
rather than being instructed by a human.
By satisfying all four requirements, AlphaZero deviates considerably
from traditional computer game-playing systems.
Thore Graepel described AlphaZero’s architecture as follows:
‘With approximately 10^47 different chess positions, it would be too
computationally expensive to exhaustively search through every
available move, and every possible sequence of moves that might
follow in the game. Therefore, most chess engines – including
AlphaZero – combine a search algorithm with an evaluation function
that provides an estimate of how good a position is at any point in
the game.
Traditional chess engines use variants of what is called alpha-beta
tree search, enhanced by dozens of game-specific search heuristics,
and combine this with an evaluation function designed by expert
chess players. In contrast, AlphaZero instead learns entirely on its

own, developing its own evaluation function and using Monte Carlo
tree search (MCTS) – a powerful alternative to alpha-beta tree
search, that has the added advantage of being able to take into
account prior knowledge about which moves are promising and
which ones are not. This allows the search to focus mostly on
promising and relevant variations. Furthermore, MCTS is robust with
respect to inaccuracies of the evaluation function, which it averages
across many different positions.
Where, then, does the prior knowledge come from? This is where
AlphaZero’s neural network – a computer system loosely modelled
on the connections and neurons in the brain – comes in. The neural
network takes the current game position as its input, and returns
move probabilities for each possible move to be the strongest
move (this is sometimes called the ‘policy network’), along with a
value estimate for the current position (sometimes called the
‘value network’). This output guides the Monte Carlo tree search
towards the most promising segments of the game tree. By reducing
the number of moves considered in each position, the move
probabilities cut down the breadth of the search. Being able to
estimate the value of non-terminal positions in this way reduces the
depth of the necessary search in the tree, because the value of the
outcome of a given variation can be determined even before the end
of the game is reached.
Crucially, the same algorithm is able to reach superhuman ability
across several games without adapting the architecture for each
specific game. In other words, the system displays a degree of
generality: the same process of Monte Carlo tree search guided by a
neural network, trained with self-play reinforcement learning, proves
effective across several domains without the need for game-specific
settings or modifications.’
Now, we zoom further into AlphaZero’s training for its clash with
Stockfish using some simple practical examples to illustrate the

process.
How AlphaZero trains
Grandmasters might train for an upcoming match by spending many
hours and days researching the latest openings and chess
developments, and adopt a strict diet and exercise regime. They will
also prepare specifically for the opponent they are expecting to face.
This specific preparation involves collecting all of the prospective
opponent’s games using a huge database of tournament games from
all over the world, looking for weaknesses in the opponent’s play,
and particularly in their openings set-ups.
In the last 20 years or so, top grandmasters have found they have to
remember much more than previously, as they feel the need to
adopt a wide range of openings to avoid the preparation of their
opponents.
By contrast, AlphaZero’s training before the Stockfish match took
nine hours. It began training from a clean slate with no chess
knowledge other than the rules of the game, and it didn’t look at
Stockfish’s play at all. AlphaZero also did not use any available chess
openings knowledge, and instead worked out its own openings as it
trained and played against itself.
At the start of these crucial nine hours, AlphaZero did play chess,
but not as we know it. As anyone who has taught chess to a small
child will know, random play will get you nowhere when playing
chess.
To avoid endless random games, those early games were stopped
after a certain number of moves and called draws. Every now and
then, though, some random games would end as wins for one side,
and this rare signal allowed AlphaZero to learn the evaluation
function output by its value network (how good is the current
position?), and its policy function (how good is each move expected
to be?). Intuitively, the system adjusts the parameters of the neural
network such that it makes the moves played by the winning side

1.
more likely in their move probabilities, and it evaluates the positions
encountered as more favourable to the winning side.
During those nine hours, AlphaZero played a total of 44 million
games against itself – more than 1,000 games per second. At the
same time, it continuously adjusted the parameters of its neural
network so as to capture moves and outcomes from the most recent
batch of games played against itself. For each move played during
self-play, the MCTS performed 800 ‘simulations’, each of which
extends the current search by one move while assessing the value of
the resulting position. As an example, AlphaZero could begin to
analyse the chess starting position like this:
Step in thought
process
Node
Evaluation of that node
Simulation 1
1.d4
56.8% (White)
Simulation 2
1.d4 ♘f6
43.1% (Black)
Simulation 3
1.♘f3
56.8% (White)
Simulation 4
1.d4 ♘f6 2.c4
56.7% (White)
Simulation 5
1.d4 d5
43.1% (Black)
Simulation 6
1.d4 ♘f6 2.♘f3
56.6% (White)
Simulation 7
1.d4 ♘f6 2.c4 e6
42.8% (Black)
Simulation 8
1.e4 e5
44.9% (Black)
We’ve shown eight simulations in the table above. By the time
AlphaZero has completed the 800 simulations used for each position
encountered during its lightning-fast training games, it would have
looked a few moves deep for the most plausible lines. However, the
search during training is much shallower than during a tournament
game.
Each time AlphaZero selects a variation to consider, it will be on the
basis of three criteria:
how plausible the move is in this type of position (as determined
by the policy network);

2.
3.
how promising is the outcome of the variation (as determined by
the value network); and
how often this variation has been considered in the search.
If a given variation has not been considered many times before, if
the move appears plausible and if the variation looks promising, then
AlphaZero will tend to select the variation and its continuation for
simulation. The evaluation of the initial position will then be the
average of all position evaluations from each of the 800 simulations.
It should be noted that this is quite different from how current chess
engines assess positions. Rather than returning an average of all
lines considered, an engine such as Stockfish bases its assessment
on the so-called principal variation, i.e. the very best line for both
sides according to the current search tree. We believe that this is
one of the reasons why AlphaZero plays in a style that is very
different to traditional chess engines, often taking a more intuitive
approach. We explore this further in the next chapter.
AlphaZero also differs from traditional chess engines such as
Stockfish in its evaluation function, which may account for further
differences in style. Stockfish’s evaluation function is a combination
of positional features. An example of how Stockfish evaluates a
given position can be found in its evaluation guide. These figures
were produced for a sample position using online resources at
https://hxim.github.io/Stockfish-Evaluation-Guide/:

In the example above, Stockfish assesses the position using an
evaluation function that is a linear combination of features, with two
sets of weights, one for the middlegame and one for the endgame.
Stockfish assesses a number of factors for both White and Black
(e.g. material and mobility are showing as contributors for the above
position) and the total evaluation is the weighted sum of the various
components. Note that beneath these groups of factors there is a
more detailed list of individual factors with Stockfish taking hundreds
of positional factors into consideration.
AlphaZero also has an evaluation function. Unlike the traditional
chess engines of the last 50 years, which use handcrafted functions
designed by grandmasters and represented as a linear combination
of positional features, AlphaZero’s evaluation function is learnt and
represented in terms of a neural network called the ‘value network’,
trained to predict game outcomes based on a raw representation of
chess positions.
As a result, AlphaZero is unconstrained by human design or lack of
imagination and has complete flexibility in choosing the features it
takes into account when evaluating a given position.
But how AlphaZero’s value network works remains a bit of a mystery
and cannot be explained in simple rules such as a knight being

worth approximately three pawns. It is likely that AlphaZero’s value
network views and assesses positions in a more fluid, situation-
dependent way.
So, rather than being constrained to, say, an evaluation function that
adds separate assessments of material and mobility, AlphaZero can
consider the interaction of different factors, for example how
mobility affects the value of the material. This flexibility can be very
useful in understanding the overall position, and could explain how
AlphaZero implements combinations of positional motifs so
effectively (see Chapter 10 on ‘Colour complexes’). Whilst we cannot
understand exactly how AlphaZero is thinking, we can explore the
ways in which AlphaZero generates its innovative and active plans,
and how it conducts its ferocious attacks through analysing its
games.
We asked David Silver to explain a little deeper how the training
process works and progresses:
How does AlphaZero’s neural network give a value for a position?
AlphaZero sees the chessboard as an 8x8 grid of numerical values.
These values are processed by a series of computational steps
known as layers of the neural network. Each layer takes the previous
8x8 board representation and constructs a new 8x8 board that can
represent richer features. This process is repeated over many layers
to produce ever more powerful representations of the board. The
nature of each layer is determined by millions of tunable weights,
which means that the system can learn for itself what features to
represent. Finally, AlphaZero combines all of these features together,
using even more tunable weights, to determine the final evaluation
of the position.
So Stockfish might say, you’ve got an open file and doubled pawns
and opposite-coloured bishops, and you add those values all up to

get a score. Does AlphaZero create its own function and does it have
the same positional features in mind?
The key difference is that AlphaZero learns its own features by
tuning the connections of its neural network. So while AlphaZero
could in principle learn a feature such as ‘open file with doubled
pawns’ it could equally see the position in a totally different way,
perhaps learning complex features that are useful to the machine
but hard for a human to interpret.
How does AlphaZero improve during training?
When it wins (or loses) a game, the connections in the value
network are updated to evaluate each position in that game more
positively (or negatively). At the same time, the connections in the
policy network are strengthened so as to play more often the move
recommended by AlphaZero itself, after a lot of thinking by its Monte
Carlo tree search. AlphaZero plays against itself millions of times,
learning to provide better move suggestions (using the policy
network) and to judge positions more reliably (using the value
network) – essentially developing something akin to ‘intuition’ for
how to play the game. This process of learning for itself, solely from
its interactions, is known as ‘reinforcement learning’.
If you left AlphaZero training against itself for a very long time,
would it just keep getting better and better?
When we trained AlphaZero on Go, we saw its performance continue
to improve over a very long training time. However, training
AlphaZero on chess appears to have diminishing returns, perhaps
due to the large number of draws that start occurring during self-
play.
Matthew Lai explained the nature of these training games:
How does it work with those training games? Are they just very fast
games?

Each training game is played very quickly, using about 40
milliseconds thinking time per move to execute a Monte Carlo tree
search consisting of 800 simulations.
When AlphaZero was training against itself, did many of the games
result in draws?
In the beginning, almost all games ended in draws by the 50 moves
rule (no pawn moves and no pieces taken for 50 moves), because
the play is almost entirely random. Towards the end of the training
we observed similar draw rates to those other top chess engines find
when they play against themselves – about 70-80%. This increases
to > 90% at tournament time controls.
Can you get a sense of how AlphaZero’s play develops as it trains?
Periodically during training, we take snapshots and play through
some games, using AlphaZero at each given stage in its training. We
don’t want to take the training games themselves because they are
played at about 40 milliseconds per move, but we take a snapshot
and play longer games to see how it is progressing. One interesting
thing we found is that AlphaZero re-discovers opening sequences
that are frequently played by human players as well. What we found
most amazing is that, as training progresses, AlphaZero often
discards those known variations because it finds ways to refute
them!
It looks to us like AlphaZero uses piece mobility well and is a
fantastic attacker. Do you think it looks at these concepts in a
different way to Stockfish, perhaps more mathematically?
Those are well-known concepts in the computer chess literature, but
in traditional chess engines they are usually applied with minimal or
no selectivity. As a consequence, they have to be given low weights
so that they do not exert an overly strong influence when their
application is not justified. In the case of AlphaZero, the highly non-

linear nature of neural networks means it can potentially learn to
apply them much more selectively, and with higher influence where
it thinks the features are valid. In addition, since AlphaZero
maximises expected score, it is not so tied to keeping the material
balance.
Is the speed of training games the sort of thing you might change if
you were changing the training process? You might give it longer?
Yeah. It’s a trade-off between how good you want the moves to be
and how many different games you want for training. And the more
games the system can see, the better it can find rules to generalise
across them and the less it will overfit to the particularities of any
individual game.
It is important to comment on the considerable difference between
the hardware used to train AlphaZero and the hardware used by
AlphaZero in match play. During training, 5,000 first-generation TPUs
were used to generate self-play games, and 16 second-generation
TPUs were used to train the neural networks. These computing
resources minimise the time taken to complete the training. By
contrast, when playing Stockfish, AlphaZero used a single machine
with 4 first-generation TPUs.
AlphaZero’s match play
Some game-playing computers simulate outcomes as they play (for
example Jellyfish, which plays Backgammon). AlphaZero simulates
millions of games whilst training, but does not use the technique of
simulating to the end of the game (‘random rollouts’) during play.
Once AlphaZero’s training is complete, the latest neural nets for
policy (how to choose moves) and evaluation (how to assess the
position) are taken for use in match play. As Matthew Lai explained
to us, DeepMind’s earlier versions of AlphaGo used to conduct
random rollouts during play. This is not necessary for AlphaZero
because its value network is already so advanced that additional

rollouts during play do not add any value. As a consequence,
though, there is no randomness built into AlphaZero as it plays.
We asked Matthew Lai about whether AlphaZero would play the
same game twice:
When it’s playing, does AlphaZero have any randomness in its play?
When AlphaZero is playing against itself during training, it is very
important that we see a wide variety of positions and moves. This is
achieved by explicitly adding randomness to its move selection. After
training, when AlphaZero is playing matches, there is still some
randomness due to the parallel nature of the hardware used; also
we sometimes add randomness to the opening to ensure diverse
evaluation.
The AlphaZero thought process – an in-depth illustration of one move
We can illustrate AlphaZero’s thought process in a match situation
(in other words, after it has completed its training) by looking in
detail at one particular position from the match with Stockfish. Let
us follow AlphaZero’s steps as it thinks and decides about what
move to make next. The position we have chosen comes from the
game ‘Exactly how to attack’: a fabulous decisive game which we
will come back to several times in this book. The position we have
chosen occurs after Black’s 29th move:
AlphaZero
Stockfish 8
London 2018

In the opening, AlphaZero had sacrificed two pawns on the kingside
(the g- and h-pawns) after gaining the bishop pair. I had expected
AlphaZero to line up all its pieces on one of those files, but instead
AlphaZero dedicated its efforts to forcing open the centre with the
goal of opening diagonals for its bishops to support its kingside
offensive. We join the game at the critical moment.
In the coming pages, we will present snapshots of AlphaZero’s
thinking at various points in its thought process, starting at the
beginning – when it has searched very few branches of its tree of
variations – to the end of its thought process when it has decided on
a move and refined its evaluation of the position.
To help us, Matthew Lai has provided us with trees of the moves
that AlphaZero considered, together with supplementary information
such as the evaluation of the move.
In the above diagram AlphaZero is considering its 30th move as
White. We will now present the first tree, after just 64 nodes of
search, and walk you through the moves and the information
displayed:

First tree – 64 nodes
That looks scary doesn’t it? That was exactly my thought when I
saw it too, but some explanations from Matthew Lai and from my co-
author Natasha helped enormously. Let’s zoom into a small part of
the tree:
We are showing here the root of the tree (the dotted line) and five
of the 19 possibilities displayed in our tree.
The root node
1. AlphaZero’s evaluation of the position
The top number (0.657) is Alpha-Zero’s evaluation of the position
from White’s point of view. 0.657 means a 65.7% expected score,
i.e. better for White. This expected score is made up of a
combination of wins, draws and losses (though we can’t tell the
exact distribution). For example, 65.7% wins, no draws and 34.3%
losses would give a 65.7% expected score, as would 31.4% wins,
68.6% draws and no losses.

2. The total percentage of node searches spent
100% means that 100% of Alpha-Zero’s node searches were used to
produce this result. We will always see 100% for the position at the
top of the tree (the root node). As AlphaZero searches deeper down
the tree into the branches, it divides up the available time and
energy between moves and variations, spending the bulk of its time
on the moves it considers most important.
When we move on to looking at the branches, we will see
percentages less than 100% and this gives the proportion of the
time that AlphaZero has allocated to this possibility.
Moves, and move probability
‘♕d2 (3.50%)’
The next step we see shows five moves, with a percentage value
next to each of them.
The percentage represents the prior move probability, and as we will
see throughout our trees, this number will never change for a given
position.
The number indicates how likely AlphaZero believes it is at the
beginning of its thought process that it would eventually choose this
move. It is like showing a position to a grandmaster and asking
them what moves are plausible at a first glance and which might be
best. The grandmaster might come up with four or five moves and
order them from most likely to least likely. This is just what
AlphaZero is doing to prioritise its analysis.
In chess terms:
AlphaZero
Stockfish 8
London 2018
30.♕d2

1.
AlphaZero thinks that ♕d2 is 3.50% likely to be its choice in this
position. Not very likely therefore, but not impossible. Compare that
to the incomprehensible and illogical 30.♗c3, which AlphaZero only
gives a 0.22% chance of being selected (thankfully!).
Evaluation of the branch and resources spent on that move
AlphaZero’s evaluation of the position after this move (30.♕d2) is
0.726 (72.6% expected score), which is pretty good, and it spent
3.0% of its total node searches on that move. In human terms,
AlphaZero had a quick look at 30.♕d2, and its first impression was
positive.
To recapitulate, working from top to bottom, we can see:
AlphaZero’s overall evaluation of the position;

2.
3.
4.
the moves it has looked at, and how likely AlphaZero thinks it is
to choose each one (its first impression);
AlphaZero’s evaluation of the position after each move;
how much time (as a percentage of the level above) AlphaZero
spent considering the move.
The alert among you will have noticed a couple of interesting points:
1. The percentages on each level of the tree don’t add up to 100%.
This is because we are not showing all the moves that AlphaZero
considered (to make it easier to read).
2. The overall evaluation of the position (0.657 = 65.7% expected
score) does not match the evaluation of any individual move.
An engine such as Stockfish works on the basis that the evaluation
of the best move determines the evaluation of the position. So if
Stockfish evaluates its best line as +0.38 pawns (remember,
Stockfish evaluates in pawns, not in percentage expected score)
then that is also Stockfish’s evaluation of the position.
AlphaZero takes a more probabilistic view. AlphaZero essentially
evaluates the position as a whole by taking into account the
evaluations of all the moves it looks at, giving more weight to the
moves it considers more deeply.
In the next chapter (‘AlphaZero’s style – meeting in the middle’), we
will discuss the advantages and disadvantages of this approach and
give some practical examples. Just in general however, such an
approach might end up mimicking human intuition where players
steer for a position because ‘it feels good’ and then work out a
concrete line when the position arises.

The first level of the tree above is very broad, with AlphaZero’s top
19 choices of first move shown. We have put the results into a table
to help readability:
At this very early stage of thinking, AlphaZero’s search is quite
broad, and AlphaZero has spent some time searching moves which it
thinks are quite unlikely, even when their evaluations aren’t
particularly special either.
From prior expectations, AlphaZero starts off thinking 30.♗d3 is the
most likely move, but its intuition is not borne out by the evaluation
of the move. Its fourth most likely move – 30.d5 – storms to the top
of the evaluation table!

AlphaZero
Stockfish 8
London 2018
30.d5
That’s another pawn sacrifice, on top of the two pawns that
AlphaZero has already offered! Will AlphaZero still like the sacrifice
when it looks deeper, or will its nerve fail and will it settle for
something safer?
Let’s look a little deeper with AlphaZero…

1.
2.
Second Tree – 256 nodes
As we can see, the number of possibilities on which AlphaZero is
spending any significant time has decreased enormously: eight
possibilities instead of 19 at the search depth in the first tree. This
has the following effects:
The tree is getting narrower and deeper: AlphaZero is looking
further into the position and mostly at lines it considers most
promising. 30.d5 – which AlphaZero evaluates at the astronomical
value 0.831 (83.1% expected score) – has had 53.8% of the total
node searches.
As fewer, more promising lines are considered, the blended
average of the position rises (the more promising continuations
contribute more and the less promising lines contribute less).
The high evaluation of 0.831 for 30.d5 is derived from one line (30…
exd5) in which White is estimating an expected score of around

70%, together with a string of other defences where White’s score is
around 90% or even higher. At this stage AlphaZero rates the
position based on the weighted average, and as AlphaZero looks
further into the position it will focus resources into the 30.d5 exd5
line to confirm its evaluation there.
Third Tree – 1,024 nodes
Time to turn to the chessboard! Something has happened.
First of all, AlphaZero is no longer madly keen on 30.d5. It is now
thinking that 30.c6 is the way to play.
AlphaZero
Stockfish 8
London 2018

30.c6
Actually AlphaZero’s evaluation for both 30.d5 and 30.c6 have fallen,
but 30.d5 has seen a bigger fall. This is mainly because AlphaZero
has become more sure that 30…exd5 is the best defence to 30.d5,
and that the position is giving only a 0.627 expected score for White
(i.e. AlphaZero has now done more analysis and is happy to discount
some of Black’s inferior defences to 30.d5 as realistic possibilities).
30…♘d5 31.♗xd5 exd5

AlphaZero wobbles between 30.c6 and 30.d5, but by the time we
get to 65,536 nodes searched, AlphaZero’s path has become clear.
Fourth Tree – 65,536 nodes
AlphaZero’s analysis has once more become focused on 30.d5. As
you can see from the values of percentage nodes searched, by this

stage AlphaZero has dedicated a very high percentage of its
resources (around 90%) to 30.d5, a narrow line involving a third
pawn sacrifice to open lines for the dark-squared bishop:
AlphaZero
Stockfish 8
London 2018
30…exd5 31.♗d3 c6 32.♕c3 ♖f7 33.♖g1 ♕h6 34.♖ce1 ♗d7 35.b6

… is AlphaZero’s main line at this stage.
Fifth Tree – 4,194,304 nodes
The last tree we have of AlphaZero’s thinking on this position is a
little too long to display comfortably on the page. However it ends
with 30.d5, a position evaluation of 0.735 (73.5% expected score)
and this variation:
AlphaZero
Stockfish 8
London 2018
30…exd5 31.♗d3 c6 32.♕c3 ♖f7 33.♖g1 ♕g7
Replacing 33…♕h6 which AlphaZero previously considered as the
best defence for Black.
34.♕c2 ♔f8 35.b6 d4

Conclusions
What can we learn from this? First, it is fascinating to see
AlphaZero’s learnt evaluation function in action and how it
contributes to its intuitive and dynamic playing style. More
specifically, I was intrigued and surprised to see how quickly
AlphaZero zooms into a line that it wants – even such a sharp line
involving the sacrifice of a third pawn – and manages to dedicate so
many of its resources to analysing that one possibility.
For a human player, it’s the dream to calculate as little as possible,
and only the moves that are relevant to the position. Judging from
this tree and a number of others that I have seen, AlphaZero
manages this very well (though, of course, it never has to worry
about running out of calculating energy, unlike human players!).
I think this also explains how AlphaZero might occasionally miss an
unusual, ‘unfair’ tactic in a position. Since AlphaZero is pruning
possibilities to consider so early and rigorously, it might discount a
non-standard move before it could examine it at the depth required
to see its hidden strengths.
It’s a trade-off that humans have to make too in a practical game,
and the best of us get it wrong sometimes, even AlphaZero! In any

case, in this example, after toying with 30.c6, AlphaZero played the
pawn sacrifice 30.d5 and won a fine sacrificial game.

CHAPTER 5
AlphaZero’s style – meeting in the middle
A remarkable facet of AlphaZero’s chess – as much as its
phenomenal strength – is its style. It’s fair to say that the 10 games
initially released in December 2017 would not have caused such a
sensation amongst chess players if AlphaZero’s style had resembled
that of other chess engines. However, the dashing attacking games
and long-term piece sacrifices awakened the hope that something
new and exciting had been discovered, a hope that the games in this
match have certainly fulfilled.
Much of the rest of this book will be dedicated to describing how
AlphaZero plays. By observing its play and evaluations, and by
analysing alternatives to its moves and those of its opponent, we
draw conclusions about its favourite schemes, its strengths and its
weaknesses.
In the previous chapter we looked at how AlphaZero thinks. As a
general-purpose learning machine, AlphaZero’s learning is structured
in a completely different way to any chess engine before it.
In the first part of this chapter, Natasha, aided by the DeepMind
team, predicts how we think AlphaZero might play, or why it plays
like it does, based on AlphaZero’s thinking process. We quote from
our interviews with Demis Hassabis, Matthew Lai, Thore Graepel and
David Silver as we make our deductions.
Matthew will start from the other angle and make observations on
AlphaZero’s play based on its games from the match with Stockfish.
Our goal is to meet in the middle and relate our deductions and
predictions to our observations of AlphaZero’s play in practice.

1.
a)
b)
c)
d)
2.
3.
4.
a)
 
Section A – AlphaZero’s design, training and
play
We identified several features of AlphaZero’s design and training that
could influence its play:
It learns without domain-specific (chess) or human knowledge. In
particular:
It has not been taught any positional ideas or chess strategy;
Its training has been entirely against itself;
It plays without an endgame database (e.g. tablebases);
It plays without an openings book.
It evaluates positions probabilistically (based on its perceived
chance of winning or drawing) rather than estimating an
advantage equivalent to a number of pawns.
Its overall evaluation is an average of the evaluations of likely
sequences rather than the evaluation of the position at the end of
the predicted sequence of moves (in layman’s terms: it aims for a
generally promising position rather than trying to find a unique
line of best play).
Its evaluation function has a flexible structure allowing it to take
account of the way positional features combine.
In the coming paragraphs, we describe the stylistic effects
AlphaZero’s thinking process might have on its play.
1. AlphaZero learns without domain-specific (chess) or human
knowledge
It has not been taught any positional ideas or chess strategy

DeepMind made a deliberate choice when designing AlphaZero to
encode only the rules of the various games (chess, Go and shogi),
and to let the machine work out the strategy on its own. This is in
accordance with DeepMind’s development principles and allows the
techniques used for AlphaZero to be used for other purposes.
The outcome of AlphaZero’s play is fascinating on many levels. It’s
the first time a computer reached this level without being taught
established chess strategy.
DeepMind has shown it is now possible for this type of challenge to
be tackled by computers from first principles, and for the computers
to achieve superhuman results.
Equally fascinating for chess players is AlphaZero’s style, as it
appears to resemble human play. Whilst we were writing this book,
Matthew had a game against AlphaZero and he said from the style
of moves alone he would not have been able to tell that he was
playing against a computer.
It’s the first time a computer reached this level without being taught
established chess strategy.
How has AlphaZero become so strong? In this book Matthew
identifies many positions where he is more convinced by AlphaZero’s
assessment of the position than by the assessments of his other
engines.
Computers are good at performing numerous calculations very
quickly, but are traditionally less good at ‘seeing’ positions and
assessing whether a position just looks good. We will see that
AlphaZero’s probabilistic approach allows it to develop a feeling for
the position. In addition, reinforcement learning techniques allow the
AI to take account of millions of games in refining its evaluation
function.
Hans Moravec and other AI developers in the 1980s highlighted the
paradox that ‘it is comparatively easy to make computers exhibit

adult level performance on intelligence tests or playing checkers, and
difficult or impossible to give them the skills of a one-year-old when
it comes to perception and mobility’.
We asked Demis’ view on Moravec’s Paradox:
DH: ‘Moravec’s Paradox is often talked about as some kind of
profound mystery. The fact that things that seem “hard” for humans
to do, say play chess, seem relatively easy to program computers to
do; and things that seem relatively “easy” for humans to do, like
vision, turn out to be very hard to program, on the face of it does
sound somewhat paradoxical.
However, I think there is actually a quite simple explanation for it,
and there isn’t really a paradox at all. A lot of tasks humans regard
as “hard” are the things we tackle with a lot of conscious effort that
usually take years of training to get good at, like maths, logic, or
chess. In contrast, we are able to process what is in our visual field
without much conscious effort at all. Of course, we have spent
literally years from birth – and also through evolution via the
structure of the visual cortex – looking and learning about the visual
world around us. But this implicit knowledge is not something we
consciously access, so once we have a fully trained visual system as
adults, it seems so simple and effortless. And yet it is incredibly
complicated to directly program a machine to “see”.
The reason for this seeming paradox then, I believe, is that the act
of programming is itself an explicit task requiring a lot of conscious
effort – you have to deeply understand the solution to a problem
before you can codify it by hand. In the 1980s, when Moravec was
writing about this, most AI researchers were building handcrafted
logic-based systems, and explicitly trying to express solutions to AI
problems directly (sometimes called good old-fashioned AI or
GOFAI). Of course, with the GOFAI approach it is “easier” to actually
tackle problems that you can describe (or at least think you can
describe) an explicit solution for, which naturally turns out to be

those “hard” tasks that we know how to do explicitly, like play chess.
Conversely, the things that we only know how to do intuitively, like
seeing, are very difficult to write a precise logical algorithm for.
The new learning systems approach that has revolutionised AI
recently, and that we used for AlphaZero, works more like the brain,
by learning knowledge implicitly through experience – it actually
mirrors what we think of as our intuitive processes more closely. This
makes these systems more suitable for dealing with messy real-
world tasks because they are trained in the same way our brains are,
namely through experience.
Interestingly, AlphaZero’s performance hints at another important
point, even for those tasks where we believe we do understand our
own thought processes explicitly enough to hardcode a solution, for
example, when evaluating a chess position, it turns out that our
introspective capacities may only be yielding a rather impoverished
approximation of the real factors our brains are actually processing
when making a decision.
So I believe that this paradox really just boils down to an artefact of
the way we traditionally used to write AI programs by handcrafting
solutions based largely on error-prone introspection.’
Lacking domain-specific knowledge, AlphaZero is free to solve chess
problems in its own way. By picking out similar features from
successful moves or games (compared to its own current best view)
AlphaZero refines its classification and assessment of chess
positions. This may lead to new insights, or a better, or more
precise, implementation of known chess ideas.
In addition, AlphaZero may be able to take a more ‘bottom-up’ and
numerical approach than humans are able to for factors such as
mobility, influence and initiative. AlphaZero may have found things it
wants to calculate (e.g. available moves; control of key squares etc.)
as part of its estimation of mobility, say. This would allow it a quite
high-precision way of reviewing how mobility changes in its

candidate lines of play. A human grandmaster will take a more ‘top-
down’ judgemental view based on the overall position as it will not
be practical for him or her to embark on the detailed calculations.
Having no handcrafting could work for or against AlphaZero. It is
conceivable that there may be gaps in AlphaZero’s knowledge. For
example, in its training games it may not have come across certain
situations and thus may not have been able to draw certain
conclusions. On the other hand, free of the possible biases instilled
alongside conventional wisdom, AlphaZero may discover new
strategies that have never been seen before or overturn the
assessment of some known rules.
The sign of true mastery is to know when to apply general rules, and
when to put them to one side. Since no human rules have been
programmed into AlphaZero, AlphaZero may find it easier to
appreciate exceptions to rules it discovers and to adopt non-
standard ideas when required.
Later in the chapter we will look at AlphaZero’s play for evidence of
any of the following:
I. AlphaZero may not have grasped generally accepted human rules.
II. AlphaZero may have discovered new strategies that humans
haven’t thought of.
III. AlphaZero may find it easier to implement exceptions to rules.
IV. AlphaZero may apply a numerical interpretation to achieve a
superior evaluation of positional features.
We asked DeepMind’s Matthew Lai about our theory that AlphaZero
is looking at something numerical to complement its use of
positional chess features.

b)
NR: It would be likely to be doing something more numerical,
wouldn’t it, than the other engines?
ML: In order to process a given chess position, the neural networks
in AlphaZero turn the position into a long vector of numbers. These
numbers are then processed through the many layers of the neural
network. So, from that perspective, there are only numbers. For the
purpose of position evaluation, this architecture certainly enables the
system to work with shades of grey and to trade off different
positional features in a position-dependent way.
NR: Maybe it has a value for each square, and if it’s closer to the
king it has a high value.
ML: That’s how traditional engines do it, I think – I believe the
concept is called King-tropism – if you look at Stockfish, for example,
it gives a value for each piece and the opponent’s king pair, and a
score between the piece value and distance from the opponent’s
king. Does AlphaZero use similar criteria? It almost certainly does,
but they would be very difficult to pinpoint. It would be super-
interesting to construct collections of positions designed to better
understand what is going on under the hood!
AlphaZero’s training has been entirely against itself
AlphaZero trained itself to play chess at its current level by playing
millions of lightning-fast games against itself. Just like a beginner, it
began its quest with only the basic knowledge of the rules of chess
(how the pieces move and how the game ends). Unlike a normal
beginner, AlphaZero didn’t have a helpful grandfather, big sister, or a
keen friend at school to assist it in learning the basics of chess
strategy and tactics.
Given that AlphaZero taught itself, we asked Thore Graepel what
kind of input and choices the DeepMind team had.
NR: It teaches itself everything, so what sort of choices do you have
in order to design the program?

TG: There are three main components that make up the system
which we have control over as systems designers: first, there’s the
learning process, second, the neural network architectures, and
third, the tree search algorithm.
NR: So the learning process – you teach it the rules and then say
‘play yourself a lot of times!’
TG: Well, yes, but designing the learning process involves decisions
like how much time to spend for each training game, how to balance
freshness and size of the training data, and what learning rules to
use.
NR: And how about the neural network architectures?
TG: Some people claim that training neural networks is more of an
art than a science! However, we had some real neural network
experts on the team, and choices regarding the neural network
architectures include the number, type, and size of layers, selecting
appropriate loss functions and optimisation algorithms for training,
and choosing and tuning other network hyperparameters.
NR: And the tree search, was that a given?
TG: Not really, no. The choice of Monte Carlo tree search seems
crucial if we wish to make good use of the neural networks, and
requires further choices such as criteria for selecting positions for
expanding the tree, and how to aggregate evaluations towards the
root of the tree.
NR: Anyone could do this right?
TG: Basically yeah (laughs). Of course we are fortunate to have a
passionate team of experts in neural networks, reinforcement
learning, tree search algorithms, and large-scale systems, together
with the technical infrastructure to run it on! Remarkably, the only
skill that seemed relatively optional was being an excellent player of
the game in question. As a testament to that, AlphaZero is also a
very strong shogi engine, and actually none of us play shogi. Demis
used to, but hasn’t played for about 20 years.

c)
d)
It plays without an endgame database (e.g. tablebases)
There is a gap in built-in endgames knowledge between AlphaZero
and standard chess engines. For example, AlphaZero doesn’t make
use of tablebases which currently contain perfect evaluations of
endings with seven pieces or fewer.
AlphaZero was trained against itself with no prior endgame
knowledge. This lack of endgame knowledge could cause AlphaZero
to miss some known endgame wins. As we will discover later this
doesn’t seem to be a big problem for AlphaZero as it has pretty
much worked out all of these endings itself.
However the authors think that this approach could nonetheless be
having an effect on AlphaZero’s style. Our theory is that it could also
explain AlphaZero’s love of direct attacks on the king. During training
and analysis, the later in a line a clear endgame evaluation is made,
the more likely AlphaZero is to pick an alternative advantageous
middlegame line. Without tablebases AlphaZero might (in its
training) have treated some winning endgames that occur deep in its
analysis as inconclusive and steer towards lines with a possibility of
an early checkmate instead.
This gives rise to the following possibilities:
V. AlphaZero may occasionally misplay an endgame or miss the
chance to steer the game towards a favourable endgame.
VI. AlphaZero may be more motivated by finding checkmate than
steering towards more strategic endgame wins.
AlphaZero plays without an openings book
This is arguably one of the bravest bits of not using any human
knowledge! There is a risk that an obscure line with an opening trap
isn’t picked up in AlphaZero’s positional play. However we can well
understand DeepMind’s approach here. It was a deliberate choice to

use no human knowledge throughout the design of AlphaZero. In
any case, opening theory is continually being refined, and starting
from a clean slate with no human knowledge is bound to lead to
some innovations and improvements, and to give AlphaZero the
chance to steer the game to positions where it thinks it has the
highest expected score.
We look for evidence of the following:
VII. AlphaZero may discover new and innovative ideas in the
opening. It may also steer games down its preferred route (the
direct attack on the king).
VIII. AlphaZero may occasionally fall into a known opening trap.
2. AlphaZero evaluates positions probabilistically (based on its perceived
chance of winning or drawing) rather than estimating an advantage
equivalent to a number of pawns
AlphaZero’s way of assessing positions is the most immediately
noticeable difference for chess players used to standard engines.
Standard engines evaluate a position based on the number of pawns
advantage given by the single best move in the position. An
evaluation such as +1.19 means that White’s best move gives an
advantage of just more than one pawn. The drawback to this type of
evaluation is that it does not incorporate the general complexity of
the position or the risk involved in the ‘best’ course of action.
AlphaZero’s approach mitigates this somewhat as it takes into
account all the lines it looks at (not just the ‘best’). This will naturally
give some allowance for the complexity of the position, as a complex
position will have more variable assessments as the line progresses.
Human players should take note though that AlphaZero’s
probabilities are based on AlphaZero playing itself, and so we can’t
assume that we will achieve the same expected score.

IX. AlphaZero may simplify the game in a winning position to
maximise its chances.
Rather like a disciplined human player, AlphaZero may choose the
safest win rather than the most accurate win. Its evaluation is based
on its expected score rather than on how quickly it wins or the
immediate material balance.
This is particularly plausible when we compare how AlphaGo played
in a winning position (AlphaGo was the Go-playing forerunner of
AlphaZero). In the game of Go, who wins is determined by the
difference of black and white territory. While human Go players often
use approximate territory counts as a proxy for winning, AlphaGo
only considered the probability of winning. As a consequence,
AlphaGo had a tendency to win by extremely narrow margins, even
to the point that it would throw away points if that did not change
the outcome of the game.
X. AlphaZero may seek complications when it thinks it stands worse.
To defend positions, AlphaZero may seek uncertain positions over
positions in which AlphaZero is sure that it has a low expected score.
This uncertainty could relate to the nature and complexity of the
position – in a complex position the opponent has chances of going
wrong, leading AlphaZero to look for complications to turn around
the evaluation instead of trying to hold the current unfavourable
evaluation. Extending our hypothesis further, AlphaZero might also
consider a position uncertain if it hasn’t fully analysed the
continuation itself.
This theory was put to Natasha by Andrew Simons, one of England’s
top Go players, He thinks that some unusual (and basically bad)
moves that were played by AlphaGo when AlphaGo was behind were
selected when AlphaGo deeply analysed the most plausible
continuations and saw they gave a low expected score. To avoid

that, Andrew’s theory is that AlphaGo came back to a barely
analysed line and (like humans do sometimes) just played it on the
grounds that there’s a chance it could be better!
3. AlphaZero searches what it considers to be the most promising
moves, and its evaluation is an average of a large number of likely
sequences rather than trying to find a unique line of best play
AlphaZero’s assessment of positions is based not just on a single line
where both players make the best moves, it is an average of
evaluations of all the positions considered in its analysis. As it works
out more about the position, it will continue to analyse most
frequently the lines that are most promising for each colour, and
then it will select the move it thinks, on balance, is going to return
the highest expected score.
You could say that AlphaZero’s evaluation of a position also takes its
‘general impression’ of the position into account, not just the value
of the best move.
This leads us to our next set of hypotheses:
XI. AlphaZero may steer games towards positions that are ‘generally
promising’.
Since AlphaZero is taking an average of assessed outcomes it is
quite well placed to handle ‘unclear’ positions with complications far
down the track. This is because it doesn’t need to identify which is
the single best line all the way to its conclusion, rather it aims to get
a good feel for the position and assess its winning chances. This
mirrors a human thought process where you might think ‘it looks like
I’ll have all the chances here – there must be something good’
without calculating all the way to checkmate.
In other words, we expect that AlphaZero will aim for positions that
are ‘easy to play’ or that offer it a choice of good moves or offer the
opponent plenty of chances to go wrong. These could be positions in

which it is attacking and in which the opponent’s king is in danger.
This is like human intuition in avoiding precarious positions.
XII. AlphaZero may give the opponent the chance to go wrong.
Given two possibilities, 1) which forces a given line X, and 2) which
offers a transposition to line X, and the additional possibility of an
equivalent or worse move Y, we would expect AlphaZero normally to
choose 2) as it would tend to have a higher expected score (there is
some chance the opponent would choose the inferior line).
This is a different emphasis from human chess, where you may be
told not to let your opponent have a choice of replies (in case you
have miscalculated, and the opponent sees something that you
missed).
This is also relevant in endgames, and we may expect to see
AlphaZero manoeuvring for a while to repeat positions before taking
decisive action in case the opponent goes wrong in the interim.
XIII. AlphaZero may overlook a single concrete line that refutes a
generally promising situation.
AlphaZero may be vulnerable to missing a single concrete line that
refutes a position that is generally promising for it. In particular we
predict that if there are some very unlikely looking moves that save
the day deep in an otherwise bleak line, this line might be missed by
AlphaZero.
4. AlphaZero’s evaluation function has a flexible structure, allowing it to
take account of the way positional features combine
As we saw in the previous chapter, standard engines look at various
positional features and add them up to make a score. AlphaZero
uses a neural net which allows it to use more complicated functions
than adding, and hence allows it to take a more sophisticated
approach to how positional features combine.

This could be particularly important for features such as king safety
and piece mobility, where having a number of plusses simultaneously
could make all the difference on the ability of your attack to break
through.
Whilst that might sound a little mysterious, human thinking and
evaluation is even more so. A human might be able to tell you
positional factors they had taken into account but would not usually
formally add them up in numerical terms, and rather come up with a
judgemental overall assessment.
We asked Matthew Lai about how he makes improvements to
AlphaZero’s evaluation nets (neural nets).
ML: In the spirit of pursuing the most general solution that would
advance the system towards higher intelligence, we restricted
ourselves to changes in the training process and the architecture of
the neural networks used.
MS: So you can’t inject any extra knowledge about a certain pawn
structure or anything like that.
ML: The way to inject extra knowledge into a neural network is to
provide it with input features that represent that knowledge. The
neural network then decides during the learning process how to
incorporate those features into its overall computation. If the
knowledge turns out to be useful, the neural network will make use
of it, otherwise it will ignore it. However, in our pursuit of generality,
we chose not to use such game-specific knowledge but to let the
neural network figure things out by itself – from just the raw board
representation.
Another way of injecting knowledge is through the neural network’s
architecture, which represents its inductive bias. For example, if we
believe that the neural network should take a more global view of
the board, we can increase the size of its receptive fields, its low-
level pattern detectors. The network will then be in a position to
recognise larger patterns on the board more easily.

NR: What’s the constraint on its capacity?
ML: Maybe the biggest constraint is training time. A larger neural
network has more parameters, and requires more data and time to
train. However, at play time, network size can also pose problems. A
larger network requires more time to evaluate, and hence there is a
trade-off between network size and number of position evaluations
that can be done within a given time period.
NR: Yes – that sounds good. But if you did add the handcrafted
features you think it would get stronger?
ML: Adding handcrafted feature may help accelerate training, but
would likely not make much of a difference in the long term. We
have found time and time again that given enough capacity and
training time the neural network will eventually figure out
automatically what patterns are useful and which ones are not.

1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
10.
 
Section B – How does AlphaZero play?
In this section, we describe how AlphaZero actually plays, based on
our analysis and observations of its games.
Here are the highlights which we examine in detail in the coming
sections, divided into B1 – AlphaZero’s middlegame play, and
B2 – AlphaZero’s opening play.
AlphaZero likes to target the opponent’s king.
AlphaZero likes to keep its own king out of danger.
AlphaZero makes sure the central situation is stable before it
weakens its own kingside structure to open lines against the
opponent’s king.
Before AlphaZero launches a wing attack, it always ensures that
either it controls the centre, or the centre is stable or fixed so
that its opponent cannot initiate counterplay there.
AlphaZero is not afraid to sacrifice material (normally one or two
pawns) at an early stage to open lines or diagonals against the
opponent’s king.
AlphaZero looks to combine an open file and an open diagonal
against the opponent’s king.
AlphaZero loves attacking with opposite-coloured bishops.
AlphaZero finds great outposts for its knights and is not afraid to
sacrifice material to gain time to transfer them there.
AlphaZero excels in building up wing attacks against the enemy
king with a fixed centre.
AlphaZero often wins games by making some of its opponent’s
pieces passive, and then exchanging off the opponent’s active
pieces.

11.
12.
13.
14.
AlphaZero defends by creating confusion and introducing tactics
into the game.
AlphaZero is not afraid to delay occupying open files with its
rooks if it thinks it can open a file against the enemy king
elsewhere on the board.
AlphaZero looks to restrict the mobility and freedom of the
opponent’s king. It exploits this factor in its plans both in the
middlegame and in the endgame.
AlphaZero keeps an eye out for the possibility to switch to a
kingside assault. If its opponent’s pieces lose coordination, it will
look to start kingside operations as quickly as possible.
B1 – AlphaZero’s middlegame play
AlphaZero’s style of play is attacking. To put it more specifically, the
location on the board of the opponent’s king – typically the kingside
in the games against Stockfish – substantially influences the focal
point of AlphaZero’s efforts during the game.
AlphaZero style
1. AlphaZero likes to target the opponent’s king.
The most memorable games from the match were decided on the
kingside. For example, the game ‘Exactly how to attack’ analysed
in the ‘Colour complexes’ chapter is a wonderful example of
concerted play against the opponent’s king in which a line-opening
pawn sacrifice on move 10 started off an attack that lasted another
35 moves. Here is the game, with a few choice diagrams.
Game: ‘Exactly how to attack’
AlphaZero
Stockfish 8
London 2018

1.♘f3 ♘f6 2.c4 e6 3.♘c3 ♗b4 4.♕c2 0-0 5.a3 ♗xc3 6.♕xc3 a5 7.b4 d6
8.e3 ♘e4 9.♕c2 ♘g5 10.b5 ♘xf3+ 11.gxf3 ♕f6 12.d4 ♕xf3 13.♖g1
13…♘d7 14.♗e2 ♕f6 15.♗b2 ♕h4 16.♖g4 ♕xh2 17.♖g3 f5 18.0-0-0
♖f7 19.♗f3 ♕h4 20.♖h1 ♕f6 21.♔b1 g6 22.♖gg1 a4 23.♔a1 ♖g7
24.e4
24…f4 25.c5

25…♕e7 26.♖c1 ♘f6 27.e5 dxe5 28.♖he1 e4 29.♗xe4 ♕f8 30.d5
30…exd5 31.♗d3 ♗g4 32.f3 ♗d7 33.♕c3 ♘h5 34.♖e5 c6 35.♖ce1 ♘f6
36.♕d4 cxb5 37.♗b1 ♗c6 38.♖e6 ♖f7 39.♖g1 ♕g7 40.♕xf4 ♖e8
41.♖d6 ♘d7 42.♕c1 ♖f6 43.f4

You would have thought that White would have run out of pawns by
now after the series of sacrifices. AlphaZero uses its last kingside
pawn to bring another unit into the attack and finally break Black’s
resistance. Look how single-mindedly it has focused everything it
has against Black’s kingside.
43…♕e7 44.♖xf6 ♘xf6 45.f5 ♕e3
Stockfish manages to break the attack at the cost of a piece, but it
also loses too many pawns at the same time. White is winning.
46.fxg6 ♕xc1 47.gxh7+ ♔f7 48.♖xc1 ♘xh7 49.♗xh7
And White won on the 67th move.
A corollary to AlphaZero’s awareness of the opponent’s king is a
concern for the safety of its own king. It is a rare occurrence for
AlphaZero’s king to be dangerously exposed in the middlegame.
AlphaZero style
2. AlphaZero likes to keep its own king out of danger.
However, AlphaZero is extremely flexible. It will consider overriding
its concern with its own king safety if this gives it an opportunity to
attack the opponent’s king! This is one of many examples of
AlphaZero allowing – even encouraging – its kingside structure to be
damaged to open lines against Stockfish’s king.

Game: ‘AlphaZero’s new approach in the Carlsbad’
AlphaZero
Stockfish 8
London 2018
1.d4 ♘f6 2.c4 e6 3.♘c3 d5 4.cxd5 exd5 5.♗g5 c6 6.e3 ♗d6 7.♗d3 0-0
8.♘f3 ♖e8 9.0-0 ♗g4 10.♕b3
Tempting Black to double White’s kingside pawns, a temptation
which Stockfish gives in to a move later.
10…♘a6 11.♖fe1 ♗xf3 12.gxf3

12…♖b8 13.♕d1 ♘c7 14.f4 ♗e7 15.♕f3 ♘d7 16.♗xe7 ♖xe7 17.♕h3
♘f6 18.♔h1 ♕d7 19.♗f5 ♕d6 20.♖g1 ♔h8 21.♗d3 ♖g8 22.♕h4 ♘ce8
23.♖g5 h6 24.♖ag1
The perfect result of AlphaZero’s plan: the g-file opened by 11…
♗xf3 has turned into a great attacking channel for White. AlphaZero
soon won a pawn and finished off the game in 89 moves.
As you can see, although AlphaZero is willing to loosen its king cover
to open lines against the opponent’s king, it does so with

•
consideration and a dose of caution. The recapture gxf3, although
weakening AlphaZero’s king, also took control of central territory –
the e4-square –, preventing Black from using this square (for
example with …♘e4) to start operations against White’s kingside.
AlphaZero ensured that the central situation was very stable.
AlphaZero style
3. AlphaZero makes sure the central situation is stable before it
weakens its own kingside structure to open lines against the
opponent’s king.
This is the first time I have mentioned the centre, but it won’t be the
last. AlphaZero plays a great many wing attacks (particularly against
the opponent’s king) but it never does so without strength in the
centre. This can be a blocked or stable pawn structure or a central
structure in which little can happen.
AlphaZero style
4. Before AlphaZero launches a wing attack, AlphaZero always
ensures that either it controls the centre, or the centre is stable or
fixed so that its opponent cannot initiate counterplay there.
In terms of attacking techniques, we can identify several strong
tendencies in AlphaZero’s play:
sacrificing material to open lines or diagonals against the
opponent’s king
Material sacrifices occur regularly in AlphaZero’s games (we have
seen some in this chapter already). The most noteworthy feature of
AlphaZero’s sacrifices is that they are long-term sacrifices. There is
no immediate mate or forced tactical sequence to regain material.
AlphaZero believes in the long-term value of open files and open

•
diagonals pointing towards the opponent’s king and is willing to
sacrifice to achieve these plusses.
AlphaZero style
5. AlphaZero is not afraid to sacrifice material (normally one or two
pawns) at an early stage to open lines or diagonals against the
opponent’s king.
open file against the opponent’s king + open diagonal against the
opponent’s king + restricted opponent’s king = advantage
We will see many examples in which AlphaZero seems to follow a
fixed procedure to put the opponent’s position under pressure. This
is again essentially a long-term view on the position: if AlphaZero
has an open file and an open diagonal pointing towards the
opponent’s king and the opponent’s king is stuck in the ‘kill zone’, as
the Danish GM Jacob Aagaard so memorably called it, then
AlphaZero assumes that it will find a way through.
And looking at the results, you cannot disagree:
Game: ‘The matrix’
AlphaZero
Stockfish 8
London 2018

This brilliant game is a wonderful example of AlphaZero’s single-
mindedness in opening lines and diagonals pointing towards a
restricted black king. It starts with a break on the kingside.
38.f5 ♗xd4 39.♗xd4 exf5 40.♕g1 b5
A weakness of the g1-a7 diagonal next to the black king has been
created, so AlphaZero shuffles its queen and bishop around to be
able to exploit this to the maximum.
41.♗c5 ♖g8 42.♕d4 ♕e6 43.♗b4 ♗d7 44.♗d2 ♕c6 45.e6

Control of the g1-a7 diagonal will not be enough for White to win
the game: AlphaZero also wants an open file. This second pawn
sacrifice opens the e-file on which AlphaZero will double its rooks.
45…♗xe6 46.♗e3 ♖a8 47.♗f2 a5 48.♖e2 ♖a6 49.♖fe1 ♖e8 50.h6 ♕d7
51.♕g7 ♖e7 52.♕f6 b4 53.♕d4 ♕d6
Stockfish has managed to barricade the e-file and cover some entry
squares of the white queen on the g1-a7 diagonal (a7 and b6) at the

cost of rather passive pieces. AlphaZero continues to manoeuvre,
and then Stockfish spies a chance to go for active defence.
54.♔b1 ♕c7 55.♗e3 bxa3
It’s a very risky decision to open the b-file, and just what AlphaZero
wants, but Stockfish has a tactical idea.
It would meet 56.bxa3 with 56…f4, aiming for 57.♗xf4 ♕b6+, when
the exchange of queens will ease Black’s defence enormously.
AlphaZero, however, is willing and able to do everything to keep the
queens on.
56.♔a2 ♔a8 57.♖b1 ♕c8 58.c3

A wonderful sequence: 58…axb2 could now be met by 59.♖exb2,
and as if by magic, the white rooks are doubled on the newly-
opened b-file! And Stockfish has had no chance to get in …c4-c3
followed by …♕c4+ (56…c3 would have been met by 57.b3 when
Black’s c3-pawn will soon come under attack).
58…♖b7 59.bxa3 ♖b3 60.a4
Stopping Black from solidifying its rook on b3 with 60…a4. The next
few moves are extremely intricate, but in the end AlphaZero gets its
way and Stockfish feels compelled to exchange rooks on the b-file.
60…♗d7 61.♖d2 ♖xb1 62.♔xb1 ♗xa4 63.♖a2 ♕e8 64.♕xd5+ ♗c6
65.♕c5 ♕e4+ 66.♔a1 ♕h1+ 67.♗g1 ♕xh6 68.♖h2 ♕e6 69.♗e3 ♕d7
70.♖d2 ♕e8

Stockfish has even picked up another pawn on h6, but this doesn’t
alter the long-term situation: Black’s rook is rooted to a6 to defend
against the threat of mate on a7 while Black’s queen is helpless in
the long run to keep the white rook (assisted by the fantastically-
placed white queen) from invading on one of the three open files
(b-, d- or e-) that White’s pawn sacrifices have opened.
71.♖d6 ♔b7 72.♔b2 ♕b8 73.♔a2 ♕c8 74.♖d2 ♕e8 75.♔a3

•
As we have mentioned before, AlphaZero is very conscious of king
safety, and this is one of several examples in which – after first
sacrificing pawns for the initiative – AlphaZero improves the safety of
its king to the utmost before proceeding with the final onslaught.
75…♔a8 76.♗g5 ♕e1 77.♔a2 ♕e4 78.♗e3 ♕e8 79.♖d6 ♔b7 80.♔a3
♕h8 81.♗d4 ♕e8 82.♖f6
And here it comes: via the e-file, White’s rook has stepped off to the
f-file and will invade on the eighth rank with decisive effect. All that
is left is computer desperation!
82…f4 83.gxf4 ♕d7 84.♖d6 ♕c7 85.f5 ♗d7 86.♕xc7+ ♔xc7 87.♖xa6
♗xf5 88.♖f6 ♗c2 89.♔b2 1-0
AlphaZero style
6. AlphaZero looks to combine an open file and an open diagonal
against the opponent’s king.
Opposite-coloured bishops
That opposite-coloured bishops are a potent attacking force is well-
known in chess literature, but I have rarely seen such a powerful
display of this theme as in AlphaZero’s games. The example above is

•
the most spectacular, but we will see many more in the ‘Colour
complexes’ chapter. The value of opposite-coloured bishops is that
they provide an unopposed channel of attack. In the game above,
White’s dark-squared bishop was mighty since Black had no dark-
squared bishop of its own to oppose it.
AlphaZero style
7. AlphaZero loves attacking with opposite-coloured bishops.
Using the rook’s pawn to attack the opponent’s king’s position
This was one of the first attacking schemes that caught my eye in
AlphaZero’s games. Against a black king castled on the kingside,
AlphaZero likes to push an h-pawn all the way up to h6, where it
creates dark-square weaknesses, sets up a mating square on g7, and
restricts the black king to a great degree. This is true even in the
endgame:
Game: ‘Putting the king in a box’
AlphaZero
Stockfish 8
London 2018
1.d4 ♘f6 2.c4 g6 3.♘c3 d5 4.cxd5 ♘xd5 5.♘f3 ♗g7 6.e4 ♘xc3 7.bxc3
c5 8.♗e3 ♕a5 9.♕d2 ♘c6 10.♖b1 a6 11.♖c1 cxd4 12.cxd4 ♕xd2+
13.♔xd2 e6 14.♗d3 ♗d7 15.e5 0-0 16.♖b1 b5

This is one of my (many) favourite games of AlphaZero. AlphaZero
plays a typical assault on the black kingside with its rook’s pawn and
does so with unique panache and skill.
17.h4 ♘e7 18.h5 ♗c6 19.h6
Human players are often loath to play such moves, wanting to keep
the option of opening the h-file in reserve for as long as possible.
AlphaZero’s conception is quite different: the pawn on h6 both hems
in the black king and – together with the pawns on d4 and e5 –

restricts the activity of Black’s dark-squared bishop. There is one
cloud on the horizon however: Stockfish’s next move will be …f7-f6,
attacking the e5-pawn and freeing itself from the shackles that
AlphaZero is attempting to put on it.
19…♗h8 20.♘g5
Here we see AlphaZero’s lack of concern about material balance
come into its own. It understands that Black’s counterplay will come
from …f7-f6, so it plays 20.♘g5 to prevent this (e6 would hang).
That this costs a pawn is irrelevant: restricting Black’s pieces is the
number one goal and deserves 100% focus.
20…♗xg2 21.♖hc1 ♗d5 22.♖c7 ♘f5 23.♘e4
Black’s 22…♘f5 means that two pawns are en prise: the a2-pawn
and the h6-pawn. AlphaZero is only interested in one of them, of
course: the attacking unit on h6, and thus allows Black to capture
the first one.
Now watch the knight on e4. You might think that g5 was an ideal
square, but AlphaZero spots an even better one, displaying
incredible vision.
23…♖fc8 24.♖bc1 ♖xc7 25.♖xc7 ♗xa2 26.♘c5 ♗d5 27.♘d7

What a square: the knight keeps the black king trapped on g8 and
simultaneously prevents the freeing move …f7-f6. The knight also
interferes with the black rook’s activity as b8 is taken away and ♘b6
is available if necessary.
27…♘xe3 28.♘b6 ♖b8 29.fxe3 ♖e8 30.♘d7 ♗f3 31.e4 ♖a8 32.♖b7
♗g4 33.♗b1 ♗h3 34.♔e2
At some stage White will manage to achieve d4-d5 in favourable
form. Stockfish starts loosening its position to struggle free, but to

•
no avail.
34…g5
34…a5 35.♖xb5 a4 36.♖b7 a3 37.♗a2 is no trouble at all for White.
35.♗d3 ♗g4+ 36.♔e3 ♗d1 37.d5 exd5 38.exd5 ♖e8 39.♗e4 ♗g4
40.♘f6+ ♗xf6 41.exf6 b4 42.d6 b3 43.♔d4 ♖d8 44.♔e5 ♖e8+ 45.♖e7
♖f8 46.♗d5 b2 47.♖b7 ♖e8+ 48.♔d4 1-0
White picks up b2 and then returns to the seventh rank and queens
the d-pawn. Look at the difference in the activity of the kings!
It’s interesting to note that AlphaZero plays this idea of marching the
rook’s pawn forwards even when it has castled kingside itself, most
often from fianchetto positions.
Bringing the knight close to the king
In the last game, we saw AlphaZero sacrifice a pawn to play its
knight to g5 (not far from the black king on g8) and then later
manoeuvre the knight to an even better square on d7. As short-
range pieces, knights are strongest on a central post, close to the
opponent’s position. AlphaZero uses its knights fantastically, and
once it has opened lines and diagonals, you will often see AlphaZero
spending some time (and material) to transfer a knight to an outpost

•
close to the opponent’s king. Note the importance of stable squares
for knights: since it takes some moves to transfer them from one
outpost to another, it would be a severe waste of time if a knight can
be driven away easily from a target outpost.
AlphaZero style
8. AlphaZero finds great outposts for its knights and is not afraid to
sacrifice material to gain time to transfer them there.
Long-lasting (‘slow-burning’) attacks
We have already mentioned the long-term strategy behind many of
AlphaZero’s line-opening and diagonal-opening sacrifices, and this
description also applies to many of its attacks. We have seen several
games in which AlphaZero manages to develop attacks in such a
way that Stockfish does not see the danger until it is too late. The
following game is the most graphic example of all:
Game: ‘Python squeeze’
AlphaZero
Stockfish 8
London 2018
1.d4 ♘f6 2.♘f3 e6 3.c4 b6 4.g3 ♗b7 5.♗g2 ♗b4+ 6.♗d2 ♗e7 7.♘c3 c6
8.♗f4 0-0 9.e4 d5 10.e5 ♘e4 11.cxd5 cxd5 12.0-0 ♘xc3 13.bxc3 ♗a6
14.♖e1 ♘c6 15.h4 ♖c8 16.♖e3 ♖c7 17.♘g5

Having fixed the centre, AlphaZero has delineated the game into a
battle on opposite wings: AlphaZero will attempt to make something
of the space advantage and advanced outposts on d6 and f6
conferred by the pawn on e5 by attacking on the kingside; Stockfish
should try and minimise the danger on the kingside while trying to
generate some queenside counterplay, using the c3-pawn as a
starting point for counterplay.
As you can see however, AlphaZero handles – and assesses – such
positions much better than Stockfish. Without seeming to hurry,
AlphaZero makes enormous progress on the kingside while Stockfish
barely makes any impression on the queenside.
17…h6 18.♘h3 ♔h7 19.♖f3 ♘a5 20.♕c2+ ♔g8 21.♖e1 ♔h8 22.♕d1
♘c6 23.♗e3 ♗c4 24.♕d2 ♔h7 25.♘f4 ♕e8 26.g4 ♖h8 27.♘h5 ♔g8
28.♖h3 ♖b7 29.♗f4 ♗f8 30.♕d1 ♘e7 31.♗c1 b5 32.f4 ♖b6 33.♗a3
♘g6 34.♗xf8 ♘xf8 35.♕d2 ♕c8 36.♖f3 ♕d8 37.♕f2 b4 38.cxb4 ♖xb4
39.f5

20 moves after the last diagram, there is no doubt which side has
made the most of its time.
39…♕c7 40.♖d1 ♕b7 41.♖d2 ♕c7 42.♕g3 ♗b5 43.♔h2 ♗d7 44.♕f2
♖b6 45.♖c2 ♖c6 46.♖b2 ♖b6 47.♗f1 ♕b8 48.♖xb6 axb6 49.f6 g6
50.♘g3
The last three moves from AlphaZero are typical of its play, and a
good demonstration of why it doesn’t fall victim to lightning
Stockfish counterattacks (as I tend to in such situations). Stockfish
had placed its rook on h8 to provide maximum resistance to a white

break on the kingside with g4-g5. AlphaZero doesn’t try to push
through the attack at all costs, but instead closes the kingside
(starting with 49.f6), leaving Stockfish’s rook rotting in the corner on
h8 (the subsequent move 52.h5 opens the b1-h7 diagonal so that
Black will be unable to release the rook with …♔h7).
AlphaZero also exchanges off Black’s most active piece – the rook on
the queenside – to ensure that Black is left with only passive pieces.
The game would then be decided by invading with queen and rook
on the queenside – ironically the wing on which Black should have
been superior.
50…♗e8 51.♕b2 ♕d8 52.h5 ♘d7 53.♔g2 g5 54.♖c3 ♘xf6 55.exf6 ♕xf6
This desperate sacrifice didn’t solve anything: AlphaZero won 20
moves later.
AlphaZero style
9. AlphaZero excels in building up wing attacks against the enemy
king with a fixed centre.
AlphaZero style
10. AlphaZero often wins games by making some of its opponent’s
pieces passive, and then exchanging off the opponent’s active

1.
2.
3.
pieces.
Having talked so much about attack, it’s time to talk about defence.
In fact, we can learn a lot from Stockfish as it spent much of its time
in the match performing miraculous defensive feats. It’s worth
examining Stockfish’s defensive technique briefly as it demonstrates
the amazing resistance that AlphaZero’s attacking skill must
overcome.
Stockfish’s defensive technique generally encompasses three
techniques:
Distracting/nudging the opponent’s attacking pieces from their
best positions;
Using its active pieces to create confusion in the opponent’s
position;
Creating a weakness in the opponent’s king’s position to gain
counterplay.
Game: ‘Using a queenside file to defend the kingside’
AlphaZero
Stockfish 8
London 2018
1.d4 ♘f6 2.c4 e6 3.♘f3 b6 4.g3 ♗e7 5.♗g2 0-0 6.♘e5 c6 7.♘c3 ♗a6
8.0-0 d5 9.♖e1 ♗xc4 10.♘xc4 dxc4 11.e3 ♘d5 12.a4 ♘a6 13.♗f1 ♘ab4
14.♗xc4 ♘f6 15.e4 ♕d7 16.e5 ♘fd5 17.♘xd5 ♘xd5 18.♕g4 g6 19.♗h6
♖fc8 20.h4 ♗f8 21.♗g5 h5 22.♕f3 ♗e7 23.♗xd5 cxd5 24.g4

1.
2.
We take a detailed look at this game in the ‘Defence’ chapter.
White’s attack is surprisingly dangerous. Black’s problem is two-fold:
White has plenty of ways to transfer its rooks to the kingside to
increase the pressure;
If Black attempts to anticipate an invasion on the h-file, then
White may invade along the c-file instead.
24…♗xg5
The variation 24…hxg4 25.♕xg4 ♔g7 26.♕f4 ♖h8 27.♗f6+ ♗xf6
28.exf6+ ♔g8 29.♖ac1 is a good illustration of Black’s second
problem.
Stockfish comes up with a great manoeuvre. First of all, the queen is
sent off to the queenside to interfere with White’s piece
coordination.
In particular, Black wants to stop White’s rooks from moving easily to
the kingside.
25.hxg5 ♕e7 26.♕f4 ♕b4 27.gxh5
27.♖a3 ♕xe1+; 27.♖e3 ♕xb2 28.♖ae1 hxg4 29.♔g2 ♖c1,
exchanging off some of White’s attacking forces: 30.♕xg4 ♖ac8
31.♕f4 ♖xe1 32.♖xe1 ♕c2 33.♖h1 ♕e4+ and nothing is left of
White’s attack. This also shows the inherent airiness in White’s
kingside and the opportunities for counterplay that this gives Black.

27…gxh5 28.♖e2 ♖c4 29.♖d2
AlphaZero has consolidated its position against Black’s attack on its
sensitive b2- and d4-points and is now ready to transfer its queen’s
rook over to the kingside, for example via ♔g2 and ♖h1.
29…♕f8
A stunning idea: having interfered with White’s coordination, the
queen heads back to g6, from where it defends the black kingside

(f7 and h5 pawns) and eyes the e4-square, and also will combine
with Black’s doubled rooks on the c-file for counterplay.
30.♖d3
30.♖a3 ♕g7 31.♖h3 ♖c1+ 32.♔g2 ♕g6 33.♕f3 ♕b1 34.♖xh5
♖g1+ 35.♔h2 ♖c8 36.♖d3 ♖cc1 is a wonderful demonstration of
Black’s ultimate idea, combining c-file play with an active queen
aiming at White’s own kingside weaknesses.
30…♕g7 31.♖f3 ♕g6 32.♖e1 ♖ac8
Black still faces great danger, but its pieces are beautifully
coordinated for counterplay against White’s position.
33.♔h2 ♖8c7 34.♖g1 ♖xa4 35.♕h4 ♖ac4 36.♖f6 ♕e4 37.♖f4 ♕g6
38.♖f6 ♕e4 39.♕xh5 ♕xd4 40.g6 ♕h4+

White’s airy kingside gives Black the crucial saving resource of
exchanging queens.
41.♕xh4 ♖xh4+ 42.♔g3 ♖b4 43.♔h3 fxg6 44.♖gxg6+ ♖g7
And Stockfish eventually drew. Very impressive defence: the key
point was the manoeuvre 26…♕b4, with which Black did its best to
interfere with White’s build-up of forces on the kingside and by so
doing managed to gain time for its own counterplay. It may not look

like much when you’re playing through the game quickly, but this is
not easy to spot or to execute!
AlphaZero’s defensive skills in response to direct attacks are only to
be seen in the series of games starting from TCEC positions. From
those starting positions, AlphaZero is not necessarily getting the type
of position that it likes from the opening and thus must improvise
and defend. Whereas Stockfish is a master at deflecting, slowing and
absorbing the opponent’s attack, AlphaZero’s approach is…
confusion. As soon as it dislikes its position, it is looking for active
play – even at the cost of material – as soon as possible. At times,
this tips its play over from sustained aggression to something on the
zany side. Take a look at this game!
Game: ‘Anything for open lines!’
Stockfish 8
AlphaZero
London 2017
1.e4 d6 2.d4 ♘f6 3.♘c3 g6 4.f4 ♗g7 5.♘f3 0-0 6.♗d3 ♘a6 7.0-0 c5 8.d5

The TCEC book stopped here. AlphaZero was clearly not happy with
its opening position, judging from its evaluation of 31.2% expected
score.
Instead of the normal 8…♗g4 or 8…♘c7 it decided to take strong
countermeasures!
8…c4 9.♗xc4 b5
10.♘xb5
10.♗xb5 ♘xe4.
10…♘xe4

a)
I admire the creativity, but Black is actually just a pawn down for
little compensation. AlphaZero does have more open space for its
pieces than before, which I imagine is what attracted it to the idea.
AlphaZero managed to hold on in 89 moves – and even turn the
position around – but I do not think that this opening idea will catch
on!
AlphaZero style
11. AlphaZero defends by creating confusion and introducing tactics
into the game.
The outer manifestation of AlphaZero’s style is its propensity for
kingside attacks, but there is something fundamental underpinning
that directness, and that is a wonderful ability to assess and act on
the mobility of its own pieces and those of the opponent. In the
following games, we see how AlphaZero marshals three of its pieces
– the knight, rook and king.
The knight
As we have remarked before, AlphaZero is skilled in finding good
outposts for its knights and it is not afraid to spend considerable

amounts of time to place them well. The following game is the most
dramatic example:
Game: ‘Bold Sir Lancelot’
AlphaZero
Stockfish 8
London 2018
1.d4 ♘f6 2.c4 e6 3.♘f3 b6 4.g3 ♗b7 5.♗g2 ♗e7 6.♘c3 0-0 7.0-0 ♘e4
8.♗d2 d5 9.cxd5 exd5 10.♕b3 c5 11.♗f4 ♘a6 12.♖fd1 c4 13.♕c2 ♘b4
14.♕c1 ♕d7 15.h4 ♖ac8 16.a3 ♘xc3 17.bxc3 ♘c6 18.♕b1 ♖ce8
19.♖e1 ♘a5 20.♘g5 f5 21.♘f3 ♗f6 22.♖a2 h6 23.a4 ♕e6
Just watch now how White transfers its knight to the g6-outpost.
24.♔h2 ♗c8 25.♖h1 ♘c6 26.h5

24.♔h2 freed h1 for the rook to support a pawn on h5, which in
turn will support the knight on g6.
26…♔h8 27.♘g1
24.♔h2 freed g1 for the knight!
27…♕f7 28.♗f3 ♖d8 29.♘h3 ♔g8 30.♗c1 ♖fe8 31.♕b5 ♗b7 32.♖d1
♘a5 33.♕b1 ♗c8 34.♘f4 ♗g5 35.♘g6

… and there it is!
35…♗xc1 36.♕xc1 ♗e6 37.♘e5 ♕c7 38.♖b2 ♘b7 39.♖b5 ♘a5 40.♕f4
♘b3 41.♘g6
Moving the knight between two strong outposts as required.
41…♕c6 42.♕e5 ♕d7 43.e3 ♘a5 44.♗g2 ♘b7 45.♖a1 ♔h7 46.♘f4 ♗g8
47.♖xd5 ♗xd5 48.♕xd5 ♘d6 49.♗h3 ♖e7 50.♘g6 ♖f7 51.♘e5 ♕b7
52.♗g2 ♕xd5 53.♗xd5 ♖c7 54.♔g2 ♘e4 55.♗xe4 fxe4 56.f3 exf3+
57.♔xf3 ♖e7 58.♘g6

Again the knight has swivelled between e5 and g6. I wasn’t sure
how good this position was for White, but it seems to be very
strong: White’s central pawns are coming through!
58…♖b7 59.e4 b5 60.axb5 ♖xb5 61.♘f4 ♖b3 62.♘e2
An unexpected idea, bringing the knight back from an advanced
square to cover White’s c3-pawn. Without counterplay against the
c3-pawn, Black has no way to prevent the march of the d- and e-
pawns.

62…♖a8 63.e5 a5 64.d5 a4 65.d6 a3 66.d7 ♔g8 67.♖d1 ♖bb8 68.e6
♔f8 69.♘d4 1-0
Fittingly, the knight ends the game stopping Black from halting the
central pawns with its king. Wonderful long-term planning and
extreme mobility from White’s knight.
From the other side, I noticed a number of times that Stockfish
ended the game with a ‘lonely knight’: a knight that contributed
nothing to the course of the game.
Game: ‘Feint on the queenside, punch on the kingside!’
Stockfish 8
AlphaZero
London 2018

b)
34…♖g8
AlphaZero drove White’s knight to a5 early in the game with 13…b5,
seemingly conceding an outpost for the knight on c6. However,
AlphaZero had understood that this outpost was not as dangerous as
it seemed, and 20 moves later, Stockfish could really have used a
knight to defend its king!
35.f4 ♕g3+ 36.♔g1 ♕f3 37.♕xf3 exf3 38.g4 ♘g3 39.♔f2 ♘e4+
40.♔xf3 ♘xd2+ 41.♔e2 ♘e4 0-1
The rook
AlphaZero’s handling of the rook is particularly interesting in relation
to its attitude to the occupation of open files. There are plenty of
examples where AlphaZero has occupied open files with its rooks,
but AlphaZero is also able to break this general chess rule effectively
if it decides that a file (normally pointing at the opponent’s king) can
be opened elsewhere. In that case, AlphaZero prefers to delay
fighting for the open file – which could easily lead to mass
exchanges – and retain firepower for an attack against the
opponent’s king.
Game: ‘The h-file is never safe’
AlphaZero

Stockfish 8
London 2018
1.d4 ♘f6 2.♘f3 e6 3.c4 b6 4.g3 ♗b7 5.♗g2 ♗b4+ 6.♗d2 ♗e7 7.♘c3 c6
8.♗f4 d5 9.cxd5 ♘xd5 10.♘xd5 cxd5 11.0-0 0-0
In this position, it would be natural for both sides to place rooks on
the only open file on the board – the c-file –, when exchanges of
both pairs of rooks might ensue. AlphaZero instead takes a peek at
the black kingside to see whether it can tease out any weaknesses
there.
12.h4 ♘c6 13.♕d3 ♕d7 14.♘g5 g6

This weakness encourages AlphaZero, so it delays occupying the
open file still further and notches up the pressure on the black
kingside.
15.♘f3 ♖fc8 16.h5 ♕d8 17.♕e3
AlphaZero is still unconcerned by the damage that Stockfish can do
with its c-file control.
17…gxh5

A typical engine move: White has pressure on Black’s kingside so
Black is willing to accept a kingside weakness to break this pressure,
calculating that White has no way to exploit it.
However, AlphaZero has a way that falls completely out of scope of
the vision of all my engines. It is related to AlphaZero’s refusal to
fight for the c-file for now, keeping its powder dry for another
channel of attack. And now AlphaZero has a chance to prove it was
right.
18.♔h2 ♗f8 19.♖h1
Stunning! White’s rook is going to be 100 times more dangerous on
the h-file than on the c-file.
19…♕e7 20.♔g1

c)
With a very dangerous initiative, which AlphaZero later converted in
a long endgame after 105 moves.
AlphaZero style
12. AlphaZero is not afraid to break the rule of occupying open files
with its rooks if it thinks it can open a file against the enemy king
elsewhere on the board.
The king
Perhaps the most impressive part of AlphaZero’s understanding of
piece mobility is the value it puts on the restriction of the opponent’s
king. One attacking theme in particular – marching the rook’s pawn
up the board to plant it close to the black king – is directly related to
this idea. When AlphaZero has restricted the movement of the
opponent’s king, it appears to interpret this both as a big plus factor
in its evaluation and as an integral part of its future planning, both in
middlegames and endgames.
The next example, from a fantastic Berlin endgame, is my favourite
illustration of this.
Game: ‘Endgame class’

Stockfish 8
AlphaZero
London 2018
1.e4 e5 2.♘f3 ♘c6 3.♗b5 ♘f6 4.0-0 ♘xe4 5.d4 ♘d6 6.♗xc6 dxc6
7.dxe5 ♘f5 8.♕xd8+ ♔xd8 9.♖d1+ ♔e8 10.♘c3 ♗e7 11.b3 ♘h4
12.♘xh4 ♗xh4 13.♗e3 ♗e7 14.♘e2 h5
A new move in this position, typically for AlphaZero gaining kingside
space with an advance of the rook’s pawn and preparing to activate
the king’s rook via h5.
15.c3 h4 16.♖d2 ♖h5 17.h3 a5 18.♖e1 ♗e6 19.f4 a4 20.♘d4 ♗d7 21.b4
c5 22.bxc5 ♗xc5 23.♘c2 ♗e7 24.♖b1 b6 25.♘b4 ♗e6 26.♘c6 a3
27.♔h2 f6 28.♖e1 f5 29.♘d4 ♗d7 30.♗f2 ♖d8 31.♖ee2
In this position, I was expecting Black to be trying to exchange off
the white knight on d4 and the rooks and then to play on the
weakness of the a2-pawn which Black has fixed with its pawn on a3.
AlphaZero’s plan took me completely by surprise.
31…c5 32.♘c2 g5

Giving away the a3-pawn which – to my eyes – was one of Black’s
strongest assets! However, AlphaZero is trading this asset for a
series of other dynamic plusses.
33.♘xa3 g4 34.♔g1 g3
With this manoeuvre, Black has gained space on the kingside and
thus severely restricted the freedom of the white king. Also, by
sacrificing the pawn on a3, Black has gained a new potential channel
for entry into the white position: the a-file. With Black’s pawn on g3,

a black rook landing on the back rank would cause White’s king
enormous problems.
35.♗e3 ♖a8 36.♘c4 ♖h6 37.♖b2 ♖a6 38.♗c1 b5 39.♘e3 ♖a4 40.c4
40.♘d5 ♗d8 41.♘f6+ ♗xf6 42.exf6+ ♔d8 43.f7 ♖f6 44.♖e5
♖xf7 45.♖xc5 ♖e7 46.♖e5 ♖e4 is still problematic for White due
to the weakness of the back rank: 47.♔f1 ♖7xe5 48.fxe5 ♗e6 and
the white king will not escape: …♗c4+ is coming.
40…bxc4 41.♘d5 c3 42.♘xc3 ♖c4 43.♗d2 ♖c6 44.♔f1 ♗e6 45.♖b1
♖b4 46.♖ee1 ♗c4+
Sealing the white king in its box on the kingside: the bishop stops
the king escaping via f1-e2 while the pawn on g3 covers f2 and h2.
47.♔g1 ♖c8 48.♖bc1 ♗d3 49.♘d5 ♖b2 50.♗c3 ♖xa2 51.♖a1 ♖xa1
Typical AlphaZero play, exchanging off the opponent’s active pieces
to leave it with passive pieces.
52.♗xa1 c4 53.♘f6+ ♔d8 54.♗c3 ♖b8 55.♗d4 ♗b4 56.♖d1 ♖b5
57.♔h1 ♗c5 0-1

This position is an illustration of White’s lonely knight. It is also a
great illustration of Stockfish’s boxed king. White is helpless to stop
Black’s c-pawn from queening. After 58.♗xc5 ♖xc5 59.♔g1 ♔e7
60.♔h1 c3 wins.
AlphaZero style
13. AlphaZero is always looking to restrict the mobility and freedom
of the opponent’s king. It exploits this factor in its plans both in the
middlegame and in the endgame.
AlphaZero style
14. AlphaZero always keeps an eye out for the possibility to switch
to a kingside assault. If its opponent’s pieces lose coordination, it will
look to start kingside operations as quickly as possible.
B2 – AlphaZero’s opening play
AlphaZero’s opening play with both colours is strictly classical,
favouring central control and simple development. All of its systems
can be considered to be main lines, and many of these systems are
currently extremely popular at the elite level.
AlphaZero as Black

AlphaZero refuses to play 1.e4 as White, and this is clearly due to
the reply 1…e5 which AlphaZero invariably plays. After 1.e4 e5,
AlphaZero considers that Black has a 44.9% expected score.
Compare this to 1.d4 ♘f6 after which AlphaZero considers that
Black has just a 43.1% expected score!
In 26 games AlphaZero faced with 1.e4, AlphaZero played 1…e5 26
times. Stockfish chose either the Ruy Lopez 2.♘f3 ♘c6 3.♗b5 – to
which AlphaZero invariably replied with the Berlin 3…♘f6, the
drawing weapon of choice at the elite level – or 3.♗c4, which led to
wilder games and some excellent AlphaZero wins.
Against 1.d4, AlphaZero tended to favour the Ragozin Defence (1.d4
♘f6 2.c4 e6 3.♘f3 d5 4.♘c3 ♗b4) though this was not the only
choice. When I requested a series of games with Stockfish forced to
play 1.d4, then the Slav (1.d4 d5 2.c4 c6) was also chosen a few
times.
When I requested a series of games in which Stockfish was forced to
start 1.c4, AlphaZero invariably answered with 1…e5, which is the
most principled reply, fighting for the central dark squares which
White has failed to occupy with 1.d4.
AlphaZero as White
AlphaZero is a 1.d4 player, with the occasional 1.♘f3 thrown in. In
fact, it is extremely successful with 1.♘f3 and has scored some

stunning wins in the anti-Nimzo-Indian variation 1.♘f3 ♘f6 2.c4 e6
3.♘c3 ♗b4 4.♕c2.
Its favourite line against …♘f6 and …e7-e6 systems is undoubtedly
the 4.g3 Queen’s Indian (1.d4 ♘f6 2.c4 e6 3.♘f3 b6 4.g3) with
which it has scored immensely well while scoring some very
attractive wins:
Despite its classical inclinations, AlphaZero is not afraid of taking the
bull by the horns at an early opening stage if it feels the situation
demands it. This is demonstrated by its willingness to enter all
manner of sharp gambits in the Semi-Slav complex such as the
Botvinnik System (1.d4 d5 2.c4 c6 3.♘f3 ♘f6 4.♘c3 e6 5.♗g5
dxc4) and the Anti-Moscow Variation (1.d4 d5 2.c4 c6 3.♘f3 ♘f6
4.♘c3 e6 5.♗g5 h6 6.♗h4 dxc4 7.e4 g5 8.♗g3 b5). In both cases,
AlphaZero has scored some convincing wins.

Section C – Bringing it all together
It’s now time to compare, one by one, our hypotheses about how
AlphaZero might play considering how it has been designed, with
our observations of how AlphaZero plays in practice based on game
analysis.
I. AlphaZero may not have grasped generally accepted human rules.
We have not seen any evidence at all, but we decided to test it in
two ways.
Knights on the rim are dim
A rule that all beginners learn is an aphorism by the great 19th
Century player and teacher Siegbert Tarrasch: ‘Knights on the rim
are dim’. This refers to the fact that knights are generally much less
effective on the side of the board than in the centre. We decided to
check: how often did AlphaZero play its knights to a3, a4, h3 or h4
(as White) and a6, a5, h6 or h5 (as Black) in the selection of games
from the starting position? See the top right table.
Had AlphaZero learnt to centralise its knights?
These figures didn’t seem to indicate that AlphaZero doesn’t know it
should centralise its knights. Looking at the games, I could also see
that the knights were there for a purpose, usually on their way to
better squares – for example, the knights on h5 landed on f4 (close
to the white king) very quickly. In other words, AlphaZero seems to
have grasped this rule from its self-training. As a comparison, we
give Stockfish’s statistics. See the second table.

The minority attack

This refers to a standard way of attacking the black position in a
famous structure (the so-called Carlsbad structure) that regularly
arises in the Orthodox Queen’s Gambit Declined:
Carlsbad structure
In this structure, White has a pawn majority on the kingside and
Black has a pawn majority on the queenside. The ‘minority attack’
refers to a classic plan in which White advances the b-pawn up the
board (the area in which White is in principle weaker) and
exchanges it for Black’s c-pawn.

Minority attack (1)
Minority attack (2)
The resulting structure is very pleasant for White, who can target
the weak, unprotected c6-pawn with major pieces along the half-
open c-file. We were intrigued as to whether AlphaZero had
discovered this classic plan and how often AlphaZero had
implemented it in its games. The raw material for this analysis was a
series of 800 games played between AlphaZero and Stockfish from

the starting position 1.♘f3 ♘f6 and 1.d4 d5. From these games, I
extracted the number of times in which AlphaZero and Stockfish had
reached the Carlsbad structure with white and the number of times
that they had played the move b4-b5. The results are very
interesting:
White
Number of games in
Carlsbad structure
Number of times b4-b5
was played in the game
AlphaZero
59
2
Stockfish
128
76
Stockfish launched even more minority attacks with b2-b4 than this
but didn’t always manage to follow through with b4-b5. I think this
really shows how a self-training engine can be unaware
of/ignore/assess differently a plan that humans – and thus human-
programmed chess engines – might play automatically.
Should we pity AlphaZero for perhaps missing this standard piece of
strategical knowledge? Well… let’s look at the scores result:
If you want to know how AlphaZero handled the white and black
sides of this opening so successfully, take a look at the ‘Carlsbad’
chapter later in this book!

II. AlphaZero may discover new strategies that humans haven’t
thought of.
Looking through AlphaZero’s games, I am loath to state that
AlphaZero has discovered completely new rules: after all, chess has
400 years of documented history, so most plans have been seen at
least once in that time. However, if you take a look at the ‘Carlsbad’
chapter, AlphaZero is extremely impressive at executing existing
general schemes with a focus and power that has rarely been seen.
In so doing, it unlocks the dynamic potential in many positions that
has lain hidden until this moment, and alters the evaluation of these
schemes. In particular the way it combines attacking motifs is very
powerful.
III. AlphaZero may find it easier to implement exceptions to rules.
Judging from the games, this is true, the best example being
AlphaZero’s treatment of the occupation of open files. AlphaZero
seems to be able to choose easily between occupying an open file
and temporarily ignoring an open file with the intention of opening a
different file on the other side of the board.
IV. AlphaZero might be able to apply a numerical interpretation to
achieve a superior evaluation of positional factors.
In a certain sense this is clearly true – AlphaZero has generated ‘a
bunch of numbers’ that have allowed it to demonstrate a fine
appreciation of chess positions and their dynamic potential.
AlphaZero’s quite superb understanding of piece activity (both its
own and the opponent’s) and how this can compensate for a
(substantial) material deficit made us look at mobility and whether a
mathematical process (such as maximising the number of options for
each of its pieces) was underpinning it.

During our interview, Demis made an interesting point about
games in general:
‘A big part of games – and I think it applies to chess too – is
about collecting assets, working out which ones are important at
this moment and how you want to deploy them in the most
efficient way possible. Optionality – maximising the number of
choices you have – is also an asset of course.’
In order to get an initial sense of AlphaZero’s mobility we plotted
charts showing the number of legal moves in a position during
typical AlphaZero games. Whilst this is a very simplistic measure, the
results were quite striking.
We looked at all the games we have from the match starting from
the initial position, and all the games from the TCEC match (where
the first few opening moves are pre-determined by the competition
rules). We then plotted the average number of legal moves for White
and Black at each move of the game (averaged over all games still in
play by that move number).
Initial starting position database: AlphaZero had 80 White games and 30 Black
games

The solid white and black lines in the above chart show AlphaZero’s
average number of legal moves with white and black. The dotted
lines show Stockfish’s average number of legal moves. What
immediately stands out is that the solid white line is well above the
other lines right from the start all the way up to move 70 or so – this
is where AlphaZero is playing White. This is quite consistent – on
average (taken over 80 games), AlphaZero has 10-20% more choice
each move from early in the opening right into the endgame. This
suggests that AlphaZero has found an opening/middlegame schema
that emphasises mobility that it uses with great effectiveness when
playing White.
When we look at the TCEC games there is little difference between
AlphaZero and Stockfish in the opening phase of the game in terms
of number of legal moves available. These are openings that have
been pre-specified and they include Grünfelds, Sicilians, French
Defences etc.
TCEC starting position database: AlphaZero had 50 White games and 50 Black
games
In these TCEC games we haven’t picked up a clear AlphaZero plus in
the opening/middlegame in terms of choice of legal moves. We did

see AlphaZero with more mobility for Black and White when we
extended the chart into the late endgame, however this is based on
a decreasing number of games so at this stage is inconclusive.
Overall to us these results suggest that AlphaZero is considering
optionality – how many choices it will have – when steering the
game towards its preferred positions. This comes out most clearly
when it plays White from the standard opening position, and when
considering king mobility (see the ‘Activity’ chapter).
V. AlphaZero may occasionally misplay an endgame or miss the
chance to steer the game towards a favourable endgame.
I haven’t found any examples of this. While playing through the
games at breakneck speed, I had noticed two endgames with queen
and b-pawn against queen. With the extra pawn, AlphaZero drew:
AlphaZero
Stockfish 8
London 2018
81…e1♕

… whereas it lost the endgame a pawn down:
Stockfish 8
AlphaZero
London 2017
64…h1♕
However, as the endgame tablebases tell us (and as Stockfish
knew), the first position is a worked-out draw whereas the second is
a worked-out win! The results were exactly as expected!
VI. AlphaZero may be more motivated by finding checkmate than by
more strategic endgame wins.
As we have mentioned earlier, AlphaZero is willing to sacrifice
substantial amounts of material to pursue its goals of maximising
piece activity. In that case, a calm strategical win is less likely to
occur than checkmate.
In all fairness, from quiet positions we will see some excellent
examples of strategical skill from AlphaZero, although always with a
little twist involving the opponent’s king!

VII. AlphaZero may discover new and innovative ideas in the
opening. It may also steer games down its preferred route (the
direct attack on the king).
As we discuss in the section on openings, AlphaZero’s opening
choices are extremely sensible and flexible. I would say that if I had
my time as a 1.d4 player again, this is precisely the opening
repertoire that I would choose. AlphaZero does demonstrate an
uncanny ability to generate attacking positions from even the most
solid openings, such as the 4.g3 Queen’s Indian.
VIII. AlphaZero may occasionally fall into a known opening trap.
This has happened surprisingly little, but there was one game that
jumped out at me. In 2012, Gata Kamsky won this brilliant game
against Yasser Seirawan:
Gata Kamsky
2741
Yasser Seirawan
2643
St Louis ch-USA 2012 (9)

Gata Kamsky: a brilliant game.
1.e4 c6 2.d4 d5 3.♘c3 dxe4 4.♘xe4 ♗f5 5.♘g3 ♗g6 6.h4 h6 7.♘f3 ♘d7
8.h5 ♗h7 9.♗d3 ♗xd3 10.♕xd3 e6 11.♗d2 ♘gf6 12.0-0-0 ♗e7 13.♘e4
♘xe4 14.♕xe4 ♘f6 15.♕d3 0-0 16.♔b1 c5 17.g4 ♘xg4 18.♕e2 ♔h8
19.♖hg1 ♘f6 20.dxc5 ♕c7 21.♘e5 ♗xc5 22.♗xh6
An astounding idea.

22…gxh6 23.♖d7
Brilliant tactics from Kamsky!
23…♕xd7
23…♘xd7 24.♕d2 ♔h7 25.♘g4 and mate cannot be stopped.
24.♘xd7 ♘xd7 25.♕d2 ♔h7 26.b4 ♖ad8 27.bxc5 ♘f6 28.♕f4 ♘e8
29.♕e4+ ♔h8 30.♕xb7 ♘g7 31.♕xa7 ♖c8 32.♖d1 ♘f5 33.♖d7 ♔g7
34.a4 ♔f6 35.a5 1-0
Imagine my surprise when I saw this game! The opening 1.e4 c6
was stipulated for both sides. After that, AlphaZero was on its own!
Stockfish 8
AlphaZero
London 2018
1.e4 c6 2.d4 d5 3.♘c3 dxe4 4.♘xe4 ♗f5 5.♘g3 ♗g6 6.♘f3 ♘d7 7.h4 h6
8.h5 ♗h7 9.♗d3 ♗xd3 10.♕xd3 e6 11.♗d2 ♗e7 12.♘e4 ♘gf6 13.0-0-0
0-0 14.♘xf6+ ♘xf6 15.♔b1 c5 16.g4 ♘xg4 17.♕e2 ♘f6 18.dxc5 ♕c7
19.♖hg1 ♔h8 20.♘e5
In one fewer move, Stockfish and AlphaZero have reached the
position after White’s 21st move in the Kamsky-Seirawan game!

AlphaZero avoids the worst, but the position is already very difficult
for Black.
20…♕xc5 21.♗c3 ♘d5 22.♗d4 ♕c7 23.c4 ♘f4 24.♕e4 ♗g5 25.♗e3 f6
26.♗xf4 fxe5 27.♗xe5 ♕f7 28.f4 ♗f6 29.♗xf6 ♕xf6 30.♖d7 ♖f7
31.♕xb7 ♕f5+ 32.♔a1 ♖af8 33.♕xa7 ♕xf4 34.a3 e5 35.♖xf7 ♖xf7
36.♕a8+ ♔h7 37.♕d5 e4 38.♔a2 e3 39.♕d3+ ♔g8 40.♖e1 ♖e7 41.b4
♔h8 42.♔b3 ♕g3 43.♖e2 ♕f3 44.♔c2 ♕f7 45.♔c3 ♕e8 46.b5 ♖e4
47.♔b3 ♖e7 48.a4 ♖e5 49.a5 ♕g8 50.♔b4 ♕e8 51.a6 1-0
A rare example where an opening book for AlphaZero would have
helped keep it out of trouble!
IX. AlphaZero may simplify the game in a winning position to
maximise its chances.
The Go world was mesmerised when AlphaGo (the precursor to
AlphaZero) took on champion Lee Sedol from Korea and won
convincingly. The professionals were amused and baffled by
AlphaGo’s endgame play however. One commentator laughed out
loud as AlphaGo played moves gaining barely any territory when
much ‘bigger’ moves were available. AlphaGo was sanguine. It didn’t
feel the need to win by a huge margin: winning safely by a small
margin was good enough. Like AlphaZero, AlphaGo evaluated
positions in terms of win probability rather than territorial balance
(the Go equivalent of evaluating win probability rather than number
of pawns advantage).
We haven’t really seen anything similar in the chess games from the
match with Stockfish. This is conceivably due to AlphaZero’s play
being so enterprising that it never really got the chance to win safe:
it had to win big to recoup the material investments it made.
However, some very impressive factors of its play and conversion
technique do recall the idea of winning safe. There are numerous
examples of AlphaZero restricting some of its opponent’s pieces and
then swapping off the opponent’s active pieces to leave the
opponent helpless.

I had personal experience of AlphaZero converting an advantage in
such a smooth fashion in my quickplay game with AlphaZero on 20th
April 2018. It feels as if AlphaZero wins safe by restricting the
opponent’s pieces to the greatest degree and by neutralising the
opponent’s strongest pieces by exchanges. In Go, this came across
as ‘slack’ play; in chess, it feels like the master strategy of a Karpov
or Carlsen!
X. AlphaZero may seek complications when it thinks it stands worse.
This again seems to be completely true: we have already shown an
example in which AlphaZero sacrificed a pawn quite wildly in the
opening when it felt it was worse.
This worked out for AlphaZero in that it generally held the draw
through active play. I’d want to do more work myself to check these
lines are sound before copying them however!
XI. AlphaZero may steer games towards positions that are ‘generally
promising’.
This is a key feature of AlphaZero’s play and is why AlphaZero’s
games look so natural and intuitive. By taking account of whether
lines are generally promising or not, AlphaZero can steer itself
towards sound continuations and away from horrible positional
moves where tactical complexities make the position impossible to
analyse to exhaustion.
This seems to be reflected in the types of positions that AlphaZero
plays: positions in which it has an initiative and in which the
opponent’s king is constantly in danger.
XII. AlphaZero may give the opponent the chance to go wrong.
Rather than simply selecting the best line, AlphaZero bases its
evaluation on a weighted average of likely lines.

When Natasha predicted that AlphaZero would offer its opponent
extra choices, provided they were inferior, I was extremely sceptical
about it. And then I came across this passage of play:
AlphaZero
Stockfish 8
London 2018
35…♗e8
After an early pawn sacrifice to open lines against the black king,
AlphaZero had pushed hard, but Stockfish was resourceful as
always. In this position, White has two choices: 36.cxd6, which
forces 36…cxd6, or 36.cxb6, which allows both 36…cxb6 (leading to
the same position as after 36.cxd6 cxd6) and 36…♗xg6 which is a
complete mess. From a human perspective (and seemingly from the
perspective of most of my engines), 36.cxd6 is the rational move as
you need to calculate just one alternative to reach the main position,
whereas 36.cxb6 requires calculation of two possibilities. A human
would only venture 36.cxb6 if he was rolling the dice or wanted to
confuse! However, AlphaZero played 36.cxb6 and Stockfish took the
bait with the very risky 36…♗xg6 !

1.
2.
36.cxb6 ♗xg6 37.b7 ♕d8 38.hxg6 ♕b8 39.♗a6 ♔g7 40.♕c3 ♔xg6
41.♕f3 a4 42.♕g4+ ♔h6 43.♔a1 ♕a7 44.♕c8 ♕b8
The game ended in an eventful draw in 236 moves after AlphaZero
had come very close to winning!
One example doesn’t prove a hypothesis, of course, but the choice
of 36.cxb6 was completely unexpected for me!
XIII. AlphaZero may overlook a single concrete line that refutes a
generally promising situation.
AlphaZero has lost only a small number of games against Stockfish,
and its losses fall into two categories:
Overpressing and losing by desperately avoiding a draw at all
costs.
Blunders due to unexpected tactics.
Here’s an example of the latter.
Stockfish 8
AlphaZero
London 2018

41.♔e2
After another wild kingside attack in a Carlsbad-structure Queen’s
Gambit Declined, AlphaZero had reached this equal position. Its next
move was rather tragic however.
41…♕xh2 42.♖g1 b5 43.♔f1
The queen is trapped and White will round it up by taking the b-
pawn, then ♖b2-e2 and f2-f3.
43…♔f6 44.♖xb5 ♔e7 45.♖b2 1-0

PART III
Themes in AlphaZero’s play

CHAPTER 6
Introduction to our selected AlphaZero themes
In 1890, a two-game telegraph match began between the World
Champion Wilhelm Steinitz and his two-time challenger Mikhail
Chigorin. The games started from two opening positions which had
become a bone of contention between the players. In both, Steinitz
was a pawn up, for which his opponent Chigorin had compensation
in the form of open lines and piece activity. Steinitz billed the match
as a contest between ‘the tactical and strategical maxims of the old
school of which Chigorin is the strongest living exponent’ and ‘the
modern principles of play’ which Steinitz believed he represented.
The modern school of chess believed that ‘sacrifices early in the
game, even of the first party, are mostly unsound or else they
succeed only in consequence of moves on the other side which can
be demonstrated as errors in development’ and Steinitz stated
before the match that ‘in each of these games, I am a pawn ahead
and, theoretically, I maintain I ought to have a won game in both’.
This match was one of the first matches – if not the first –
between a great defender (Steinitz) and an equally great attacker
(Chigorin), played with the sole purpose of demonstrating a
superiority in one player’s conception of how chess should be played.
On that occasion, the attacker (Chigorin) won in superb style.
The magnificent games that Chigorin won are strangely similar to
the victories of AlphaZero. Both Chigorin and AlphaZero disregard
the material balance completely, sacrificing pawns and pieces where
appropriate to increase the scope of their pieces and to limit the
activity of their opponent’s pieces. Both also show an extraordinary
ability to regroup and redeploy their pieces for a new wave of
attacks, often through temporary retreating moves. Both Steinitz and
Stockfish display extraordinary ingenuity in defence, accepting ugly,

cramped positions and using hidden and unexpected tactical
resources to maintain their balance in the face of a furious onslaught
Let’s see a couple of examples starting with Chigorin-Steinitz.
Mikhail Chigorin
Wilhelm Steinitz
Cable match 1890
1.e4 e5 2.♘f3 ♘c6 3.♗c4 ♗c5 4.b4 ♗xb4 5.c3 ♗a5 6.0-0 ♕f6 7.d4 ♘h6
8.♗g5 ♕d6 9.d5 ♘d8 10.♕a4 ♗b6 11.♘a3 c6 12.♗e2
A first great retreating bishop move, freeing the c4-square for the
knight.
12…♗c7 13.♘c4 ♕f8 14.d6

A temporary sacrifice, bringing the black bishop in front of its d-
pawn and thus blocking Black’s natural development with …d7-d6
and …♗d7.
14…♗xd6 15.♘b6 ♖b8 16.♕xa7 ♘e6 17.♗c1
Wonderful vision. The bishop is headed to a3, overloading the
bishop on d6 which has to protect the rook on b8.
17…♘g8 18.♗a3 c5 19.♖ad1 ♘f6 20.♗c4 ♗c7 21.♘d5 ♗d6 22.♘h4

Chigorin was famed for his handling of the knights, and here he
finds two great outposts for his pieces. The pressure is too great and
Black loses material.
22…♘xd5 23.♘f5 g6 24.♘xd6+ ♕xd6 25.♗xd5 ♕c7 26.♗xe6 fxe6
27.♗xc5 ♖a8 28.♕xa8 ♕xc5 29.♕a4 ♔d8 30.♖d2 ♔c7 31.♖b1 ♖d8
32.♖b5 ♕c6 33.♕b4 d6 34.a4 ♕e8 35.♖b6 ♕f8 36.♕a5 d5 37.exd5
♔b8 38.d6
Black resigned.

Mikhail Chigorin (left) and Wilhelm Steinitz during their rematch for the World
Championship in Havana 1892.
Now it’s time for AlphaZero against Stockfish, with one of 10 games
released in December 2017. The decisive part of the game occurs
from move 36 onwards:
AlphaZero
Stockfish 8
London 2017

AlphaZero sacrificed a pawn in the opening, pressing Black’s pieces
to the back three ranks. AlphaZero – just like Chigorin – retreats its
pieces to regroup for a new attacking wave. 37.♗d1 and 38.♗b3
recalls Chigorin’s 17.♗c1 and 18.♗a3, preparing an assault on
Black’s position from a fresh angle.
36.h5 ♖e7 37.♗d1 ♕e1 38.♗b3
38…♖d8 39.♖f3 ♕e4 40.♕d2
AlphaZero goes still further by retreating two major pieces (39.♖f3
and 40.♕d2) in order to set up a new attacking structure with
42.h6.
40…♕g4 41.♗d1 ♕e4 42.h6 ♘c7 43.♖d6 ♘e6 44.♗b3 ♕xe5 45.♖d5
♕h8 46.♕b4 ♘c5 47.♖xc5
Material is of no importance in AlphaZero’s attacking vision as first a
central pawn (44…♕xe5) and then the exchange (47.♖xc5) are
offered to open new lines (the a1-h8 diagonal) and to clear away
Black’s defensive pieces.
47…bxc5 48.♕h4 ♖de8 49.♖f6 ♖f8 50.♕f4 a5 51.g4

Stockfish’s caged queen on h8 is even more unhappy than Steinitz’s
inactive queen on f8.
51…d5 52.♗xd5 ♖d7 53.♗c4 a4 54.g5 a3 55.♕f3 ♖c7 56.♕xa3 ♕xf6
57.gxf6 ♖fc8 58.♕d3 ♖f8 59.♕d6 ♖fc8 60.a4 1-0
It seemed as if the debate started by Steinitz and Chigorin about the
right way to play chess is continuing to this very day at the highest
level, but this time not by humans but by human creations!
AlphaZero’s style has two vital facets: a constant awareness of the
opponent’s king which manifests itself in ferocious, unexpected
attacks; and a fantastic ability to extract maximum activity from its
pieces while reducing the opponent’s pieces to passivity. AlphaZero
blends many recognisable tenets of chess strategy with new or
refreshed self-taught techniques (the quick advance of the rook’s
pawn as a means of initiating a wing attack is a good example of
this).
Perhaps the most impressive feature of AlphaZero’s play is the
consistency of purpose with which it executes its (attacking) plans.
This makes AlphaZero’s games attractive and easy to learn from. In
many cases AlphaZero uses a clear and consistent method to build
up its attacking forces. In the coming chapters we dissect and

•
•
•
analyse AlphaZero’s play, highlighting themes which demonstrate the
techniques that AlphaZero uses repeatedly, and we explain how to
use these techniques in our own games.
We observed three distinct ways in which AlphaZero improves over
accepted wisdom and current elite play:
Finding exceptions to the rules
Human players may take some decisions as a matter of routine,
while handcrafted engines may apply their heuristics too rigidly. In
both cases, unexpected strategical opportunities may be missed.
AlphaZero seems to have an excellent sense of when to take non-
routine decisions such as abandoning the fight for an open file on
one side in order to concentrate its forces on a different wing.
Combining known ideas to construct a cohesive long-term plan
AlphaZero combines known individual attacking or strategical
techniques into a schematic approach to storming the opponent’s
position. AlphaZero has played some beautiful games where it
deliberately sets out to open both a file and a diagonal against the
king and then transfers a knight into an attacking position, even at
the cost of substantial material sacrifices.
More effective implementation
This is shown most clearly in the ‘Activity’ chapter. Humans would
readily accept that it is a good thing for their pieces to have greater
mobility. However, it can be hard for humans to quickly measure
relative piece mobility when selecting between various lines.
AlphaZero appears to have a clear edge over Stockfish in piece
mobility so we surmise that it has found a particularly effective way

to place a value on its mobility (see the charts in the ‘Activity’
chapter).
In the coming chapters we will describe and examine some of
AlphaZero’s key strengths. We have grouped the themes into two
broad categories:
Piece mobility
THEME: outposts (Chapter 7)
THEME: activity (Chapter 8)
Attacking the king
THEME: the march of the rook’s pawn (Chapter 9)
THEME: controlling a colour-complex close to the opponent’s king
(Chapter 10)
THEME: sacrifices for time, space and damage (Chapter 11)
THEME: opposite-side castling (Chapter 12)
THEME: defence (Chapter 13)
Each theme is examined from two perspectives:
1. Description of the theme
Using examples from AlphaZero’s games, we describe each theme in
detail, noting the preconditions for a successful implementation and
the best way to implement it in practice.
2. Historical perspective
We have selected similar ideas from past and present human games,
famous and little-known, to enrich the ideas already discussed in
AlphaZero’s games.

CHAPTER 7
Piece mobility: outposts
This chapter examines the ways in which AlphaZero secures valuable
posts for its pieces, from the knight and bishop all the way up to the
king itself!
Chapter 7 – Piece mobility: outposts – key points
Theme
Manoeuvres and techniques to secure valuable posts for
the pieces.
Purpose
Improve the positioning of existing pieces, increasing
your own activity.
What are the
prerequisites?
AlphaZero likes central outposts in particular. It always
ensures a firm central presence to support its pieces (for
example, with black, a central pawn on e5 supporting an
aggressive knight on f4).
What are the risks?
AlphaZero is willing to spend a lot of time transferring
pieces (in particular the knight) to strong squares. Such
slow manoeuvres can give the opponent time to launch a
counterattack.
Unique implementation
by AlphaZero
AlphaZero makes a success of long manoeuvres by first
restricting the mobility of the opponent’s pieces. The
opponent lacks the activity to derail the gradual
improvement of AlphaZero’s pieces and position.
Complexity of resulting
positions
Low. Once a piece has reached a great outpost, the rest
of your position always looks much better!
Any tips
Look at the chapters on ‘Colour complexes’ and ‘Activity’
too. These themes frequently coincide in AlphaZero’s
games.
Who does it remind us
of?
Anand.

AlphaZero’s creative attacking play is the most attention-grabbing
facet of its game, but its strategic play, though less outwardly
spectacular, is equally remarkable. AlphaZero demonstrates an
uncanny ability to discover strong, safe outposts for its pieces and to
formulate a plan for establishing them there. This is especially true
of its handling of knights, but also for bishops, rooks, queen and
even the king! In this chapter, we examine AlphaZero’s handling of
each of these pieces in turn.

1.
2.
1.
2.
 
Section A – AlphaZero’s knights
AlphaZero likes to gradually build up the pressure as it mounts its
attacks. Once the basic attacking force is in place, if AlphaZero still
has a knight left on the board, then it will tend to invest a
considerable amount of time (and even material) to bring this knight
closer to the opponent’s king.
We demonstrate this with a few examples:
I. AlphaZero’s attacking knights
Game: ‘Take my knight!’
We referenced this game in Chapter 2. It was the game that
convinced me that AlphaZero is an attacking lunatic!
Game themes:
Sacrificing structure to open lines against the opponent’s king
[11…gxh6]
Long knight manoeuvre [13…♘e7]
Stockfish 8
AlphaZero
London 2018
1.e4 e5 2.♘f3 ♘c6 3.♗c4 ♗c5 4.d3
Stockfish opens with the quiet but flexible Italian Game. White has a
multitude of plans available:
Expanding in the centre with c2-c3 and d2-d4.
Delaying castling and transferring the white knight on b1 to the
kingside via the manoeuvre ♘b1-d2-f1-g3. White may combine
this with such attacking ideas as pushing the g-pawn and even

1.
2.
castling queenside. This plan has been much played by the
Russian/Dutch grandmaster Sergei Tiviakov, and I have also had
some success with it.
4…a6
This is an unusual move order (4…♘f6 is normal) which tempts
Stockfish to target the f7-pawn immediately with 5.♘g5. After 5…
♘h6, we are already in an original and unexplored position!
5.♘g5 ♘h6 6.0-0 d6 7.a4 ♗g4 8.♘f3 0-0 9.h3 ♗h5 10.c3 ♔h8 11.♗xh6
gxh6 12.♘bd2 ♗a7 13.♗d5
Black’s attack is still in its infancy, but the contours of AlphaZero’s
schematic approach of combining a file with a diagonal in the attack
are already visible:
The g-file has been opened (AlphaZero has allowed White to
damage its kingside structure in return for this).
The bishop on a7 is eyeing White’s king’s position from a
distance.
Danger for White still seems a long way away. AlphaZero considers
that it needs to bring more pieces into play on the kingside and
spots a tempting square on f4 for the knight.

The only problem is that the knight on c6 is X-rayed to the pawn on
b7 by White’s d5-bishop. In AlphaZero’s world, such problems can be
solved by sacrifices.
With hindsight I would suggest a cautious move like 13.♔h1 to
meet 13…♘e7 with 14.g4, forcing the bishop back to g6 and
preventing both …f7-f5 and …♘g6.
13…♘e7 14.♗xb7 ♖b8 15.♗xa6
You would expect Black to regain one of its sacrificed pawns with
15…♖xb2. However, this was not the primary goal of AlphaZero’s
sacrifice. After 15.♗xa6, the knight is one step closer to f4, the
bishop on d5 has been driven away from the a2-g8 diagonal (from
where it might have interfered with Black’s ability to place a rook on
the g-file) and Black has a tempo for the attack.
15…f5 16.♔h1 ♘g6 17.exf5 ♘f4

Four moves ago, this knight did not look at all threatening. The
knight is especially strong on f4 since White has played h2-h3, which
interferes with White’s ability to drive away the knight with g2-g3 (as
h3 would hang).
18.d4 ♖xf5 19.♕c2 ♖f8 20.♖ae1 ♕f6 21.♖e3 ♕g7
For the two pawns, Black has a strong attacking position, due in
great part to the knight on f4. AlphaZero won a tough fight in 97
moves.

1.
2.
3.
Game: ‘No Minority Attack for AlphaZero!’
As we discuss in the ‘Carlsbad’ chapter, AlphaZero doesn’t adopt the
classical plan of the Minority Attack: pushing its queenside pawns to
create a small pawn weakness on c6 that could be exploited in a
long endgame is not AlphaZero’s preferred style of play! In Natasha’s
opinion AlphaZero plays like a headstrong young player, burning with
ambition to deliver checkmate. So I had to laugh when I read this
comment on the Minority Attack by the famous Russian trainer
Mikhail Shereshevsky in his recent book, The Shereshevsky Method:
‘The Minority Attack is an excellent plan but Black has ways to
defend. I cannot help remembering an ironic comment by master
Oleg Dementiev, trainer of Arshak Petrosian: “If you spend your best
years attacking the pawn on c6, what on earth are you going to do
when you get old and past it?” I share the view that in the Carlsbad
structure, young players should employ a plan that involves a wider
strategic arsenal than the Minority Attack.’
Perhaps Natasha is right: AlphaZero looks youthful in this game!
Game themes:
Opening a file to support an attack along a diagonal [12.gxf3]
Exchanging off defenders of a colour complex [17.♗xf6]
Long knight manoeuvre [26.♘b1]
AlphaZero
Stockfish 8
London 2018
1.d4 d5 2.c4 e6 3.♘c3 ♘f6 4.cxd5 exd5 5.♗g5 c6 6.e3 ♗d6 7.♗d3 0-0
8.♘f3 ♖e8 9.0-0 ♗g4 10.♕b3
A sharp new idea from AlphaZero. A previous game had continued
with the standard 10.♖b1, supporting b4.
10…♘a6 11.♖fe1
11.♕xb7 ♘b4 is bad news for the white queen!
11…♗xf3 12.gxf3

AlphaZero accepts a certain weakening of its kingside structure to
open the g-file against the opponent’s king.
12…♘c7 13.♔h1 g6 14.f4
Despite the doubled pawns, White’s kingside is not vulnerable to
attack. For now the f4-pawn blocks any pressure along the b8-h2
diagonal; later it will move to f5 to combine in the attack against
Black’s kingside.
14…♖b8 15.♖g1
White’s rook is on the half-open g-file and the light-squared bishop is
aiming at g6 from d3. Black’s kingside structure is solid however, so
White will need to bring more units to bear on Black’s kingside.
15…♘e6 16.♗h4 ♗e7 17.♗xf6 ♗xf6 18.f5

Increasing the pressure on the g6-pawn, which is Black’s most
exposed point on the kingside. 17.♗xf6 removed a defender of
Black’s kingside light squares that might jump into e4 and block the
b1-h7 diagonal. AlphaZero only exchanged the knight on f6 once
Black had played …♗e7. After ♗xf6 …♗xf6, Black’s bishop is
pointing towards the queenside along the h8-a1 diagonal instead of
towards the white king along the b8-h2 diagonal. This removes any
danger for White in reopening the b8-h2 diagonal with f4-f5.
18…♘g7 19.♕d1
The queen is redeployed to the kingside.
19…♗h4 20.♕f3 ♕f6 21.♖g4
Preparing to double rooks on the g-file and add yet more pressure
on the g6-pawn. White also eyes the bishop on h4, which is short of
squares, and introduces the hidden threat of e3-e4.
21…h5
Weakens g6, but Black has calculated that it can neutralise the f5-
pawn before White can make fxg6 tactically possible. 21…g5 was
another idea, moving the pawn forwards to a protected square.
However, apart from the drawback of cutting off the h4-bishop from
the rest of Black’s forces this move allows White to demonstrate the
strength of the ♖g4: 22.e4 ♕xd4 23.f6 ♘e6 24.exd5, discovering

an attack from the g4-rook on the queen on d4: 24…♘f4 25.♖xh4
and wins.
22.♖g2 ♔f8
Stepping out of the pin on the g-file.
23.♖ag1 ♘xf5 24.♕h3
Black has neutralised the immediate attack on the g6-pawn by
winning the f5-pawn. Black’s position looks safe, and only the
awkward bishop on h4 seems a cause for concern. However,
AlphaZero has grasped how difficult it is for Black to unravel its
position. In order to bring the bishop on h4 back into play along the
h4-d8 diagonal, the black queen must move from f6. Before Black
moves the queen from f6, Black must retreat the knight from f5.
However, the knight on f5 performs a key defensive task: shielding
the g6-pawn from White’s light-squared bishop. A normal retreat
such as 24…♘d6 allows AlphaZero to capitalise on its combination
of bishop and rooks pointing at the black kingside with 25.♗xg6
fxg6 26.♖xg6 when Black will not survive long.
The only knight retreat that still protects the g6-square is 24…♘e7.
However in this case, Black is no closer to bringing its bishop on h4
back to safety as the retreat of the queen on f6 is now blocked by

the knight on e7! Black’s constellation of kingside pieces thus
appears to be paralysed.
To increase the pressure on Black’s position, AlphaZero touched the
awkward bishop on h4 with 24.♕h3, threatening ♗xf5, when Black
will be forced to answer …gxf5, doubling the f-pawns and allowing
White unhindered access to the g-file.
That last threat seems to be of limited power: ♖g8+ is met by …
♔e7 and the black king is safe. However, AlphaZero has a powerful
idea in mind. Just assume it was White’s move here: how would you
stop the black king from escaping so that White can deliver mate on
the g-file?
If we make Black miss a move, we see that [24…--] 25.♗xf5 gxf5
26.e4 is the wonderful tactic, with the enormous threat of e4-e5:
26…dxe4
27.♘d5 (amazing, and worth a diagram) 27…cxd5 28.♕a3+ ♕e7
29.♖g8#.
In other words, White’s pressure with doubled rooks on a file
pointing at the black king combined with a bishop on an open
diagonal truly creates severe danger.
24…♘e7

Black retreats the knight to deal with the threat of 25.♗xf5, being
careful to keep covering g6. Black’s pieces are poorly coordinated
and in each other’s way, but for all that, Black has survived the first
wave of the attack and the second is not obviously imminent.
AlphaZero now plays a fantastic manoeuvre, increasing the pressure
by bringing its knight close to the black king.
25.f4

One part of White’s idea is to play f4-f5 a second time. The second
part is dastardly.
25…♖bd8 26.♘b1
A great move: the knight is headed to f3 (where it will attack the
bishop on h4) and then most likely e5, when either f4-f5 or a
sacrifice on g6 will rip open the black king’s position. The plan seems
slow, but as so often, AlphaZero has engineered a position in which
its opponent’s pieces are poorly coordinated, leaving it all the time in
the world to bring the knight into play.
26…♖d6 27.♘d2 ♘g8 28.♖e2
To allow ♘f3 without dropping the e3-pawn.
28…♕e7 29.♘f3 ♗f6 30.f5 ♕d7 31.♕g3 g5 32.♘xg5 ♗xg5 33.e4 ♖xe4
If 33…dxe4 34.♕xg5 is twice as powerful as the black king will
attempt to use the e-file to escape: 34…♘f6 35.♗c4 ♔e7 36.♗xf7
wins.
34.♗xe4 dxe4 35.h4
Not to allow the knight to settle on f6!
35…♘h6
35…♘f6 36.hxg5 ♘g4 37.♖xe4 ♖xd4 38.♕b8+ and White wins.
36.♕xg5 ♕xf5 37.♕xf5 ♘xf5 38.♖xe4
And AlphaZero converted its advantage in 71 moves:

1.
38…♖d5 39.♖f4 ♘xd4 40.♖g6 ♘f5 41.♖g5 ♖d1+ 42.♔h2 ♖d2+
43.♔h3 ♖d3+ 44.♔g2 ♖d2+ 45.♔f3 ♘g7 46.♖g6 ♘e8 47.♖g2 ♖d6
48.♖f5 ♘f6 49.♔e2 ♖e6+ 50.♔d2 ♖d6+ 51.♔c1 ♖e6 52.♖g3 b6 53.b4
♔e7 54.♖gf3 ♖d6 55.a3 ♖e6 56.♔d2 ♖d6+ 57.♖d3 ♖e6 58.♖e3 ♔d6
59.♔e2 ♘d5 60.♖xe6+ ♔xe6 61.♖g5 ♘f6 62.♔f3 a6 63.♔f4 ♘d5+
64.♔g3 ♘f6 65.♔f3 b5 66.♖g7 ♔e7 67.♔f4 ♘d5+ 68.♔g5 ♘f6 69.♔f5
♘d5 70.♖h7 ♔f8 71.♖xh5 1-0
II. AlphaZero’s long knight manoeuvres
Now we turn to AlphaZero’s long knight manoeuvres, in which
AlphaZero spots a great square for a knight and then puts its whole
position at the disposal of the knight to arrive on that square. Rooks,
queens and even kings must step out of the way to assist the knight
in its goal. There were a couple of fine examples of this in the
original 10 AlphaZero games released in December 2017, but the
following game beats them all.
Game: ‘Bold Sir Lancelot’
With the manoeuvre 20.♘g5, prepared by 15.h4 and 18.♕b1,
AlphaZero starts to unravel the black kingside position, inducing first
of all 20…f5 (blocking the b1-h7 diagonal, but weakening the e5-
square) and 22…h6 (covering against White’s possibility of ♘g5 but
weakening the g6-square). These two weakened squares – e5 and
g6 – will form the pivot of White’s play in the next 35 moves. Taking
advantage of the rigidity of Black’s position, AlphaZero instigates an
amazing long-term plan to exploit the g6-square with the knight.
Having established a grip on the position, AlphaZero destroys Black’s
centre with a fine exchange sacrifice and then rushes its central
pawns through the centre. Fittingly, the knight delivers the coup de
grâce – 69.♘d4 –, preventing the black king from stopping White’s
passed central pawns.
Game themes:
Fixing the centre [9.cxd5]

2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
Using a rook’s pawn to establish an outpost for a knight [15.h4]
Combined attack with queen and knight on rook’s pawn [18.♕b1,
20.♘g5]
Immediate piece redeployment once goal is achieved [21.♘f3]
Long knight manoeuvre
Advanced rook outpost [39.♖b5]
Advanced queen outpost [42.♕e5]
Breaking the fortress with a sacrifice [47.♖xd5]
AlphaZero
Stockfish 8
London 2018
1.d4 ♘f6 2.c4 e6 3.♘f3 b6 4.g3 ♗b7 5.♗g2 ♗e7 6.♘c3 0-0 7.0-0 ♘e4
8.♗d2 d5 9.cxd5 exd5
This game demonstrates another line of the 4.g3 Queen’s Indian in
which AlphaZero plays so strongly. AlphaZero likes the early
exchange on d5 in such positions, stabilising the centre and freeing
its knights to manoeuvre around the fixed central pawn structure.
10.♕b3 c5
10.♕b3 was an unusual choice from AlphaZero – 10.♖c1 is usually
played – and 10…c5 is new from Stockfish. A previous high-level
game continued 10…♘xd2 11.♘xd2 c6 12.♖fd1 f5 13.f4 ♘d7
14.♘f3 ♔h8 15.♖ac1 ♘f6 16.♘e5 ♗d6 with a balanced position in
Ivanchuk-Korobov, Berlin rapid 2015.
11.♗f4 ♘a6 12.♖fd1 c4 13.♕c2 ♘b4 14.♕c1 ♕d7 15.h4
One of AlphaZero’s favourite moves, often played with the idea of
advancing the h-pawn to h6, weakening Black’s kingside dark
squares. Here, h4 provides support for a knight outpost on g5 which,
combined with a queen on the b1-h7 diagonal, White will use to
tease out a weakening of the black kingside.
15…♖ac8 16.a3 ♘xc3 17.bxc3

Recapturing with the pawn rather than the queen consolidates the
centre and opens the b-file to assist White’s queenside play.
17…♘c6 18.♕b1 ♖ce8 19.♖e1 ♘a5 20.♘g5
Exploiting the scenario prepared by 15.h4 and 18.♕b1, White
attacks h7 and forces a concession from Black. Stockfish takes a
radical approach to stop White from breaking in the centre with e2-
e4.
20…f5
Black’s first weakness.
21.♘f3
Typical AlphaZero: the knight has performed its function on g5, so
AlphaZero wastes no time in redeploying it to the next target square.
21…♗f6 22.♖a2 h6 23.a4
Another typical AlphaZero move, using a lull in the game to grab a
small piece of extra territory with a rook’s pawn. This move will
prove to be useful later.
23…♕e6

White’s next move introduces a long knight manoeuvre with the goal
of establishing the knight on g6. It’s a fantastic concept!
24.♔h2
A move AlphaZero has used before in its games as preparation for a
regrouping of its knight.
24…♗c8 25.♖h1 ♘c6
Stockfish is unwilling to concede e5 to White’s pieces and adopts a
waiting strategy.

A human player might have gambled on 25…♘b3 followed by …a7-
a6 and …b6-b5 to generate queenside counterplay.
26.h5
24.♔h2 freed h1 for the rook to support a pawn on h5, which in
turn will support the knight on g6.
26…♔h8 27.♘g1
24.♔h2 freed g1 for the knight. Can you see the knight’s route?
27…♕f7 28.♗f3

The knight freed f3 for the bishop, which allows White to defend the
h-pawn and the e-pawn securely.
28…♖d8 29.♘h3 ♔g8 30.♗c1
Freeing f4 for White’s knight. The bishop can also be redeployed
along the c1-a3 diagonal if necessary, thanks to the move 23.a4.
30…♖fe8 31.♕b5 ♗b7 32.♖d1 ♘a5 33.♕b1 ♗c8 34.♘f4 ♗g5 35.♘g6
… and there it is! Many of White’s pieces – both bishops, the king’s
rook, the king itself and the lowly rook’s pawn on h5 – have

contributed to the redeployment of the knight to this outpost. In the
next part of the game, White swarms around Black’s most obvious
weakness: the d5-pawn. White’s knight continues to trample on
Black’s position, moving between g6, e5 and f4.
35…♗xc1 36.♕xc1 ♗e6 37.♘e5 ♕c7 38.♖b2 ♘b7 39.♖b5
Installing the rook on a strong outpost, targeting the d5-pawn. The
pawn on a4 shows its usefulness, protecting the rook on b5 and
holding back Black’s queenside pawns. Black doesn’t want to drive
the rook away with …a7-a6 as the b6-pawn would be weak and
unable to move forwards.
39…♘a5 40.♕f4 ♘b3 41.♘g6 ♕c6 42.♕e5
An amazing move! The queen is beautifully centralised but looks
vulnerable to attack by Black’s rooks. However the queen is eyeing
the weak pawns on d5 and f5 and is difficult to repulse. If the black
bishop moves, then one of the weaknesses may fall. This allows
AlphaZero to focus on Black’s biggest weakness: the d5-pawn.
42…♕d7 43.e3 ♘a5 44.♗g2 ♘b7 45.♖a1 ♔h7 46.♘f4 ♗g8 47.♖xd5

Well-calculated and just in time! We will examine this typical
AlphaZero stratagem in the ‘Activity’ chapter: using an exchange
sacrifice to break a static ‘fortress’ by the opponent.
47…♗xd5 48.♕xd5 ♘d6 49.♗h3 ♖e7 50.♘g6 ♖f7 51.♘e5 ♕b7 52.♗g2
♕xd5 53.♗xd5 ♖c7 54.♔g2
I wasn’t sure this position was so amazing for White, but AlphaZero
is at an 86.7% expected score while my engines like White a lot too
(values between 0.7 and 1.0). Black’s rooks have little scope, many
of its pawns are weak and White’s centre is a long-term strength.
54…♘e4 55.♗xe4 fxe4 56.f3 exf3+ 57.♔xf3 ♖e7 58.♘g6 ♖b7 59.e4

… and here they come!
59…b5 60.axb5 ♖xb5 61.♘f4
Another amazing move for a human player: AlphaZero redeploys its
knight from a wonderful outpost to a defensive square on e2 to
cover Black’s counterplay against c3. After that, the central pawns
will march through!
61…♖b3 62.♘e2 ♖a8 63.e5 a5 64.d5 a4 65.d6 a3 66.d7 ♔g8 67.♖d1
♖bb8 68.e6 ♔f8 69.♘d4 1-0
HISTORICAL PARALLEL
Anand’s wonderful Ruy Lopez knight
These long knight manoeuvres in which AlphaZero’s knight ghosts
through the position, other pieces stepping to one side, reminded
me of a classic game by living legend Vishy Anand, many times
World Champion and still at the very top of the game at the age of
48, against American Gata Kamsky – a challenger to Karpov for
the World Championship title in 1996. In this game, Anand’s
queen’s knight is the star of the show, heading to the kingside to
accumulate concessions (23…h5) before returning to the
queenside to decisively exploit the weakness that Black created
when trying to generate counterplay.

Viswanathan Anand
2715
Gata Kamsky
2710
Las Palmas PCA-Wch Candidates final 1995 (9)
1.e4 e5 2.♘f3 ♘c6 3.♗b5 a6 4.♗a4 ♘f6 5.0-0 ♗e7 6.♖e1 b5 7.♗b3
d6 8.c3 0-0 9.h3 ♖e8 10.d4 ♗b7 11.♘bd2 ♗f8 12.a4 h6 13.♗c2 exd4
14.cxd4 ♘b4 15.♗b1 ♕d7
Anand had to face various sub-variations of the Ruy Lopez in this
match, all involving the same unbalanced pawn structure in which
Black concedes the central e5-point but White’s double pawn
centre is under fire from Black’s pieces. White’s queenside
development is restricted by the knight on b4, but Black too has
difficulty increasing the pressure on White’s position. The move
15…c5 looks tempting, to mobilise Black’s queenside pawn
majority; however the response 16.d5 would block the pressure of
Black’s b7-bishop against the e4-pawn, freeing White’s pieces –
the knight on d2 in particular – for further action.
16.b3 g6 17.♗b2 ♗g7 18.♕c1

This method of development had not been seen before. By
attacking the knight on b4 with ♗c3, Anand forces …c7-c5, after
which d4-d5 will block out the light-squared bishop on b7. The
attack on the knight also prevents Black from activating his
queenside majority any further with …c5-c4. Moreover, the queen
is ready to combine with the bishop on c3 to generate pressure
along the a1-h8 diagonal (which is opened after d4-d5).
Altogether, it’s an ingenious way of developing White’s queenside.

Viswanathan Anand is wonderfully adept at knight manoeuvres.
18…♖ac8 19.♗c3 c5 20.d5 ♕e7 21.♘f1
White’s knight continues its journey.
21…♘h7 22.♗xg7 ♔xg7 23.♘e3

An excellent move. White intends ♘g4, combining with the queen
on c1 to attack Black’s kingside dark squares, which were
weakened by the exchange of the dark-squared bishops. After
♘g4, White threatens not only the h6-pawn but also a disruptive
check along the a1-h8 diagonal.
23…h5
Black prevents 24.♘g4, but his kingside dark squares are much
looser now.
24.♕d2 ♔g8 25.axb5 axb5 26.♘d1

A fantastic move, demonstrating vision over the whole board. So
many players (including me!) would have been satisfied with the
knight’s position on e3! However, having extracted a kingside
weakness, Anand spots a new weakness – the b5-pawn – and
once again his queen’s knight is the star that must attack it! Note
also that by moving the knight away from e3, White uncovers the
rook’s support of the e-pawn, which potentially gives White the
central break e4-e5. Finally, Black’s exchanging attempt 26…♘g5
is prevented.
26…♘a6 27.♘c3 b4
Black cannot hold the pawn on b5 and has to push it to b4. Black’s
queenside structure loses its elasticity and this substantially
increases the activity of an unemployed white piece.
28.♘b5 ♘c7 29.♗d3 ♘xb5 30.♗xb5 ♖ed8 31.♗c4

That bishop feels happier now! It protects d5 and thus supports
the e4-e5 break.
31…♘f6 32.♕h6 ♕f8 33.♕g5 ♕g7 34.♖a7
As if by magic, Black’s position appears porous from all sides. First
the white queen invaded on the kingside, now the rook has
reached the seventh rank via the queenside.
Note also how passive the black queen is compared to White’s: a
theme we often see in the AlphaZero-Stockfish games.

34…♖c7 35.♗a6 ♖b8 36.e5
The transformation is complete: the e4-pawn, which was assailed
from all sides on move 15, is deciding the game!
36…♘e8 37.♖xb7 ♖cxb7 38.♗xb7 ♖xb7 39.♕d8 ♕f8 40.♖a1 ♘c7
41.♕d7 ♕b8 42.♕xd6 c4 43.bxc4 b3 44.♖b1 b2 45.♕c5 ♖b3 46.♕d4
♕b4 47.♘g5 ♖c3 48.♕f4 f6 49.exf6 ♘xd5 50.f7+ 1-0
III. AlphaZero’s knight on g5
The knight outpost on g5, prepared by a pawn on h4 and supported
by a queen on the b1-h7 diagonal, is a recurring stratagem in
AlphaZero’s games.

1.
2.
What does this set-up give to White?:
White attacks two points close to the black king: the f7-pawn and
the h7-pawn.
By involving other light-squared pieces (a bishop or queen on the
b1-h7 diagonal, for example) White can create serious threats
against one of those points.
Note that h7 is normally weaker than f7. f7 tends to be defended by
a rook on f8 (which is hard for White to draw away) whereas h7 is

3.
typically defended by a knight on f6, which is closer to White’s
position and thus easier to attack, for example with a pawn on e5:
Although White would love to deliver checkmate on h7, it cannot
be assumed that the opponent will co-operate. Initially, White
would be happy for the manoeuvre h2-h4+♘g5+♕d3 to elicit a
weakening of Black’s kingside structure such as …g7-g6.
Why is g6 a weakening? There are two reasons:

a.
b.
The pawn on g7 no longer defends the f6- and h6-squares, which
means that a dark-square colour complex (a collection of squares
of the same colour) has been weakened.
With …g7-g6, Black’s g-pawn breaks ranks with its colleagues on
f7 and h7 and sticks its head above the parapet. That brings it a
step closer to White’s position and thus easier for White to attack.
In this case, White’s h-pawn is already in play and can add
pressure to the black kingside with h4-h5.
Game: ‘Unexpected danger on the h-file’
Both AlphaZero and Stockfish start quietly: AlphaZero fianchettoes
its king’s bishop and Stockfish erects a solid wall of central pawns.
AlphaZero’s decision to fix the centre with exchanges on d5 doesn’t
seem geared to livening up the game. Starting from move 12
however (12.h4), AlphaZero invests time in kingside play, testing out
whether it can achieve an initiative there. Stockfish plays in
stereotyped, even careless, fashion, assuming that White’s play
contains little danger. The stunning manoeuvre 18.♔h2 and 19.♖h1
– missed by all my engines – unexpectedly allows a rook to join in
the kingside fun, after which the danger is all too real. Stockfish
manages to limp on to a bad ending but loses a long game.

1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
Game themes:
Fixing the centre [9.cxd5, 10.♘xd5]
Combined attack with queen and knight on rook’s pawn [12.h4,
13.♕d3, 14.♘g5]
Immediate piece redeployment once a goal is achieved [15.♘f3]
Avoiding the automatic occupation of an open file [no ♖ac1/
♖fc1]
Using a rook’s pawn to weaken the opponent’s king’s position
[16.h5]
AlphaZero
Stockfish 8
London 2018
1.d4 ♘f6 2.♘f3 e6 3.c4 b6 4.g3 ♗b7 5.♗g2 ♗b4+ 6.♗d2 ♗e7 7.♘c3 c6
8.♗f4 d5
Both sides have started the opening solidly. White’s attempt to gain
an influential long diagonal for the light-squared bishop with 4.g3
and 5.♗g2 has been countered by a granite-like central structure
with pawns on c6 and d5. Conventional wisdom expects White’s play

to take place mainly in the centre (with such moves as ♘e5 and e2-
e4) and the queenside (as both of White’s bishops are pointing in
that direction).
9.cxd5 ♘xd5
The exciting game Bacrot-Ivanchuk, Linares 2006, was the only
previous experience after 9.cxd5. The game continued 9…cxd5
10.♘b5 ♘a6 11.0-0 0-0 12.♖c1 ♘e4 13.h4 ♘d6 14.a4 ♘c4
15.♘e5 ♘a5 16.♗h3 ♕e8 17.h5 ♘c6 18.h6 g5 19.e4 with a wild
position.
10.♘xd5 cxd5
White’s 9th and 10th moves surprised me when I played through the
game. I would consider it best practice to maintain the uncertainty in
the position to the maximum degree: in this case the tension in the
pawn structure between the white c4-pawn and black d5-pawn. Both
sides must take account of two scenarios: they must develop for the
current situation while anticipating the resolution of the tension at
any moment.
The player with more space (here White) has more opportunity to
find moves useful for both situations than the player with a cramped
position (Black in this position). For example, if White had not played

9.cxd5, Black would normally complete queenside development with
…♘bd7 or …♘a6.
After White’s early release of the tension, Black can place the knight
directly on its most natural square: c6.
Note that AlphaZero insisted on a fixed central structure. After
9.cxd5, Black offered the opportunity of a fluid centre with 9…♘xd5
but White continued on the same path with 10.♘xd5. The purpose
of AlphaZero’s play will become clear shortly, but for now let me
comment that the exchange of the knight on f6 has removed a
defender of the h7-pawn, and that Black can no longer occupy the
central square e4 with a knight…
11.0-0 0-0 12.h4
A move that stopped me in my fast-forwarding tracks on that
January day in the DeepMind offices. I could guess at the idea, but I
was very surprised! White’s bishops are pointing towards the
queenside and AlphaZero has spent two moves opening the c-file. A
rook on c1 and the bishop on f4 would combine to attack the c7-
square and provide a possible entry point (although Black can parry
this easily).
Instead, AlphaZero starts probing on the kingside.

12…♘c6 13.♕d3
After the introduction, you might spot what White is intending.
That’s right: 14.♘g5 !
Let’s review what AlphaZero gained by stabilising the centre with
9.cxd5 and 10.♘xd5. White traded the possible advantages from an
uncertain central situation for the opportunity to implement its plan
on the king’s wing without any distractions in the centre.
An ancient piece of chess wisdom is that you should meet a
demonstration on the wing with action in the centre. If the centre is
static however, then this isn’t possible. You then need to both parry
the attacks on your inferior wing and develop counterplay of your
own on the other wing.
In this, AlphaZero has an advantage over its opponent: it is creating
play on the wing where its opponent’s king is situated, and it is
planning to leave the other wing – far away from its own king – to
the opponent. If AlphaZero is successful, it won’t just win a pawn: it
will capture the king and win the game.
AlphaZero assesses its position as a 58.8% expected score, which is
a small gain over its assessment of the initial position. My three
engines are lukewarm with values between 0.05 and 0.20, which is
still within the bounds of equality. To be honest, that is my
assessment of the position too, but there is some AlphaZero
inventiveness to make things tricky! In the coming moves Stockfish
plays a little carelessly, giving AlphaZero a loose thread to pull at on
the kingside.
13…♕d7 14.♘g5 g6
I hesitate to call a natural move like 13…♕d7 a mistake, but it
allows White to extract a kingside concession by executing its plan
with 14.♘g5. Black was unwilling to play 14…♗xg5 as this concedes
the advantage of the two bishops but more importantly allows White
to recapture on g5 with the h-pawn.
14…♗xg5 15.hxg5 is another advantage of the h4+♘g5 attacking
structure. White only needs to get some major pieces to the h-file

and Black’s h-pawn will be a sitting target. If Black were to play …
g7-g6 to cut out any pressure along the b1-h7 diagonal, then its
kingside dark squares (f6, h6, e7, g7) would form a severe weakness
considering that Black would no longer have a dark-squared bishop
whereas White still does.
In another game, Stockfish preferred 13…♘b4 14.♕d2 ♘c6,
protecting its kingside by driving away the white queen from d3 and
implicitly offering a draw by repetition. Unable to create a black
kingside weakness, AlphaZero blended both kingside expansion and
queenside play with 15.♖ac1 ♕d7 16.g4 ♗a6 17.g5 ♖ac8 18.♗h3,
achieving a small edge that led to a win in 80 moves.
15.♘f3
AlphaZero’s next idea is to target the weakness it has extracted with
14.♘g5 by playing the h-pawn to h5. White needs to be a little
careful as the immediate 15.h5 can be met by either 15…f6 or 15…
h6 followed by …g6-g5, gaining space on the kingside and stabilising
the kingside pawn structure. For this reason, White retreats the
knight to f3 (out of the attack of the black f- or h-pawn) before
continuing with h4-h5. It’s a typical AlphaZero trait to redeploy a
piece immediately once it has achieved the goal that AlphaZero
designed for it.
We examine the rest of the game in detail in the ‘Activity’ chapter.
However, if we fast forward to move 20, I’m sure you will agree that
AlphaZero’s plan to create and exploit weaknesses on the kingside
has worked perfectly!
15…♖fc8 16.h5

16…♕d8 17.♕e3 gxh5 18.♔h2
We saw the idea of ♔h2 increasing the mobility of White’s pieces in
an earlier game. Here too the king gets out of the way to allow a
white piece to increase its activity dramatically. However, this time it
isn’t the knight on f3!
18…♗f8 19.♖h1

It’s the rook! After a subsequent 20.♔g1, AlphaZero will get an
additional major piece attacking on the kingside alongside the queen
and three minor pieces which are already there. Compare that to
Black’s meagre defences.
19…♕e7 20.♔g1
… and we can see that White’s plan has worked very well. The rest
of the game is less important to our theme. Stockfish takes on a

plethora of weaknesses to stave off immediate disaster but is ground
down by AlphaZero in a long game.
20…f6 21.♘e1 ♖e8 22.♗f3 e5 23.♗xd5+ ♔h8 24.dxe5 ♘xe5 25.♗xb7
♕xb7 26.♗xe5 ♖xe5 27.♕d3 ♕d5 28.♕xd5 ♖xd5 29.♘d3 ♖e8 30.♖c1
♗d6 31.♖c2 ♔g7 32.♖h4 b5 33.♔f1 ♔f7 34.b3 ♖e7 35.♔g2 a5 36.♔f3
♖c7 37.♖xc7+ ♗xc7 38.♖h1 ♔e6 39.♖c1 ♔d7 40.♔e4 ♖g5 41.♖h1
And AlphaZero won in 105 moves.

Section B – AlphaZero’s bishops
We see many examples of AlphaZero’s raking bishops in the ‘Colour
complexes’ chapter. Here we focus on a specific scenario: AlphaZero
first weakens the opponent’s kingside with a rook’s pawn, which
Stockfish tries to stop by moving its own rook’s pawn one square
forwards. In a couple of games, this led to a weakening of the
g6-/g3-square which AlphaZero then exploited in instructive fashion
by installing a diagonal piece (in this case a bishop) there. AlphaZero
likes putting diagonal pieces (like a bishop, queen or pawn) on such
advanced outposts, in my opinion because they restrict the
opponent’s king to the greatest degree.
Game: ‘The file that matters’
When I played through the following game, I had the feeling that I’d
seen a great game, but I didn’t understand why. After quite a bit of
analysis, I think I do! The opening is a solid anti-Berlin variation with
a symmetrical pawn structure and only the faintest initiative for
White. Between moves 25 and 34, AlphaZero unbalances the

1.
2.
3.
4.
position: White gains an outpost for its knight on c5, control of the
open e-file, an invasion square on e6 and weak black queenside
pawns on a5 and c6.
However AlphaZero slowly reels White in, first creating a dark-
square weakness on White’s kingside and then converting this
weakness into an advanced pawn on g3 (41…hxg3). Stockfish lets it
all happen, evaluating the position before and after with exactly the
same value (0.00). The g3-pawn restricts the movement of the white
king and AlphaZero uses this to stretch White’s position to breaking
point by opening an extra file – the a-file – and targeting White’s
queenside pawns, after which White’s position eventually collapses.
Game themes:
Avoiding the automatic occupation of an open file [Black never
played …♖e8]
Using a rook’s pawn to weaken the opponent’s king’s position
[35…h4]
Advanced bishop outpost [39…♗g3]
Improving the position of the king before the next wave of attack
[76…♔h6]
Stockfish 8
AlphaZero
London 2018
1.e4 e5 2.♘f3 ♘c6 3.♗b5 ♘f6 4.0-0 ♘xe4 5.♖e1 ♘d6 6.♘xe5 ♘xe5
7.♖xe5+ ♗e7 8.♗f1 0-0 9.d4 ♗f6 10.♖e1 ♖e8 11.c3 ♖xe1 12.♕xe1
♘e8 13.♗f4 d5

A well-known theoretical position in the anti-Berlin in which Black
has scored very satisfactorily. 14.♗d3 is the main move, but neither
this nor Stockfish’s choice has caused Black many serious problems.
14.♘d2 ♗f5 15.♕e3 ♘d6 16.♘f3 a5
AlphaZero also likes gaining space on the other wing with a rook’s
pawn!
17.♖e1 c6 18.a4 h6 19.♕c1 ♗e7 20.b3 ♘e8 21.♕e3 ♗f8 22.♗d3 ♕f6
23.♘e5 ♘d6 24.f3 ♗xd3 25.♘xd3 h5

The typical AlphaZero push, now played to secure the f5-square for
the black queen and stop White from gaining space with g2-g4.
26.♕d2 b5
A bold move, introducing tension into the queenside structure at the
cost of weakening the c5-square. If White captures on b5, then
Black recaptures with the pawn and gains the opportunity to create
an outside passed a-pawn. If White allows the capture on a4, then
Black gains the c4-square for its knight. As can be seen however,
Black is in no hurry to capture on a4. This is probably due to the
white bishop on the h2-b8 diagonal which controls b8, and which
will interfere with any black attempts to invade on the b-file. For now
Black maintains the status quo.
27.♕d1 ♖c8
Defends the now weakened c6-pawn against a future attack and
ensures that the rook will attack the c3-pawn after a future axb5, …
cxb5.
28.♗e5 ♕g5 29.♗f4 ♕f6 30.♗e5 ♕g5 31.♗f4 ♕f5
Avoiding the draw by repetition.
32.♖e5 ♕g6 33.♘c5 bxa4 34.♘xa4 f6
Together with 26…b5 and 33…bxa4, a quite incredible sequence. It
looks as if Black is giving everything away. 26…b5 gave away the c5-

square with the white knight on d3 already well-placed to exploit it.
By delaying the capture on a4 until White had played ♘c5, Black has
allowed White to maintain the integrity of its queenside structure
and recapture on a4 with the knight. When the knight returns to c5,
it will also defend the b3-pawn against attack. With its last move
34…f6, Black weakens its control of the e6-square, which is then a
natural target for the white knight on c5. On top of this, Black is not
fighting for the open e-file, which means that White can support the
knight on e6 with a rook on the e-file.
As the next moves show, Black is aiming for different goals. Black
generates play on both wings, initiated by both rook’s pawns.
On the queenside, Black has the …a5-a4 break, which can be used
either to open the b-file or to distract the white knight away from
the kingside. On the kingside, Black is aiming to create weaknesses
which will influence the course of the battle in the next 40-50
moves. Black has two strong pieces: the queen on g6, which cuts
across White’s position along the h7-b1 diagonal, and the knight on
d6, which has access to the f5-square and attacks potentially
vulnerable dark squares (e3 and g3) in White’s camp. These
weaknesses are not yet visible. Black’s goal in the next few moves is
to expose them.
35.♖e1 h4

AlphaZero launches forward the intrepid h-pawn, looking to attack
g2 with …h4-h3. Stockfish doesn’t want to allow this and stops the
pawn with its own h-pawn. This isn’t a bad decision, but notice that
the g3-square is now a strong outpost for a black piece. It would be
natural to transfer the black knight on d6 there (via f5) but
AlphaZero is more ambitious. It likes having diagonal pieces on
outposts close to the king: a bishop, a queen or another pawn.
36.h3
It was worth considering 36.g4 followed by ♔f2. Though the White
kingside is loosened, the crucial f5-square is taken away from Black’s
pieces. Capturing en passant with …hxg3, hxg3 opens Black’s king
just as much as White’s.
36…♕f5 37.♗e3
It starts to go wrong for White from this point on. White’s bishop
withdraws to f2, and thereby allows Black an enormous increase in
activity: the f8-bishop occupies the b8-h2 diagonal and its rook gets
to the b-file.
37.♗h2 was White’s best move, keeping the bishop active on the
h2-b8 diagonal.
37…♘f7 38.♗f2
This natural attack on the h4-pawn allows an unpleasant riposte.

38…♗d6
39.♘b2
39.♗xh4 is extremely risky: 39…♕f4 40.♗f2 ♕h2+ 41.♔f1 ♕h1+
42.♗g1 ♗g3. Apart from …♗xe1, Black also threatens to include its
knight in the attack with …♘g5xh3, …♘d6-f5 or even …♘d6, …f6-
f5 and …♘e4. From a practical point of view, it isn’t worth White’s
while to play like this.
Did Stockfish play 38.♗f2 missing that 38…♗d6 was possible? I
don’t think that’s the whole story. The point is that Stockfish doesn’t
see danger in any line. It assesses the position after 36…♕f5 as
0.00 and it also assesses the position after 39…♗g3 as 0.00. In
other words, it doesn’t seem to believe that Black has made any
progress, which to human eyes is barely credible. AlphaZero clearly
feels it has, as its evaluation increases from 53.4% after 36…♕f5 to
56.5% after 39…♗g3. After Stockfish takes on g3 on move 41,
AlphaZero’s evaluation increases again to 59.8% for Black while
Stockfish’s evaluation stays rooted at 0.00. In fact all my engines
share Stockfish’s evaluation.
There is something in this type of position that lulls the engines into
a fall sense of security, and the finger of suspicion points to the open

file! The move …♖e8 features heavily in all of the engine lines in the
coming 30+ moves. However, AlphaZero steadfastly avoids this
move, eyeing a future invasion of the second or first rank, for which
it will need its major pieces.
Why would this invasion be strong? One reason: look at the white
king later in the game! Once Black gets a bishop or pawn on g3,
White’s king is terribly restricted: if Black gets its major pieces into
the white position, its mating threats on the back rank will handcuff
White.
Once again, my feeling is that there is a fundamental difference in
insight between AlphaZero and my engines. AlphaZero sees the
constricted king on g1 and manoeuvres until it has found a way to
stretch White’s position sufficiently to force an invasion of one of its
major pieces, even at the cost of a pawn. It puts everything into
that, conceding White the open file and the e6-outpost to maintain
its firepower for the scenario it is envisaging. The engines don’t
seem to appreciate the weakness of the white king in the same way
and expect Black continually to neutralise White’s major trump – the
open e-file – rather than to exploit one of Black’s own.
39…♗g3

40.♘d3 ♘d6 41.♗xg3 hxg3
42.♘c5 ♕g5 43.♔f1 ♘f5 44.♕e2 ♖b8 45.♘e6 ♕h6
Black is consistently careful not to allow White to get its knight to f4.
46.♘c5 ♔h7 47.♕e6 ♘h4 48.♕e2 ♕g5 49.♕d1 ♔g8 50.♘d7 ♖c8
51.♘c5 ♖b8 52.♖e2 ♕g6 53.♘d3 ♕f5 54.♕c2 ♕g5 55.♔g1 ♔f7 56.♔f1
♖h8 57.♔e1 ♖d8 58.♔f1 ♖h8 59.♔e1 ♖a8 60.♔f1 ♕f5 61.♖e3 ♖b8
62.♕a2 ♔g8 63.♕c2 ♔f7 64.♕a2 ♕g5 65.♖e1 ♔g8 66.♕c2 ♘f5 67.♔g1
♘h4 68.♔f1 ♘f5 69.♔g1 ♖b7
After all that manoeuvring, things are about to get dramatic!
70.f4

No reaction from the engines, the evaluation stays at 0.00 (just like
after 70.♕d1) and even AlphaZero’s evaluation doesn’t change
substantially (62.1% before and 63.2% after). To me 70.f4 looks
horrible, conceding e4, removing the f4-square from White’s pieces
(in particular the white knight) and making the black king safer by
blocking the c1-h6 diagonal.
70…♕h5 71.♘c5 ♖b8 72.♔f1 ♔h7 73.♖e6 ♕g6 74.♕d1
74…a4

AlphaZero’s evaluation starts to rise after this: a 67.7% expected
score for Black. I just gaped in amazement when I saw it, in
particular after AlphaZero’s leisurely follow-up! What is the point of
it?
75.♘xa4 ♕f7 76.♖e1 ♔h6
Having sacrificed a pawn, AlphaZero takes a little time-out to make
its king nice and safe!
77.♔g1 ♕a7 78.♔h1 g6
Black creates a safe king position, helped by the fact that 70.f4
blocked the c1-h6 diagonal. The only piece that could attack the
black king under these circumstances, the knight, is far away on a4.
79.♔g1
I didn’t understand that move as it loses a pawn back by force. Then
I tried to find a move for White and couldn’t. After 74…a4 by Black,
giving a pawn away to open a file, White is overstretched! The
queen is needed to defend b3 while the rook cannot defend f4 from
f1 due to the fork …♘e3. The knight is not doing a great deal on a4
but needs to stay there to stop Black’s rook or queen from invading.
79.♘c5 is painful for White in two ways. My engine gives the
beautiful 79…♖a8 80.♘a4 ♕b8. A delightful way of getting at the

b- and f-pawns quickly!
In the game Black regains the pawn, leaving White with a terrible
king and with White’s pride and joy – the open e-file – blocked by a
monster knight on e4.
79…♕c7 80.♘c5 ♕xf4 81.♘d3 ♕g5 82.♖e6 ♖b7 83.♕c2 ♖a7 84.♕b2
♔h7 85.♖e2 ♘d6 86.♖e1 ♘e4
87.♘b4 ♖b7 88.♘d3 ♔h6 89.♖e2 ♔g7 90.♖e1 ♕d2 91.♕xd2 ♘xd2
92.♘c5 ♖a7

This ending is appalling for White: the rook is rooted to the first rank
as the king is caged by the pawn on g3 (and the knight on d2!).
93.c4 dxc4 94.bxc4 ♘xc4 95.♘e4 ♖a3 96.♖c1 ♘b6 97.♘xg3 ♖xg3
98.♖xc6 ♖b3 99.♖d6 ♔f7 100.♖d8 ♖e3 101.♔f2 ♖e7 102.♖b8 ♘d5
103.♖d8 ♘b6 104.♖b8 ♘c4 105.♖h8 ♔g7 106.♖c8 ♘d6 107.♖d8 ♘f7
108.♖d5 ♖a7 109.h4 ♖b7 110.♔f3 ♖e7 111.♖a5 ♖d7 112.♖a4 ♖b7
113.♖a5 ♖d7 114.♖a4 ♘d6 115.g4 ♘b5 116.♔e3 ♔f7 117.♖b4 ♘c3
118.♔f3 ♘d5 119.♖b1 ♘e7 120.♖d1 ♘d5 121.♖b1 ♖a7 122.♖b3 ♘e7
123.♖d3 ♘d5 124.♖b3 ♘e7 125.♖d3 ♘c6 126.♔e4 ♖d7 127.♖d1 ♖a7
128.♖d3 ♖e7+ 129.♔f3 ♖e1 130.♖d2 ♖b1 131.♔f4 ♖b4 132.♔e4 ♖b1
133.♔f4 ♖h1 134.♔g3 ♖c1 135.♔f4 ♖b1 136.♔g3 ♖b4 137.♖c2 ♘xd4
138.♖c7+ ♔f8 139.♖a7 ♘c6 140.♖a6 ♖c4 141.♔f2 ♔f7 142.♔e2 ♘e7
0-1

1.
 
Section C – AlphaZero’s queen
It’s unusual to talk of queen outposts, as in the middlegame a queen
is normally easy to drive away due to her high value. However, in a
few games I felt AlphaZero was consciously protecting advanced
squares in the opponent’s territory with a pawn to install the queen
there.
Game: ‘Outpost for the queen’
Stockfish neutralises AlphaZero’s opening efficiently and numerous
possible draws by repetition pass by before AlphaZero decides to
tease Black on the kingside with the pawn push 38.h5 followed by
installing the queen on an advanced outpost (40.♕g6). To get rid of
the pressure exerted by the queen, Stockfish must allow a pawn on
g6 which restricts the black king. However, Stockfish hangs tight to
hold the draw.
Game themes:
Advanced queen outpost [40.♕g6]
AlphaZero
Stockfish 8
London 2018

In this tense position, AlphaZero decides to pull at Black’s kingside a
little with its favourite pawn push.
38.h5 ♗b4 39.♖ec1 h6 40.♕g6
As the weakness on g6 appears, AlphaZero occupies it at once with
a diagonal attacking piece: the queen this time.
40…♗a3 41.♖d1 ♕f7 42.♗c1 ♗f8 43.♗e2 dxc4 44.bxc4 ♗b5 45.♖f1
♕xg6 46.hxg6

Just as in the previous game, AlphaZero uses an advanced doubled
g-pawn to restrict the movement of the black king on g8. Stockfish
defends well, and the game is drawn on move 182.

1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
 
Section D – AlphaZero’s rooks
The natural assumption is that outposts – advanced squares on
which a piece can install itself without fear of being driven away by
an enemy pawn – are meant for lower-value pieces such as knights
or bishops. The closer a piece is to the enemy position, the easier it
is for the opponent to dislodge it with a lower-value piece. That
doesn’t matter too much if you have a knight or bishop on that
square, but a rook…
AlphaZero has played a few games in which it has successfully
placed rooks on ‘risky’ outposts on the fifth or sixth ranks. The most
striking example comes from one of the games released from the
original match in December 2017, which I present briefly here:
Game: ‘Risky rooks’
A unique example of rook activity: I have never seen rooks planted
on an opponent’s weak squares as effectively as in this game
(21.♖d6, 22.♖f6, 29.♖d6). The end is stunning too, with the black
queen on h8 completely immobilised due to AlphaZero’s advanced
rook’s pawn on h6 and its rook on f6.
Game themes:
Advanced rook outpost [21.♖d6, 22.♖f6, 29.♖d6]
Exchanging off defenders of a colour complex [26.♗xf8]
Using a rook’s pawn to weaken the opponent’s king’s position
[36.h5, 42.h6]
Exchanging off the opponent’s active pieces to leave passive ones
[47.♖xc5]
Sacrificing material to open diagonals [44…♕xe5]
AlphaZero

Stockfish 8
London 2017
1.♘f3 ♘f6 2.c4 b6 3.d4 e6 4.g3 ♗a6 5.♕c2 c5 6.d5 exd5 7.cxd5 ♗b7
8.♗g2 ♘xd5 9.0-0 ♘c6 10.♖d1 ♗e7 11.♕f5 ♘f6 12.e4 g6 13.♕f4 0-0
14.e5 ♘h5 15.♕g4 ♖e8
Black has tried many moves in this position – 15…♕c8, 15…♕b8,
15…d5 and 15…♘g7 – but not yet Stockfish’s choice.
16.♘c3 ♕b8 17.♘d5 ♗f8 18.♗f4 ♕c8 19.h3 ♘e7 20.♘e3 ♗c6 21.♖d6
The rook blockades the d7-pawn – preventing Black from even
contemplating the freeing …d7-d5 – and eyes the kingside.
21…♘g7 22.♖f6

A very unusual placement of the rook! It exerts some unexpected
pressure on the black position, in particular on the f7-square.
22…♕b7 23.♗h6 ♘d5 24.♘xd5 ♗xd5 25.♖d1 ♘e6 26.♗xf8
Exchanging the dark-squared bishops and thus weakening Black’s
defence of the dark squares. This will make it even harder for Black
to evict White’s rooks.
26…♖xf8 27.♕h4 ♗c6 28.♕h6 ♖ae8 29.♖d6

White’s other rook also occupies an advanced outpost! Again, there
is no immediately decisive continuation, but Black’s mobility is
restricted enormously.
29…♗xf3 30.♗xf3 ♕a6 31.h4
A wonderful-looking position with all of White’s major pieces
entrenched so deep into Black’s position!
31.h4 is not a surprise for us anymore! AlphaZero brings up the
reserves, involving the rook’s pawn to attack Black’s exposed point
on the kingside: the g6-pawn.
31…♕a5 32.♖d1 c4 33.♖d5 ♕e1+ 34.♔g2 c3 35.bxc3 ♕xc3 36.h5 ♖e7
37.♗d1 ♕e1 38.♗b3 ♖d8 39.♖f3 ♕e4 40.♕d2 ♕g4 41.♗d1 ♕e4 42.h6

Again very typical AlphaZero, restricting the mobility of the black
king.
42…♘c7 43.♖d6 ♘e6 44.♗b3 ♕xe5
An amazing sequence of moves from AlphaZero from here to the
end, the goal of which is to leave Black with only passive pieces. The
position after move 54 shows how successful AlphaZero was!
45.♖d5 ♕h8 46.♕b4 ♘c5
47.♖xc5
The knight was still reasonably active, so it has to go!

47…bxc5 48.♕h4 ♖de8 49.♖f6
The rook returns, this time to bury the queen on h8! The pressure
on f7 paralyses Black completely. Total domination.
49…♖f8 50.♕f4 a5 51.g4 d5 52.♗xd5 ♖d7 53.♗c4 a4 54.g5 a3 55.♕f3
♖c7 56.♕xa3 ♕xf6 57.gxf6 ♖fc8 58.♕d3 ♖f8 59.♕d6 ♖fc8 60.a4 1-0

Section E – AlphaZero’s king
Outposts is perhaps not quite the right word, but here I highlight
AlphaZero’s uncanny ability to keep its own king safe while causing
all sorts of trouble for the opponent’s king! It reminds me of the
great World Champion Garry Kasparov, who was known for making
his king’s position safer with strengthening moves at the height of
battle, for example playing …♖e8 and …♗f8 in the Sicilian before
proceeding with his own attack. AlphaZero demonstrates a similar
imperative, often spending a few moves making its king safe before
proceeding with the next wave of attack:
Game: ‘The matrix’
AlphaZero
Stockfish 8
London 2018
72.♔b2

We will analyse this game in great detail in the ‘Colour complexes’
chapter; here we look at king safety. White has a huge initiative for
the three(!) sacrificed pawns: Black’s pieces are passive and White
has many paths of entry for its pieces. However, White’s king is
bereft of pawn cover, which makes a counterattack with perpetual
checks a definite possibility. For this reason, AlphaZero identifies a
safe square for its king and installs it there before proceeding with
the next (and final) wave of attack.
72…♕b8 73.♔a2 ♕c8 74.♖d2 ♕e8 75.♔a3 ♔a8 76.♗g5 ♕e1 77.♔a2
♕e4 78.♗e3 ♕e8 79.♖d6 ♔b7 80.♔a3
AlphaZero has played around a little bit, but now its task is
complete. On a3, the king is safe from the black queen so the final
invasion can begin.
It’s striking that AlphaZero often finds a safe spot for its king far
forward on the side of the board.
80…♕h8 81.♗d4 ♕e8 82.♖f6 f4 83.gxf4 ♕d7 84.♖d6 ♕c7 85.f5 ♗d7
86.♕xc7+ ♔xc7 87.♖xa6 ♗xf5 88.♖f6 ♗c2 89.♔b2 1-0

CHAPTER 8
Piece mobility: activity
In this chapter we demonstrate perhaps the most important facet of
AlphaZero’s play and the source of its superiority in the match
against Stockfish: an amazing ability to maximise the activity of its
own pieces while restricting the potential of the opponent’s pieces.

Chapter 8 – Piece mobility: activity – key points
Theme
Maximising the potential of your own pieces, restricting
the activity of the opponent’s pieces.
Purpose
A substantial disparity in activity gives the superior side
opportunities to launch attacks or gain further
advantages.
What are the
prerequisites?
In principle, none. AlphaZero builds this advantage from
equal-looking positions.
What are the risks?
AlphaZero is not afraid to bend or break the rules at
times – for example, not challenging for an open file – if
it feels there are rewards to be had elsewhere on the
board. However, it’s not always good to do that!
Unique implementation
by AlphaZero
AlphaZero judges the relative activity of its pieces and its
opponent’s and makes exchanges to leave the opponent
with passive pieces. This is particularly impressive
against an engine such as Stockfish, which is highly-
skilled in the art of finding unexpected active resources
from desperate-looking situations!
Complexity of resulting
positions
High complexity. It can be hard to notice initially why a
certain position is unpromising!
Any tips
Play through AlphaZero’s best games watching why
certain of the opponent’s pieces are performing poorly.
It’s an instinct that can be developed, and a great way to
do that is to immerse yourself in the games of the
world’s greatest expert!
Who does it remind us
of?
Alekhine, Carlsen, Polgar.
When you play through AlphaZero’s games, the first overwhelming
impression is of witnessing an irresistible force. Anything seems
possible in AlphaZero’s games with kingside attacks materialising out
of nowhere. Once the initial excitement subsides, other less obvious
details rise to the surface. I was struck in many games at how slow
Stockfish’s pieces seemed to be in comparison to AlphaZero’s. I also
noticed how often Stockfish ended the game with useless pieces: a

blocked-in rook, or a knight on a far-away outpost unable to
influence the struggle.
Eventually, I understood that these impressions were related.
Lightning kingside attacks were not isolated events: they arose from
AlphaZero’s skill in marshalling its own forces and in draining the
activity from Stockfish’s position. This skill is fundamental in
AlphaZero’s game and the platform for its superiority over Stockfish
in this match. In this chapter we examine three facets of this skill:
Section A – Maximising and effectively using the mobility of
AlphaZero’s forces
Section B – Reducing the mobility of the opponent’s forces
to create opportunities
Section C – Breaking the fortress with sacrifices
We will look in-depth at some great AlphaZero-Stockfish encounters
and make comparisons to classic human games. We round off this
chapter with a discussion on what we can learn about king mobility
from AlphaZero’s games.

Section A – Maximising and effectively using
the mobility of AlphaZero’s forces
I. The principle of two files
A classic technique for converting a superior position in the endgame
is the ‘principle of two weaknesses’. This principle says the inferior
side may be able to defend a position with one weakness, but that a
second weakness on the other side of the board will prove fatal.
Let’s see a classic example of this:
HISTORICAL PARALLEL
Alekhine’s endgame play
Alexander Alekhine, World Champion from 1927-1935 and 1937-
1946, is renowned as an attacking player, but he was also a fine
endgame technician. In the following game, he demonstrates
perfectly how to stretch the opponent’s position to breaking point
by opening a second front of attack:
Alexander Alekhine
Friedrich Sämisch
Baden-Baden 1925 (11)

Alexander Alekhine was not only a great attacking player but also a fine
endgame technician.
White is a passed pawn up on the queenside (Black’s first
weakness), which should guarantee victory. However, merely
pushing the b-pawn is not enough. With the combination of queen
and knight, Black can stop the b-pawn from advancing further

than b5. Keeping White’s b-pawn under wraps is far more difficult
if Black has a problem on the other side too. Alekhine sets about
creating one.
34.♕d4 ♕e7 35.♗d3 ♕c7 36.g4 ♔f7 37.h4 ♘b6 38.h5 gxh5 39.gxh5
Excellent endgame play from Alekhine. The centralised white
pieces restrict Black’s knight and prevent it from becoming active
while protecting the white king from checks by the black queen.
White’s pawn storm on the kingside has created both a target and
an entry channel there (the b1-h7 diagonal). Black has to worry
about danger on both wings.
39…♕c6 40.♗e4 ♕b5 41.h6

Excellent, and reminiscent of AlphaZero’s play with the rook’s
pawn! The advanced rook’s pawn creates a weakness on h7 in the
endgame.
41…♕b3 42.♗c2 ♕b5 43.♕d3 ♕xd3 44.♗xd3
The exchange of queens is decisive. If Black’s king stays to protect
the h7-pawn, then Black’s knight will be helpless to stop White’s
king from pushing through the b-pawn. Sämisch gives up the h-
pawn in desperation but this doesn’t improve the situation.

1.
2.
3.
44…♘c8 45.♗xh7 ♘e7 46.♔c1 f5 47.b4 ♘d5 48.b5 ♔e6 49.♔d1 ♔d6
50.f4 ♘xf4 51.♗xf5 ♘d5 52.♗e4 1-0
It’s essentially a question of mobility. The defensive side needs its
complete defensive strength to defend one weakness. With the
appearance of a second weakness, the defensive side must split its
forces, weakening the defensive formation at the first weakness.
Why do I mention this? AlphaZero demonstrates great expertise in
widening the field of conflict. AlphaZero regularly opens unexpected
new fronts for its pieces whilst the opponent’s pieces struggle to
adjust to the new situation. This often involves fine judgment in
(temporarily) abandoning the fight for an existing front to
concentrate forces on the new front.
Game: ‘Unexpected danger on the h-file’
In this game fragment, we focus on AlphaZero’s decision not to
challenge for the open c-file and instead to open a new front on the
kingside.
It was a completely unexpected turn of events for every other
player: Stockfish, my engines and me! Stockfish’s forces, which are
all pointed towards the queenside, are stretched to breaking point by
AlphaZero’s creative method of mobilising its rook on the h-file –
18.♔h2 and 19.♖h1. This elicits structural concessions from
Stockfish which AlphaZero exploits in a long endgame.
Game themes:
Avoiding the automatic occupation of an open file [no ♖ac1 /
♖fc1]
Opening a second front [16.h5]
Taking over the original front of attack [30.♖c1]
AlphaZero
Stockfish 8

London 2018
15…♖fc8
We saw the early part of this game in the ‘Outposts’ chapter, in
which we highlighted the manoeuvre h2-h4 and ♘g5, inducing
Black’s kingside weakness …g7-g6. Here, we focus on AlphaZero’s
outstanding exploitation of this weakness.
It’s now time to talk about the open c-file. Since White fixed the
centre and opened the c-file on move 10, my engines have been
advocating plans with ♖ac1 or ♖fc1 to maintain parity on the only
open file on the board. This continues until the 19th move, when
19.♖h1 makes it obvious that danger is coming from another angle.
Bear in mind that by move 19 (19.♖h1) AlphaZero’s evaluation has
jumped to 79.6%, a considerable increase compared to just five
moves before. By contrast, two of my engines assess the position
between 0.15 and 0.30 pawns advantage for White and the most
optimistic assesses the position at 0.50, which is somewhere
between equality and a small advantage for White.
Let’s reflect a little on this significant divergence in insight and
evaluation between AlphaZero and the engines. The engines are
constantly anticipating a clash of major pieces on the c-file and

resulting mass exchanges. After these exchanges, a kingside attack
from White would prove ineffective as White would lack the
firepower to exploit any weaknesses created in a decisive manner.
For that reason, the engines are generally fairly relaxed about
White’s kingside play: since all the rooks are going to be exchanged,
there is nothing to worry about.
AlphaZero’s approach is diametrically opposite: it takes an early punt
at opening little holes on the kingside (with 12.h4, 13.♕d3 and
14.♘g5) and sees that it has been successful. It then channels its
efforts into bringing as much firepower as possible to bear on the
kingside weaknesses. That it is normally correct to fight for open
files is unimportant: AlphaZero has seen a battlefield opening on the
opposite wing and it wants its pieces to be available for that!
This concrete approach to the occupation of open files is a recurring
feature of AlphaZero’s play.
15…♖fc8 by Stockfish feels a little loose: a kingside defender (the
rook on f8) is being diverted to the queenside at a moment when
White is starting to target the kingside! (Wrongly) anticipating a
clash on the c-file, Stockfish arranges its rooks in the optimal
manner to fight for the c-file.
16.h5

1.
2.
Stockfish was probably anticipating a variation such as this: 16.♖fc1
♘a5 17.♘e5 ♕e8. Due to 15…♖fc8, the queen can retreat to e8
without interrupting the communication between Black’s rooks (as
would be the case if Black had played 15…♖ac8). This allows Black
to maintain a rook on the c-file at all times, which would not be the
case after 15…♖ac8 16.♖fc1 ♘a5 17.♘e5 ♕d8 18.♖xc8 ♕xc8
19.♖c1.
16…♕d8
A defensive move with two points:
When Black moves the knight away from c6 to use its rook on the
c-file, White can play ♘e5, hitting the queen on d7. 16…♕d8
anticipates this hit.
The queen move fights for influence over the kingside dark
squares. Black supports …g6-g5 followed by …h7-h6, gaining
kingside space and challenging White’s grip on the dark squares.
Why is Black making defensive moves? It has placed a rook on the
c-file, which White has omitted to do: why shouldn’t Black look for
counterplay with 16…♘b4 followed by an invasion on the c-file?
AlphaZero has judged that after 16…♘b4 17.♕b3 Black cannot
achieve much with the c-file. Occupation of c2 is a blank shot: 17…
♘c2 (17…♖c2 18.a3 loses a piece; 17…♖c6 18.♘e5; 17…♖c4
18.♘e5) 18.♖ac1 when the knight has to retreat. In the meantime,
White can drive the black knight back with a2-a3, or take advantage
of the black knight’s absence from c6 to occupy e5 with its knight,
attacking the black queen and eyeing the pawns on f7 and g6
(increasing the pressure on Black’s kingside).
17.♕e3
Black’s 16…♕d8 was a ‘small’ move, evading a future attack from
the white knight whilst shoring up Black’s kingside dark squares.
White’s ‘creeping’ move 17.♕e3 performs the same function, but in
an attacking sense. The white queen sidesteps …♘b4 and moves to
a square from which it targets Black’s kingside: it attacks e6 and

supports White’s dark-squared bishop along the c1-h6 diagonal. By
so doing, it stops Black from moving its pawns to dark squares to
fight for the kingside dark-squares.
17…gxh5
An interesting decision, typical of modern engines (it is the first
choice of all my engines). This move demonstrates a big difference
between engines and human players. Human players would only
consider opening a hitherto well-covered king’s position if they were
convinced that no other continuation was satisfactory. Human
intuition says ‘I can’t see exactly how it would get refuted, but it
feels like it might!’ It’s a non-standard move that requires a certain
amount of courage and bluff to choose.
The traditional engine perspective is concrete. It sees pressure on
the kingside from the h5-pawn and calculates whether it can relieve
it by removing the h5-pawn. If deep calculation suggests that the
open king and resulting weaknesses cannot be exploited, then it is
the best move. It’s interesting to see the continuation that my
engines are expecting – perhaps not too surprisingly, both ♖ac1 and
♖fc1 feature heavily. My impression is that this expectation of
exchanges on the c-file contributes to reducing the sense of danger

that the engines experience in relation to 17…gxh5. As we shall see,
AlphaZero isn’t thinking about the c-file and it isn’t thinking about
exchanges!
A) 17…♗f6 is the human move. AlphaZero was planning to take a
grip on the kingside dark squares with 18.h6 when a sample
AlphaZero variation ran 18…♗a6 19.♖ac1 (only now!) 19…♘a5
20.b3 ♘b7 21.g4 ♘d6 (a typical knight regrouping idea by
AlphaZero, this time suggested for the opposing side!) 22.♘e5 ♗b7
23.g5 ♗e7 24.♗h3, which AlphaZero assesses as a 75.2% expected
score. That seems high to me, but there’s no doubt that White is
pressing;
B) 17…♘b4 (threatening 18…♘c2) 18.♖ad1 ♘xa2 exploits Black’s
c-file control to win a pawn, but now it’s AlphaZero’s turn on the
kingside: 19.hxg6 hxg6 20.♗h3 (embarrassing: 21.♗xe6 is a huge
threat!) 20…♖c6 (20…♘b4 21.♗xe6 fxe6 22.♕xe6+ ♔g7 23.♔g2
♖c6 24.♗h6+ ♔xh6 25.♖h1+ ♔g7 26.♖h7+ ♔xh7 27.♕f7+ ♔h6
28.♖h1+ ♗h4 29.♘xh4 is the line my engine pops out at me!)
21.♔g2 and White builds up the pressure with ♖g1, ♗e5 and ♕h6.
My engines give White an enormous plus of 2.83.
18.♔h2

Even at this point my engines are not embracing White’s follow-up.
Some are not seeing the concept whilst for others it is not figuring
as the first choice.
18…♗f8
And now it comes.
19.♖h1
AlphaZero’s stunning idea. You can understand now why it didn’t
want to put anything on the c-file! It was aiming for the h-file with
an exquisite regrouping that is missed by the other engines.
Suddenly, the weaknesses around the king (the h5-pawn and the
isolated h7-pawn behind it) really matter: White is going to get
another major piece on the kingside in addition to its queen and
three minor pieces. Black has only its bishop to defend. It has even
put its king’s rook on to the c-file!
Only Stockfish itself puts 19.♖h1 quickly as its top move after 18…
♗f8, but with the curious evaluation of 0.00, reaching a spurious
draw by repetition some five moves later. Not enough to set the
alarm bells ringing for Stockfish. Compare that to an AlphaZero
evaluation of 79.6%, which is very positive. Astounding, isn’t it?
Looking at these contrasts in evaluation, you can understand why

Stockfish could have such a rough time of it against AlphaZero in
this type of position. According to AlphaZero’s evaluations, Stockfish
is sleepwalking in positions where it is in big trouble.
19…♕e7
Black allows White to recapture the h-pawn, after which White is
just better.
19…♕f6 is the first move the engines examine. White’s plan is
simple: get the king out of the way of the rook, clear some room
with exchanges and then home in on the h5-pawn. It takes some
moves before the totality of the horror in front of the engines hits
their evaluations. 20.♔g1 (the move I analysed, although the
immediate 20.♘e5 – aiming for ♗f3 and ♔g2 – might be even
stronger) 20…♕g6 21.♘e5 ♘xe5 22.♗xe5 ♗e7 23.♗f3 h4 seems
to be the idea that the engines are pinning their hopes on: 24.♔h2
hxg3+ 25.♔g2. Once this move is on the board then evaluations
swing sharply in White’s favour. Both White’s rooks are ready to
come into play with ♖h6 and ♖ah1, and Black cannot consider
taking another pawn with 25…gxf2+ as 26.♔xf2 is a disaster for
Black. Black is so short on kingside defenders, it would be amazing if
there wasn’t trouble!
20.♔g1

… and White has achieved a lot from the opening battle. The
attention has switched to the kingside, where, in magical fashion,
AlphaZero has managed to get one of its rooks involved and create a
clear weakness on h7 to attack, while Black hasn’t even started on
queenside counterplay. White has a big initiative.
The rest of the game is less important to our theme. Stockfish
manages to avoid a mating attack by accepting lots of little
weaknesses and ends up in an unpleasant ending with awful pawns
and the worse minor piece, which it assesses as +0.95 pawns for
White (a clear advantage for White). AlphaZero is also very positive
at move 34 and puts the game away in a tight display of technique
that is impressive for humans (due to the stamina and concentration
involved) but of course is slightly less effort for a machine! For me
the nicest moment arises at 30.♖c1: after AlphaZero has diverted
attention to an attacking front on the kingside, it goes back to take
control of the c-file after all.
20…f6 21.♘e1 ♖e8 22.♗f3 e5 23.♗xd5+ ♔h8 24.dxe5 ♘xe5 25.♗xb7
♕xb7 26.♗xe5 ♖xe5 27.♕d3 ♕d5 28.♕xd5 ♖xd5 29.♘d3 ♖e8
30.♖c1
The c-file now belongs to AlphaZero too.
30…♗d6

1.
2.
30…♖xe2 31.♘f4.
31.♖c2 ♔g7 32.♖h4 b5 33.♔f1 ♔f7 34.b3 ♖e7 35.♔g2 a5 36.♔f3
And AlphaZero converted in 106 moves: the h5-pawn is doomed in
the long run.
Game: ‘Get the rooks into action with a pawn transaction’
With an obvious attacking option (26.f5) at its disposal, AlphaZero
chooses instead to play a move that seemingly helps Black’s
counterplay, opening the b-file on which Stockfish has already
tripled(!) its major pieces. AlphaZero’s idea is to open another file –
the d-file – on which it will rule. Combined with the restricted black
king, AlphaZero develops a strong initiative which Stockfish only
manages to parry through 256 moves of painful defence.
Game themes:
Opening a second front [26.c3 & 28.c4]
Taking over the original front of attack [39.♖b1]
AlphaZero
Stockfish 8
London 2018

The structure reached is typical of the Classical French. Black’s
position, with so many pawns on light squares and no dark-squared
bishop, makes a ‘holey’ impression. There are tempting outposts for
a white knight on d6 or f6 whilst Stockfish’s king is pinned to the
back rank by the h6-pawn, an attacking unit that also facilitates a
mate on g7 by the white queen. However, Black’s strong central
structure – the pawns on e6 and d5 – keeps White’s pieces at bay
and provides an outpost on e4 for the knight. Black reigns supreme
on the queenside with the advanced pawns on a4 and b4 although it
isn’t easy to force a breakthrough there. Finally, Black’s queen is the
defender of last resort if White attempts to invade on the kingside
dark squares with its queen.
All in all, the position is sharp and feels balanced. White’s natural
plan is to effect a kingside pawn break with f4-f5 (possibly supported
with a preliminary g2-g4); Black’s chances are associated with a
queenside pawn break or with pressure along the half-open c-file.
From that point of view, Black’s tripling of forces along the b-file
feels a little odd.
AlphaZero’s plan in the game surprised me enormously: after all, it’s
never too shy about launching a kingside attack!
26.c3
What? I didn’t understand this move at first. Black has a vast array
of forces on the queenside and has tripled its pieces on the b-file.
The rule of thumb is that you don’t make pawn moves on the side
where you are weaker… and yet here is AlphaZero doing Black’s job
by opening the b-file and looking very happy about it: it is assessing
the position at a 70.0% expected score for White.
Before we examine 26.c3, take a look at the possibility which sprang
to my mind: 26.f5, hitting Black directly on the wing where White
has amassed its strength, and the move I had expected from
AlphaZero.
26.f5 gxf5 (the most ambitious reply, and the only option AlphaZero
seriously considers; 26…exf5 27.♖xd5 ♘e6 28.♕xb6 ♖xb6

29.♖fd1 feels like an edge in the ending due to the constricted black
king) 27.g4 (to clear the path of the white queen to the f6-square.
27.♕g3 looks dangerous but the white queen just hits thin air after
27…♔h8 as 28.♘xe6 (28.♘e4 ♖g8) 28…♘xe6 covers g7) 27…♕c7
28.♕f4. Protecting e5, and the queen is ready to enter on the f6-
square after …fxg4. I was upbeat about this position, but AlphaZero
now suggested two cunning moves: 28…♘d7 (AlphaZero’s favourite
defence for Black. 28…♖b6 is the favourite move of my engines:
29.♖d2 ♘d7 30.gxf5 ♕xe5 31.♕xe5 ♘xe5 32.fxe6 fxe6 33.♖g2
♘g6 is a very slight white advantage according to AlphaZero: a
53.9% expected score) 29.♖de1 ♕xc2+ 30.♖f2 ♕c4 31.♘xe6
♕xf4+ 32.♘xf4 fxg4 33.♘xd5 ♖e8 34.♔g3 b3 35.a3 ♖e6 36.♖f4
and AlphaZero concludes its analysis with a small white advantage
(59.0% expected score).
The tree of variations AlphaZero analysed was broad, which
indicates that the position is complicated and that there were several
equivalent options along the way.
Let’s now think about AlphaZero’s move 26.c3. AlphaZero seems to
view its kingside structure – ♘g5 and the pawns on e5, f4 and h6 –
as a static, stable factor. This factor conveys an important advantage
on White’s position: the restricted position of the black king.
Dangerous though it is, 26.f5 destabilises this static advantage of
AlphaZero’s by weakening the e5-pawn: we saw how Black’s entire
counterplay was based around this new weakness.
Instead, AlphaZero looks to open a fresh channel of entry for its
major pieces. To do so, it isn’t afraid to also open an entry channel
(the b-file) that is completely in Black’s hands.
26…bxc3 27.bxc3 ♕c7 28.c4

And that is AlphaZero’s idea! At the cost of a pawn and the
activation of Black’s rooks on the b-file, AlphaZero destroys the
barrier formed by Black’s central structure e6/d5 and gains the d-file
for its own rook.
Again AlphaZero avoids fighting for a file because it has a plan to
open another one. And it knows that the side with greater mobility –
and for AlphaZero that takes into account which side has the least
restricted king – will outflank the opponent that will be unable to
prevent invasion along one of the entry channels.
28…dxc4 29.♖d4

Making sure that …♘d3 doesn’t block the d-file! AlphaZero assesses
this position as a 72.1% expected score.
Stockfish now puts up great resistance to hold the draw.
29…♘d3
The knight is strong on d3, but due to the weakness of the back
rank it isn’t easy to combine play with Black’s major pieces.
Moreover, while the knight stays on d3, Black is unable to push the
c-pawn.
A) 29…c3 30.♖c4;
B) 29…♖b2 was my other idea, looking for counterplay against
White’s g2-pawn by doubling on the seventh: 30.♕h4 ♖c2. To
double on the seventh rank while protecting the c4-pawn.
Now we see why AlphaZero wants an open file in addition to the
kingside weaknesses caused by the advanced rook’s pawn on h6:
31.♘f3 is a very strong move which I must have stared at for five
minutes before daring to get my engine’s opinion: a 5.37 pawns’
advantage for White! The rook on d4 prevents Black from
challenging the white queen, and the back-rank weakness does the
rest: 31…♕c8 32.♖b1 (32.♕f6 ♕f8) 32…♖a8 33.♖b6 followed by
♖bd6 and an invasion on the back rank.
30.♕f3

The proper course of action for Black in this position is not easy to
determine. Stockfish logically plays the queen to e7 (protecting the
kingside and ready to move to f8 to attack the h6-pawn) and a rook
behind the c-pawn, but White seems to have all the time in the
world to improve its position.
30…♕c5 31.♖d6
31.♕xb7 jumps out but is insufficient for an advantage: 31…♖xb7
32.♖d8+ ♕f8 33.♖xf8+ ♔xf8 34.♘xh7+ ♔g8 35.♘f6+ ♔h8. I
tried all sorts of ways to wriggle my rook past the ♙c4-♘d3
structure, but my engine was always too clever for me: 36.♖f3 ♖b2
37.♖e3 ♖f2 is one great idea, meeting 38.♖e4 with 38…♖xf4.
31…♕c7 32.♘e4 ♕e7 33.a3 ♖c8 34.♕g3 ♘c5 35.♘f6+ ♔h8 36.♖c1
♘d7 37.♘e4 ♘b6 38.♕h3 ♕f8 39.♖b1 c3 40.♘xc3 ♖xc3 41.♕h4 ♖c8
42.♖bxb6 ♖xb6 43.♖xb6 ♔g8
Stockfish is still under heavy pressure but in 256 long, painful moves
it managed to hold the draw!
Game: ‘Feint on the queenside, punch on the kingside!’
As Black in a quiet English Opening, AlphaZero decides not to fight
for the open c-file, conceding White an entry square for its knight on
c6 at the same time. Three things happen however:

1.
2.
3.
1.
2.
White’s advantages turn out to be mirages.
White organises its pieces clumsily on the queenside.
AlphaZero sacrifices material on the queenside to increase the
disharmony of White’s pieces and then opens a new front on the
kingside.
At the end of the game, White still has control of the c-file and a
wayward knight on a5 whilst all of Black’s pieces are swarming
around White’s king.
Game themes:
Sacrificing material to reduce the opponent’s activity [23…a5]
Opening a second front [26…g4]
Stockfish 8
AlphaZero
London 2018
A casual first glance at the position doesn’t ring any alarm bells for
White. White has possession of the only open file on the board – the
c-file – and a stable knight on a5 that can invade either on c6 or on
b7 (to attack d6 together with the queen on a3). A natural plan for

Black – indeed the first choice of my engine – is to neutralise White’s
pressure on the c-file, with perhaps just a small edge for White.
What grounds could Black have for aiming higher than this? What
reason could AlphaZero have for assessing the black position as a
59.4% expected score?
The first step to understanding AlphaZero’s take on the position is to
look critically at White’s control of the c-file: all White’s entry points
with the rook – c5, c6, c7 and c8 – are well covered. White’s knight
has an entry point on c6, but that is as far as the knight will go: it
doesn’t have an amazing square from there. After ♘c6, Black just
has to find an answer to the tactical threat of ♗xb5, winning a pawn
due to the pin on the a6-pawn by the queen.
Black enjoys a definite space advantage, and its pawns restrict the
white pieces: the e4-pawn takes away d3 and f3, the b5-pawn takes
away c4. Black has an invulnerable knight on d5 which prevents any
white major piece from occupying b4 and c3. White’s pieces look
slightly uncoordinated: the rook on c2 blocks the path of the white
queen back to the kingside in case protection is required, and the
queen is short of squares. Finally, White has relatively little
protection on the kingside: almost all of Stockfish’s forces are on the
queenside.
Enumerating all these positional factors, you get a feeling that
White’s position is not as safe as it looks. AlphaZero’s first task is to
deal with the threat of ♘c6 followed by ♗xb5, and AlphaZero has
something more devilish in mind than just exchanging rooks!
22…♕e6
A strong move, hiding a couple of deep tactical points.
23.♘c6
23.♘b7 b4 is an amazing resource, exploiting the restricted position
of the white queen: 24.♗xb4 (24.♕b3 a5 shows the power of
Black’s queenside pawns and the constricted position of the white
queen. As well as …a5-a4 followed by …♖c8, Black threatens …
♖a7, trapping the knight!; 24.♕a5 ♕e7 and the knight on b7 is

again in big trouble! 25.♗xb4 ♗b5 26.♗xb5 ♕xb7 27.♗c6 ♕xb4 is
the tactic. 28.♕xb4 ♘xb4 attacks the rook on c2 and leaves Black a
piece up) 24…♖b8 25.♗xa6 ♘xb4 26.♕xb4 ♕xa2 27.♕xd6
(27.♕c4 ♕xc4 28.♖xc4 ♖a8 traps the white bishop on a6!) 27…
♖a8 28.♗f1 ♕b1 followed by …♖a1 wins for Black. Tactics all
based around the poor positions of White’s major pieces.
23…a5
A great idea from AlphaZero, diverting White’s pieces from the
kingside and thus increasing the strength of a subsequent black
kingside attack with …g7-g5-g4. Yes that’s right: …g7-g5-g4 is
coming, opening an attacking front on the opposite side of the
board. The key question is: why shouldn’t Black just launch a
kingside attack straightaway with 23…g5?
23…g5 24.♗a5. The engines’ favourite defence, and not an obvious
one at all. White solidifies its grip on the queenside dark squares and
consolidates the posts of a few key pieces. In particular, the queen
on a3 maintains her attack on the d6-square, which restricts the
movement and the attacking potential of the black queen. 24…♔h7
(24…g4 is too rash, and justifies White’s idea completely: 25.hxg4
♘xg4 26.♗xg4 ♕xg4 27.♕xd6 ♕d1+ (27…h3 28.f3 exf3 29.♘e5; I

can’t see a way to beat this… and nor can my engine!) 28.♔h2
♕xc2 29.♕xd7 ♘f6 30.♘e7+ ♔f8 31.♕d6 (amazing! White is
winning according to my engines) 31…♘g4+ 32.♔h3 ♘xf2+
33.♔xh4 and ♘f5+ is a deadly threat) 25.♘b4 ♖g8 26.♕b3 makes
good use of the queen and knight. The pressure on d5 makes it hard
for Black to break with …g5-g4.
23…a5 is AlphaZero’s fabulous way of improving the kingside attack,
using a range of cunning and precise tactics to tie up the white
pieces on the queenside at the cost of a few pawns and thus reduce
the danger of a white counterattack while AlphaZero is attacking on
the kingside.
24.b4
This move seeks to improve on the immediate capture on b5 by
giving the white queen a path back to the kingside via c1.
A) 24.♗xb5 g5 (White’s pieces are tangled up as the knight on c6
is pinned to the bishop on b5 and cannot move) 25.♗xa5 (25.♗e2,
to stop 25…g4, is met by 25…♖c8, pinning the knight to the rook on
c2. How White wishes it had placed the rook on c1! 26.♕a4 g4 is
very dangerous. White cannot escape the pin on the knight whilst
Black’s attack is gathering strength on the kingside) 25…g4 (look at
the white pieces on the queenside! The knight on c6 is pinned to the
bishop on b5 and the bishop on a5 is pinned to the queen on a3)
26.hxg4 and now 26…h3 27.gxh3 ♘xg4 28.♗f1 ♘h6 is exceedingly
strong for Black, who will follow up with …♔h7, …♖g8 (the reason
Black didn’t exchange this rook on the c-file) and …♕g6;
B) 24.♗xa5 b4 25.♕a4 (if 25.♘xb4 ♘xb4 26.♕xb4 ♕xa2 wins:
that loose rook on c2 again) 25…♔h7 was suggested by my engines
and looks unpleasant again for White: 26.♕b5 (26.♗b5 ♕f5
27.♖c1 g5 is full of danger for White) 26…♘e7 Winning material.
This is the point of …♔h7: ♘xe7 is no longer with check;
C) 24.♘xa5 b4 25.♗xb4 ♘xb4 26.♕xb4 ♕xa2 27.♘b3 ♕b1+
28.♖c1 ♕xb2 29.♗d1 ♗e6 is a little better for Black according to

1.
2.
my engines. Black could also consider wilder ideas such as 24…g5,
punting the kingside attack instead of regaining material.
24…a4
It’s time to take stock after Black’s sequence 23…a5 and 24…a4.
The attack of the white queen on the d6-pawn has been blocked.
This means that the black queen has regained its freedom to move.
Moreover, the inclusion of …a5-a4 and b2-b4 has prevented White
from pressuring the knight on d5 with ♕b3 and ♘b4.
Two themes have been active in the preceding moves:
The restriction of White’s pieces, particularly the awkward logjam
of pieces on the queenside (queen, knight and rook).
A kingside attack.
AlphaZero has turned the first lever until the conditions for the
second theme are perfect. In other words, some outstanding
prophylactic work has been done to prepare the conditions for
attack.
It can be argued that 24.b4 allows the white queen to return to the
kingside and thus bolster White’s defence. This is true, but the white
queen does not have an active posting on the kingside: it can only
stay behind the lines and try and shore up a weak square like g2.

This is completely different to the lines we were seeing when White
managed to play ♕a3xd6.
It appears that the other engines possess the raw materials to take
a similar decision. For example, they all spot clever tactics based on
…b5-b4, and they all understand that White should fix Black’s
queenside structure and secure the b4-square for the knight with
24.♗a5 (which is a superb defence).
However, the other engines don’t seem to attach as much
importance to the kingside attack as AlphaZero does. The engines
are often looking at plans of neutralising the c-file with …♖c8, which
I don’t think was ever part of AlphaZero’s plan. Even when the
attack gets going, the evaluation of the engines is relatively ‘fragile’:
the evaluation jumps enormously in White’s favour after an
AlphaZero move (28…♕g5) before slowly subsiding again the further
the engines analyse. By contrast, AlphaZero thinks that the kingside
initiative is powerful. After 24…a4, AlphaZero evaluates the position
as an 80.9% expected score for Black!
25.♗xb5 g5
Here we go! AlphaZero is at an 81.6% expected score for Black,
which is very confident. I’m with AlphaZero on this one: Black’s

attack scares me like crazy! The g-file will be opened and then
Black’s decision not to contest the c-file will come into its own.
26.♕c1
26.♗e2 g4 27.hxg4 ♘xg4 28.♕c1 h3 29.gxh3 ♘h2 is the gorgeous
idea I spotted!
26…g4 27.hxg4 ♕xg4 28.♕f1
28…♕g5
A beautiful coordinating move, after which AlphaZero estimates an
88.5% expected score for Black. The move gets out of the path of
White’s defence f2-f3, frees the c8-h3 diagonal for Black’s light-
squared bishop to approach the white king and eyes the loose
bishop on b5. After this move, Black’s queen and bishop have
designs on both the queenside and kingside.
29.♖c1
A) 29.f4 ♕h6. This static position is clearly better for Black. Black
will play …♔h8/7 and …♖g8 with a huge preponderance of forces
on the kingside. My engines give Black a big advantage;
B) 29.f3 feels like the best practical chance as loosening Black’s
central grip gives hope of getting the knight on c6 back into play,
while the resource …exf3, e3-e4 can throw some confusion into

Black’s ranks. However, my engine goes straight for the line that I
eventually decided was clearly better for Black… and gives it -2.23!
29…h3 is very powerful: 30.fxe4 ♘xe4 31.♕f3 (31.♘e5 h2+
32.♔xh2 ♕h5+ is the trick I spotted! 33.♔g1 ♗xb5 34.♕xb5
♕d1+ 35.♔h2 ♔g7 (as I did this one!) 36.♕xd5 ♖h8#) 31…♕h4
32.gxh3 ♘g5 33.♕g2 ♔h8 with …♘xh3+ to follow is just winning.
29…♔h8 30.♘a5 ♗g4 31.♗e2 ♗f3 32.♔h1 ♗xe2 33.♕xe2 ♘h5
The engine evaluations start to turn as they spot the power of
Black’s …♘g3 idea (using the outpost provided by the h4-pawn).
34.♔h2
34.♔g1 ♖g8 35.♕f1 ♘g3 36.fxg3 hxg3 37.♕xf7 ♕h6 is killing:
38.♕f5 ♕h2+ 39.♔f1 ♕h1+ 40.♔e2 ♕xg2+ 41.♔d1 ♕f3+
42.♕xf3 exf3.

And nothing will stop those pawns!
34…♖g8 35.f4 ♕g3+ 36.♔g1 ♕f3
Look at Black’s wonderful knight on d5 and the open g-file, look at
the lonely white knight on a5 and Stockfish’s useless control of the
c-file, and look at White’s vulnerable king. The triumph of
AlphaZero’s supreme strategy!
37.♕xf3 exf3 38.g4 ♘g3 39.♔f2 ♘e4+ 40.♔xf3 ♘xd2+ 41.♔e2 ♘e4 0-
1

1.
2.
3.
There are many more examples of this technique, but I hope the
message is clear! AlphaZero is extremely strong in switching the
focus of play to the opposite wing when it spots passive pieces or a
weakly defended kingside.
II. Extreme major piece mobility
AlphaZero frequently sacrifices pawns to open lines against the
opponent’s king. There are a few sublime examples of AlphaZero
exploiting open files to activate and deploy its major pieces with
extreme activity.
Game: ‘♕h1’
The following game – part of the original set of 10 games released
between AlphaZero and Stockfish – was the game that made
AlphaZero’s reputation! A long-term pawn sacrifice in the opening, a
brilliant intuitive piece sacrifice and the creative manoeuvre ♕c4-h4-
h1 make this a stunning exhibition of attacking play. In this analysis,
we focus on the wonderful way in which AlphaZero deploys its major
pieces, continually finding new avenues of attack to finally break
down Stockfish’s desperate defence.
Game themes:
Queen mobility [14.♕g4, 17.♕f4, 18.♕a4, 23.♕c4, 25.♕h4,
26.♕h1, 26.♖d4, 28.♖f4, 29.♕h3, 36.♕e6]
Rook mobility [19.♖e1, 20.♖ad1, 31.♖h1, 37.♖d1]
Exchanging off the opponent’s active pieces to leave passive ones
[27.♗e4, 33.♗d4, 35.♖xd8]
AlphaZero
Stockfish 8
London 2017
1.♘f3 ♘f6 2.d4 e6 3.c4 b6 4.g3 ♗b7 5.♗g2 ♗e7 6.0-0 0-0 7.d5

A sharp pawn sacrifice that was first played in 1944 in my database
but really came to prominence in 1980 during a Candidates Match
between Polugaevsky and Kortchnoi. The line has gone in and out of
fashion since then.
7…exd5 8.♘h4 c6 9.cxd5 ♘xd5 10.♘f5 ♘c7 11.e4 d5 12.exd5 ♘xd5
13.♘c3 ♘xc3
An unusual move from Stockfish. 13…♗f6 would transpose back to a
main line when White continues either 14.♘xd5 or 14.♘e4.
14.♕g4
A new move in this position at the time from AlphaZero (the tame
14.bxc3 had been played in an earlier game).
14…g6 15.♘h6+ ♔g7 16.bxc3 ♗c8 17.♕f4 ♕d6 18.♕a4 g5
White’s advanced knight on h6 seems to be in trouble. White could
retreat it with 19.♘g4 but AlphaZero has a more radical plan in
mind. Let’s see the next few moves and then stop and evaluate the
position.
19.♖e1 ♔xh6 20.h4 f6
Forced according to AlphaZero.
21.♗e3

With 19.♖e1, AlphaZero allowed its knight to be captured, after
which it is a piece and pawn down. AlphaZero’s follow-up to the
piece sacrifice was restrained: its last move was a simple developing
move without any obvious threat, which means that Black now has a
move to start on its own plans.
What is AlphaZero doing? Let’s take a look at the position and distil
its essential elements.
Firstly, White has built up a substantial lead in development through
the pawn sacrifice on the seventh move. Black’s queenside is
completely undeveloped. Black will need at least three moves before
its queenside pieces are in play, and probably four or five moves
before they start having influence.
What is the effect of undeveloped pieces on a position? The
opponent gets additional tactical opportunities based on ranks or
squares or pieces that are unprotected. Of course, when AlphaZero
sacrificed the piece, its rook on a1 and bishop on c1 were also on
their original squares. However, the c1-bishop was already active,
protecting the disruptive knight on h6 which AlphaZero launched
towards Stockfish’s kingside at an early stage. Moreover, when the
rook on a1 is developed to d1, it will gain a tempo against the queen
on d6.

1.
2.
Secondly, the effectiveness of Black’s current development is
doubtful: the bishop on e7 has just one legal move and is a target
on the open e-file for a white rook; Black’s bishop’s only defender is
the queen on d6, which will soon become a target for a white rook
on the d-file.
Thirdly, Black’s kingside – and the position of Black’s king on the
third rank in particular – is a cause for concern. 19.♖e1 attacked the
bishop on e7 and forced Black to capture the knight on h6 with its
king (19…♕xh6 allows 20.♖xe7). On the third rank, the black king
is much closer to White’s forces than Black would like – you try and
keep your king on the first rank, safe behind a wall of pawns, during
the middlegame.
Natasha compared Black’s current development to that of generals in
an army rushing forwards while the foot soldiers look at each other
and say ‘we don’t fancy this!’. Moreover, Black’s kingside is open (the
pawns on f6 and g5 are too far advanced), which means that even if
the king returns to the fold on g7, g8 or h8, Black cannot be sure
that the king will be safe there. Black will have to spend time both
bringing the king out of immediate danger and then shoring up the
kingside pawn structure.
From this discussion it becomes clear that AlphaZero’s compensation
for the sacrificed material (knight and pawn) is:
Time (the seven or eight moves that Black will need to get its
forces properly mobilised and organised), and
Long-term problems with king safety (due to the holes Stockfish
made in its kingside to capture the knight on h6) as well as short-
term tactical problems due to the king’s current advanced
position.
In a human game, it’s easy to believe that White has big
compensation for the piece, and that danger can strike Black from
many areas. However, against an engine, human intuition normally

founders on a specific engine defence that exploits an unexpected,
‘unfair’ tactical nuance in a sub-variation.
AlphaZero seems to have the best of both worlds. It exhibits the
machine’s ability to calculate accurately and deeply at a superhuman
level. It also shows the human ability to steer the game into a
position that looks generally promising without necessarily needing
to calculate all the way to checkmate. However, although AlphaZero
is reasonably happy with its position, it certainly doesn’t think it is
winning yet, assessing its position at just a 53.3% expected score.
21…♗f5
21…♕c7 was an alternative considered by AlphaZero: 22.hxg5+
fxg5 23.♕h4+ ♔g6 24.♕h1 (that move again!) 24…♗f5 25.♗d4
h5 and now both 26.♗e4 and 26.♗f3 are interesting.
22.♖ad1
AlphaZero’s rooks are now active on the two open central files.
22…♕a3 23.♕c4
White’s challenge is to prevent Black from completing its queenside
development whilst maintaining threats against the opponent’s king.
23…b5

Since Black cannot develop its queenside safely, Black attempts to
chase away the white queen from its active position. Moves like 22…
♕a3 and 23…b5 are typical Stockfish defensive moves, aiming to
prevent the opponent’s attacking pieces from settling on strong
attacking posts. There are many more examples of this in the
chapter on ‘Defence’.
AlphaZero expected 23…♘d7. One sample variation: 24.♕xc6
(24.♕e2 is another line AlphaZero considered seriously: 24…♖ad8
25.♗c1 (the point! An attack is uncovered against the bishop on
e7!) 25…♕c5 26.♕xe7 ♕xe7 27.♖xe7 ♘e5 28.hxg5+ ♔g6 29.♖f1
♖f7 30.gxf6 ♔xf6 31.♖xf7+ ♔xf7 32.♗f4 ♔f6 33.♖e1 ♘g6
34.♗h6, which it however only assesses as a 51.9% expected score
– pretty equal) 24…♖ad8 (24…♘e5 is my attempt: 25.♗xg5+ ♔g7
26.♖xe5 fxe5 27.♕h6+ ♔h8 28.♗xa8 ♗xg5 29.♕xg5 ♖xa8
30.♕f6+ ♔g8 31.♕xf5) 25.♖d5 ♘b8 26.hxg5+ ♔g7 27.♕b5 a6
28.♕c4 ♗e6 is one line it considered, when my engines are
screaming 29.♗c1 ♗xd5 30.♕g4 at me, with a winning attack for
White!
24.hxg5+ fxg5 25.♕h4+ ♔g6
26.♕h1

1.
2.
One of the most beautiful ideas I have ever seen. AlphaZero has
understood that if it can keep Black’s knight on b8 and the rook on
a8, then it is essentially attacking Black with an extra rook. The
second part of AlphaZero’s concept is that if it manages to exchange
off all the bishops then Black would be defending its king with queen
and rook against White’s queen and two rooks. When you look at
the number of open files available to White’s major pieces – the d-
file and the e-file in particular – you understand that Black’s king
won’t last long under those circumstances.
A bonus of exchanging the light-squared bishop on f5 is that White
weakens Black’s protection of the d7-square. This has two serious
consequences:
Black cannot develop its knight to d7.
Even more seriously, Black cannot move the knight at all from b8
as Black must keep on defending the d7-square to prevent a
white rook from landing there. And if the knight must stay on b8,
then the rook cannot move from a8 either!
26.♕h1 prepares 27.♗e4, offering the exchange of bishops. I have
never seen a queen performing so much work from a corner square:
it supports the key idea ♗e4 (when the white bishop and queen also
converge against the h7-square) and also eyes the c6-pawn if the
knight moves from b8.
In the 1920’s, the Hypermodernists, like Richard Réti, initiated
schemes of development in which the queen in the corner (normally
a1) exerted enormous pressure along the long diagonal together
with a dark-squared bishop on b2. They would be fascinated to see
this game with AlphaZero independently creating similar ideas and
adding its own twist (using the pressure to force favourable
exchanges).
26…♔g7
The only move AlphaZero seriously considers for Black. 26…♘d7
27.g4 is the fabulous idea: 27…♗xg4 28.♗e4+ ♗f5 (after 28…♔g7
29.♕xh7+ the queen invades on yet another file!) 29.♖xd7 while

26…♘a6 27.g4 ♗xg4 28.♗e4+ ♗f5 29.♗xf5+ ♖xf5 30.♕xc6+
wins material (the undeveloped rook on a8!).
27.♗e4 ♗g6
A) 27…♗xe4 was the best move according to AlphaZero, after
which it gives itself a 61.9% expected score: 28.♕xe4 ♔g8
29.♕e6+ ♖f7 30.♕c8+ ♗f8 (30…♖f8 31.♕b7) 31.♗xg5 ♕xc3
32.♗f4 ♕g7 33.♔f1 (avoiding …♖xf4. 33.♔h2 was its alternative
(equivalent), which it returns to later in this line) 33…♖d7 34.♔g2
♖f7 35.♔h2 (transposing back to AlphaZero’s line after 33.♔h2)
35…a6 36.♖d8 ♕f6. It’s amazing that there is no forced win here!
However, since neither my engines nor AlphaZero can find one, it
mustn’t be there! 37.♕g4+ ♕g6 38.♕xg6+ hxg6 39.♖ee8 ♖aa7
40.♖xb8 ♖ae7 41.♖ec8 ♖e2 42.♗e3 ♖xa2 43.♗c5 ♖axf2+
44.♗xf2 ♖xf2+ 45.♔h3 ♖f6
You would expect Black to be able to hold this at the end. Black will
have suffered though!;
B) 27…♔g8 28.♗xf5 ♖xf5 29.♕h6 was AlphaZero’s idea, sneaking
around the side to threaten a check with 30.♕e6+: 29…♖e5
30.♗d4 ♕d6 31.♕h3 and the attack goes on though the game isn’t
decided yet.

28.♗xg6 hxg6 29.♕h3 ♗f6 30.♔g2
A wonderful idea, increasing the mobility of White’s major pieces by
allowing them to double along the h-file!
30…♕xa2 31.♖h1
White switches the attack from the centre to the kingside: mate is
threatened on h7.
31…♕g8
Typical all-action defence using the queen by Stockfish. The queen
looks passive on g8 but still has access to other squares on the a2-
g8 diagonal such as d5 or a2.
Stockfish is expert in placing its queen ready to emerge at the
crucial moment to deliver a fateful check or save matters with a
perpetual.
32.c4
An amazing move. The key idea is to restrict the movement of the
black queen on g8.
32…♖e8
A) 32…bxc4 33.f4 is the main idea behind this move: …bxc4 has
prevented any future activity of the queen on the g8-a2 diagonal
such as …♕a2+ or …♕c4(-e2): 33…c3 34.fxg5 (restricting the black
king further by taking away the f6 escape square) 34…♗e5 35.♗f4

(just as in the game, aiming to exchange bishops) 35…♗xf4 36.gxf4
is one sample line from my engines, after which Black is helpless
(my engines are all shouting mate in 10!). 37.♕xc3+ is the threat.
Let’s see one line… 36…♖f5 37.♕xc3+ ♔f7 38.♖h8 ♕g7 39.♕c4+
♖d5 40.♖xd5 cxd5 41.♕c7+ and Black loses its queen;
B) 32…a5 was what AlphaZero thought was the best defence,
trying to queen the a-pawn, and activate the black rook via a7 if
Black gets the chance (a7 is currently covered by the white bishop
on e3): 33.♖d6 and now:
B1) 33…a4 34.♕h6+ ♔f7 35.♖xf6+ ♔xf6 36.♕xg5+ ♔e6 37.♗c5
♔d7 38.♗xf8 was the refutation according to AlphaZero;
B2) 33…bxc4 34.♕h6+ ♔f7 35.♖b1.
This is AlphaZero’s line: I love that rook mobility, switching to the
open b-file (which it opened with 32.c4) once it has exhausted its
use of the h-file. 35…♗e7 36.♖b7 ♔e8 37.♖xe7+ ♔xe7 38.♗c5
wins, e.g. 38…♘d7 39.♕xg5+ ♔e8 40.♕e3+ ♔d8 41.♗b6+ ♔c8
42.♕e4 and Black is defenceless: 42…♘b8 43.♖xc6+.
33.♗d4
The second point of 32.c4: the d5-square is covered so Black cannot
answer this move with 33…♕d5+. Slowly, Black’s king is being

stripped of its defensive helpers, and Black is no closer to bringing
its queenside pieces into the fray.
33…♗xd4 34.♖xd4 ♖d8 35.♖xd8 ♕xd8 36.♕e6
The culmination of White’s strategy: all Black’s defensive pieces have
been exchanged and 37.♕e5+ is threatened. Note how open the
black king remains even now it’s back from the third rank: this is the
long-term aspect of White’s piece sacrifice. All that remains to be
calculated is that Black cannot escape with some last-gasp
development.
36…♘d7 37.♖d1
No! Notice how in the last two moves, AlphaZero has switched the
attacking front from the kingside back to the centre! The rook on a8
will be captured without having made a move.
37…♘c5 38.♖xd8 ♘xe6 39.♖xa8
And White won:
39…♔f6 40.cxb5 cxb5 41.♔f3 ♘d4+ 42.♔e4 ♘c6 43.♖c8 ♘e7 44.♖b8
♘f5 45.g4 ♘h6 46.f3 ♘f7 47.♖a8 ♘d6+ 48.♔d5 ♘c4 49.♖xa7 ♘e3+
50.♔e4 ♘c4 51.♖a6+ ♔g7 52.♖c6 ♔f7 53.♖c5 ♔e6 54.♖xg5 ♔f6
55.♖c5 g5 56.♔d4 1-0
III. Wandering knights

1.
2.
In the ‘Outposts’ chapter, we saw many examples of AlphaZero long
knight manoeuvres to reach a desired outpost. In this game
AlphaZero’s knight dances around the board, first pressuring Black’s
kingside, then helping to restrain Black’s two passed queenside
pawns, and finally assisting White’s passed d-pawn to march
onwards to promotion.
Game: ‘Putting the king in a box’
In one of the games I requested in a specific opening, AlphaZero
demonstrates model strategy in the Grünfeld ending structure.
AlphaZero restricts the black kingside pieces (the dark-squared
bishop and the king) through a solid, fixed central structure (pawns
on d4 and e5) and by pushing the h-pawn all the way to h6 at an
early stage. To keep its grip, AlphaZero sacrifices two pawns,
winning a magnificent game with Black completely helpless at the
end.
Game themes:
Knight mobility [20.♘g5, 23.♘e4, 26.♘c5, 27.♘d7, 28.♘b6]
Opponent’s passive pieces [♔g8, ♗h8]
AlphaZero
Stockfish 8
London 2018

1.
2.
So far nothing too unusual has happened, although AlphaZero has
taken a couple of committal decisions in the early middlegame:
To block the h8-a1 diagonal by playing 15.e5, restricting the
activity of Black’s dark-squared bishop at the cost of increasing
the scope of Black’s light-squared bishop along the a8-h1
diagonal and conceding the d5- and f5- squares to Black’s pieces.
To follow up 15.e5 with the march of the rook’s pawn to h6
(17.h4, 18.h5 and 19.h6), further restricting Black’s king and
dark-squared bishop by taking away the g7-square from both
pieces.
Both these manoeuvres have cost time, which Black has used to
mobilise its pieces, and the break …f7-f6, freeing Black’s position
and the dark-squared bishop, is in the air. AlphaZero decides to
invest two pawns in order to stop this freeing break. In the ensuing
action, invasion play on the queenside is combined with threats
against the restricted black king.
20.♘g5

Stopping …f7-f6 by attacking the e6-pawn.
20…♗xg2 21.♖hc1 ♗d5
Protects e6 and thus threatens to free Black’s position with 22…f6.
22.♖c7 ♘f5
A logical move, attacking the pawn on h6. Note that …♘xh6 cannot
be met by ♖h1 as the d5-bishop covers h1.
22…♘c6 was my first thought, as it blocks the c-file temporarily
(allowing Black to challenge White’s rook on c7 with …♖ac8) and
introduces the idea of …♘c6-a5-c4, blocking the c-file in a more
solid manner.
The only two moves that AlphaZero seriously considered here were
23.♖c1 and 23.f4. I find the latter move extremely interesting as it
reminds me of the episode in the game ‘Get the rooks into action
with a pawn transaction’, analysed earlier in this chapter, in
which I wanted to use White’s ♘g5+h6 structure to launch an
attack, but AlphaZero wanted to keep this structure stable and
attack elsewhere. Here too, I’m trying to cash in on the advantages
of White’s structure with 23.♘xe6, but AlphaZero is looking at
moves like 23.f4, keeping control and solidifying White’s centre
against a future …f7-f6 break.

It makes me think that for all its wonderful attacking skill, AlphaZero
is essentially more inclined towards the pythonesque approach of
Anatoly Karpov than the fire and brimstone of Garry Kasparov.
A) 23.♘xe6 was the main focus of my attention, triggered by a
spot of a dangerous-looking tactic against the black king: 23…fxe6
(23…♗xe6 24.♖xc6 looks very good for White. Black’s bishop is still
completely blocked on h8) 24.♗xg6 (a beautiful idea!) 24…♖fc8
(24…hxg6 25.h7#.
How is that for a dangerous h-pawn?) 25.♖xh7 ♖a7 26.♖xa7
♘xa7 27.h7+ ♔g7 (a cold-blooded engine defence. I thought 27…
♔f8 28.♗h6+ ♔e7 29.♖g1 might be dangerous, and my engine
agrees) 28.♖g1 ♘c6 29.♗d3+ (29.♗e4+ ♔f7 30.♗xd5 exd5
31.♖g8 ♖xg8 32.e6+ ♔g7) 29…♔f7 30.♗g6+ (30.♗h6 ♘e7) 30…
♔g7 is a draw by repetition according to my engine. I couldn’t
improve despite many attempts;
B) 23.f4 ♖ac8 24.♖d7 ♖cd8 25.♖xd8 ♖xd8 26.♖c1 ♖c8
AlphaZero stops here with an evaluation of 59.0% expected score,
which is mildly positive. This is not its main line however;
C) 23.♖c1 ♘b4 (23…♘a5 24.♘e4 ♗xa2 25.♔e2 ♗c4 26.♘d6 is
AlphaZero’s line with a 74.8% expected score despite the two-pawn

deficit. This is a first taste of the knight manoeuvring we will see in
the game. To me the knight already looked great on g5, but
AlphaZero is looking to improve the activity of its knight still further)
24.a3 ♘xd3 25.♔xd3 ♗c4+ 26.♔c3 a5 27.♔b2 ♖ac8 28.♖a7
♖a8 29.♖d7 ♖ad8 30.♖e7. AlphaZero’s line stopped tantalizingly
here with a 71.5% expected score. I imagined that if Black kept on
chasing the white rook then White would break on the queenside
and invade on the c-file all the same, but just to be sure I asked the
AlphaZero team to ask AlphaZero again. And indeed: 30…♖de8
31.♖a7 ♖a8 32.♖xa8 ♖xa8 33.a4 (threatening 34.axb5 followed
by invasion on the seventh rank: Black will regret its restricted king
and passive bishop on h8!)33…f6 34.axb5 ♗xb5 35.exf6 ♗xf6
36.♖c7 ♗xg5 37.♗xg5 ♖f8 38.♖g7+ ♔h8 39.f4 ♗e8 40.♖e7
♗f7 41.♖a7 ♔g8 42.♗e7 ♖c8
… was the main line of AlphaZero’s analysis, which it assesses as an
80.0% expected score (win 60% of the time, draw 40%). That
seems a fair reflection: White will pick up the a-pawn and march its
king to the kingside. Black will have to be a little lucky to survive.
23.♘e4

A stunning idea, sacrificing a second pawn to keep Black bottled up:
AlphaZero would rather lose the a2-pawn than give away the h6-
pawn which is keeping Black’s kingside pieces passive. On top of
that, AlphaZero has spotted an even more desirable destination for
its knight.
23…♖fc8 24.♖bc1 ♖xc7 25.♖xc7 ♗xa2 26.♘c5 ♗d5 27.♘d7
An amazing idea. AlphaZero has spent three moves tiptoeing the
knight through Black’s position, while Black takes another pawn and

has two passed pawns on the queenside. And yet, now Black is
paralysed! From d7, the knight is even more effective than on g5 in
preventing …f7-f6, while it also stalemates the king on g8:
essentially two black pieces are unable to take part in the game. On
the queenside, the knight gives White the idea of ♘b6, interfering
with the rook on a8, which makes it hard for Black to push its
queenside pawns. ♘b6 also opens the possibility of an exchanging
plan in which the light-squared bishop and knight are exchanged for
their black counterparts to leave Black with a useless bishop on h8.
27…♘xe3
27…a5 28.♘b6 ♖b8 29.♗xf5 gxf5 30.♘xd5 exd5 31.♖a7 a4 32.f4
followed by ♔d2-c3-b4 looks hopeless for Black.
28.♘b6 ♖b8 29.fxe3 ♖e8 30.♘d7 ♗f3 31.e4 ♖a8 32.♖b7

Black’s queenside pawns are immobilised, Black’s king and king’s
bishop cannot move, Black’s rook cannot leave the back rank and its
light-squared bishop is short of squares. Oh, and White is eyeing the
possibility of d4-d5, creating a huge passed pawn. How has this
happened?
32…♗g4 33.♗b1 ♗h3 34.♔e2 g5 35.♗d3 ♗g4+ 36.♔e3 ♗d1 37.d5
exd5 38.exd5
38…♖e8 39.♗e4 ♗g4 40.♘f6+ ♗xf6 41.exf6

Black’s king ends up as its defining weakness which also infects the
black rook with its passivity. White will simply march the d-pawn
home, combining this with threats against the f7-pawn for good
measure.
41…b4 42.d6 b3 43.♔d4 ♖d8 44.♔e5 ♖e8+ 45.♖e7 ♖f8 46.♗d5 b2
47.♖b7 ♖e8+ 48.♔d4 1-0
The b-pawn falls and shortly there-after the white d-pawn will
queen.

1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
 
Section B – Reducing the mobility of the
opponent’s forces to create opportunities
In this section AlphaZero reduces the opponent’s forces to passivity
using sacrificial and other techniques.
I. Squeezing with the pawns
Game: ‘Endgame class’
AlphaZero unexpectedly offers up an advanced rook’s pawn on the
queenside – which looked to be a useful advantage for the endgame
– to reduce the activity of White’s pieces. The knight decentralises to
win the pawn, the dark-squared bishop is restricted by pawn
phalanxes on b6/c5 and h4/g3, and most importantly the king is
rendered passive. AlphaZero converts its edge by keeping the white
king pinned to the corner and trading off Stockfish’s active pieces.
The result for Stockfish is a useless knight on f6, a rook tied to the
back rank and an unstoppable passed c-pawn to contend with.
Game themes:
Sacrificing material to reduce the opponent’s activity [31…c5]
Reducing the opponent’s activity with pawn advances [31…c5,
32…g5, 33…g4, 34…g3]
Opponent’s passive pieces [♔g1, ♘f6]
Exchanging off the opponent’s active pieces to leave passive ones
[51…♖xa1, 57…♗c5]
Lonely knight [♘f6]
Stockfish 8
AlphaZero

London 2018
Already having some experience of AlphaZero’s play, I was expecting
AlphaZero to exchange off its dark-squared bishop for the knight on
d4 and play the rook and opposite-coloured bishops middlegame,
hoping to invade the weakened central light squares and play on the
weakness of the fixed a2-pawn. That probably wasn’t a bad plan,
but AlphaZero’s creative strategy took me completely by surprise.
31…c5 32.♘c2 g5

Giving away the a3-pawn, which to my eyes was one of Black’s
strongest assets!
However, AlphaZero is trading this asset for a series of other
dynamic plusses.
33.♘xa3 g4 34.♔g1 g3
With this manoeuvre, Black has gained space on the kingside and
severely restricted the freedom of the white king and dark-squared
bishop.
By sacrificing the a3-pawn, Black has gained a new potential channel
for entry into the White position: the a-file.
35.♗e3 ♖a8 36.♘c4 ♖h6 37.♖b2 ♖a6
White is by no means helpless as Black’s position is extended and
AlphaZero has a lot of squares to protect with limited forces.
However, AlphaZero just seems to have it all under control and will
first absorb White’s current temporary activity before proceeding to
push White back and reclaim all that White has gained.
38.♗c1 b5 39.♘e3 ♖a4 40.c4
40.♘d5 looked natural to me. Playing around with the engines in
this position fails to deliver anything resembling clear equality: 40…
♗d8 41.♘f6+ ♗xf6 42.exf6+ ♔d8 43.f7 ♖f6 44.♖e5 ♖xf7

45.♖xc5 ♖e7 46.♖e5 ♖e4 is still problematic for White due to the
weakness of the back rank: 47.♔f1 ♖7xe5 48.fxe5 ♗e6 and the
white king will not escape: …♗c4+ is coming.
40…bxc4 41.♘d5 c3 42.♘xc3 ♖c4 43.♗d2 ♖c6 44.♔f1 ♗e6 45.♖b1
♖b4 46.♖ee1 ♗c4+
AlphaZero’s pieces advance inexorably, increasing the difference in
activity between its pieces and the opponent’s pieces. 46…♗c4+
seals the white king in its box on the kingside: the bishop stops the
king escaping via f1-e2 whilst the g3-pawn covers f2 and h2.
47.♔g1 ♖c8 48.♖bc1 ♗d3 49.♘d5 ♖b2 50.♗c3 ♖xa2 51.♖a1 ♖xa1
Typical AlphaZero play, exchanging off active pieces to leave the
opponent with passive pieces: we will see another example on move
57.
52.♗xa1 c4 53.♘f6+ ♔d8 54.♗c3 ♖b8 55.♗d4 ♗b4 56.♖d1 ♖b5
57.♔h1 ♗c5 0-1

White’s lonely knight – established on an outpost on f6 but unable to
influence the struggle to stop the c-pawn – and boxed-in king are
testament to the grandeur of AlphaZero’s strategy. The c-pawn will
not be stopped! 57…♗c5 58.♗xc5 ♖xc5 59.♔g1 ♔e7 60.♔h1 c3
wins.
HISTORICAL PARALLEL
Magnus Carlsen’s Grünfeld play
This encounter between the current World Champion Magnus
Carlsen when he was just 17 and the Ukrainian genius Vasily
Ivanchuk has themes of AlphaZero’s games in the Grünfeld
Defence, and the games in which AlphaZero built up play on the
kingside while Stockfish’s queenside counterplay never got going.
The switchback 23.♕c1, through which the decisive invasion
happens on the flank where Black should be strongest, reminds
me of AlphaZero.
Magnus Carlsen
2690
Vasily Ivanchuk
2750

Morelia/Linares 2007 (11)
1.d4 ♘f6 2.c4 g6 3.♘c3 d5 4.cxd5 ♘xd5 5.e4 ♘xc3 6.bxc3 ♗g7 7.♗c4
c5 8.♘e2 ♘c6 9.♗e3 0-0 10.0-0 ♘a5 11.♗d3 b6 12.♖c1 cxd4 13.cxd4
e6 14.♕d2 ♗b7
A typical Grünfeld structure has arisen in which White’s strong
centre is counter-balanced by Black’s queenside pawn majority.
Black’s most difficult problem is to find a good spot for his knight,
which tends to hang around a bit in the early middlegame (as
here on a5). There is another less obvious challenge to Black’s
position: his kingside has been weakened by the exchange of his
king’s knight on move five.
15.h4
The young Carlsen plays a move that AlphaZero likes too! White
exerts pressure on the black kingside with the h-pawn.
15…♕e7
The pawn is poisoned: 15…♕xh4 16.♗g5 ♕h5 17.♘g3 ♕g4
18.♗e2.
15…♕d7 is the standard move in this position. The queen assists
the exchange of rooks on the c-file but loses sight of the kingside
dark squares a little. A high-class game continued: 16.h5 ♖fc8

17.♖fd1 ♖xc1 18.♖xc1 ♖c8 19.♖xc8+ ♕xc8 20.♗h6 ♗xh6
21.♕xh6 ♗a6 22.♕d2 ♗xd3 23.♕xd3 ♔g7 24.♕d2 f6 25.e5
♘c6 26.exf6+ ♔xf6 27.♕h6 with a clear advantage in Kir.
Georgiev-Bukavshin, Aix-les-Bains 2011.
16.h5 ♖fc8 17.e5
We saw this idea in AlphaZero’s Grünfeld games as well: the pawn
on e5 reduces the activity of Black’s dark-squared bishop on g7
and fixes Black’s dark-squared weaknesses on that wing too by
creating an outpost on f6 for a white bishop or knight.
17…♖xc1 18.♖xc1 ♖c8 19.♖xc8+
AlphaZero chooses the same approach in this position! Exchanging
the rooks prevents the knight on a5 from activating itself (a move
like 19.♖d1 would have been met by 19…♘c4) and allows White
to maintain the attacking tempo.
19…♗xc8 20.♗g5 ♕c7 21.♗f6 ♘c6 22.♕g5

A powerful move, threatening 23.♗xg7 and 24.h6+, making
AlphaZero-style use of the advanced h-pawn to target the dark
squares around the black king.
22…h6 23.♕c1
A fantastic switchback! Black must defend his kingside (which he
was forced to weaken with 22…h6) but this gives White a tactical
opportunity to exploit the pin on the black knight on the open c-
file. The file intended for black counterplay has become White’s
decisive channel of entry, as so often happens when the mobility
of one side is much greater than the other.

Magnus Carlsen: an AlphaZero-like switchback at 17.
23…g5 24.♗b5 ♗d7 25.d5 exd5 26.♘d4
Winning a piece.
26…♗xf6 27.exf6 ♕d6 28.♗xc6 ♕xf6 29.♗xd7 ♕xd4 30.g3 ♕c5
31.♕xc5 bxc5 32.♗c6 d4 33.♗b5 ♔f8 34.f4 gxf4 35.gxf4 1-0
II. Restricting queen mobility
As we discuss in the chapter on ‘Defence’, Stockfish is skilled at
using its queen to slow down the build-up of an opponent’s attack by
harrying the opponent’s pieces and sowing confusion. The game
‘Using a queenside file to defend the kingside’ is a fine
example of this.
It was a striking theme from the games released in December 2017
that AlphaZero could render Stockfish’s queen completely passive.
Let’s see one of those games:
Game: ‘Risky rooks’
A remarkable occurrence: in the middlegame the black queen is
boxed into the corner with just one legal move.

1.
2.
Game themes:
Sacrificing material to reduce the opponent’s activity [47.♖xc5]
Opponent’s passive pieces [♕h8]
AlphaZero
Stockfish 8
London 2017
Judit Polgar: a stunning finish to box in the black king.

Black has been under pressure since White sacrificed a pawn in the
opening. The strange move 45…♕h8 is the choice of my engines
when analysing for six hours or more. AlphaZero finds a magical way
to make the queen wish she had not retreated to the corner.
46.♕b4 ♘c5 47.♖xc5 bxc5 48.♕h4 ♖de8 49.♖f6 ♖f8 50.♕f4
The black queen is completely imprisoned. Black can only sit and
await its fate.
50…a5 51.g4 d5 52.♗xd5 ♖d7 53.♗c4 a4 54.g5 a3 55.♕f3 ♖c7
56.♕xa3 ♕xf6 57.gxf6 ♖fc8 58.♕d3 ♖f8 59.♕d6 ♖fc8 60.a4 1-0
HISTORICAL PARALLEL
Judit Polgar’s ♕f6!
The stunning move 49.♖f6 reminded me of an idea played by
Judit Polgar – one of the world’s elite players until her retirement
– against the French grandmaster Laurent Fressinet. The following
position was reached after 24 exciting moves in a Najdorf Sicilian:
Judit Polgar
2656
Laurent Fressinet
2536

Istanbul ol 2000 (9)
24…♖c4
As Judit explains in volume two of her Best Games collection, she
thought for 32 minutes after Black’s 24th move, which shows the
difficulty of the position.
25.♕b8+ ♔g7 26.♕e5+ ♔g8
27.♕f6

A fantastic move. The queen ties down the black king and the
rook on h8 completely while preparing ♖h1-d1-d8+. The key
difference with 27.♖d1 is seen in the game after 27…♕c7.
A) 27.♖d1, which Judit wanted to play, fails to 27…♕c7 28.♕f6
♕f4+ 29.♔b1 ♕xf6 when the queen on f6 covers d8 and stops
the intermediate check 30.♖d8+;
B) 27.♖e1 was Judit’s next idea, but after much examination,
she decided that 27…♖c5 would destroy the coordination of
White’s pieces and take control of the e5-square: the rook cannot
be taken because of mate on e1. But then inspiration and tactical
genius struck!
27…♕c7 28.♖e1 ♕c6
Why doesn’t 28…♕f4+ work? Well in comparison to 27.♖d1, the
rook is now on e1, which means that after 29.♔b1 ♕xf6 White
can interpose 30.♖e8+, winning a piece after 30…♔g7 31.gxf6+
♔xf6 32.♖xh8. Wonderful tactical ingenuity!
The defence in the game also didn’t work.
29.♗e6 fxe6 30.♖d1 1-0
Black resigned as 30…♕e8 31.♖d8 ♕xd8 32.♕xd8+ ♔g7
33.♕f6+ ♔g8 34.♕xe6+ ♔g7 35.♕f6+ ♔g8 36.♕xa6 leads to a
winning position for White, with queen and three enormous
passed pawns on the queenside.
A stunning finish!
III. Passive king
We have already seen several games in which AlphaZero has
managed to restrict the opponent’s king to such an extent that it is
unable to assist in the struggle.
The following example shows the strategy working to perfection.
Game: ‘Inexorable constriction’
Stockfish’s opening play is somewhat passive, but not disastrous.
However, the story after move 14 is of AlphaZero’s inexorable

1.
2.
advance and Stockfish’s inability to halt this progress. The end
position contrasts a black king pinned to the back rank and tied to a
weak pawn on h7, with a white king ready to enter the black camp
with ♔e5.
Game themes:
Exchanging off the opponent’s active pieces to leave passive ones
[40.♕c6]
Keeping the opponent’s king pinned in the corner [46.f6]
AlphaZero
Stockfish 8
London 2018
This isn’t the most spectacular game, but it was one that impressed
me greatly. Stockfish’s play in the opening has been ‘computery’: …
♕b6 was unusual while the exchange of the light-squared bishop on
f3 gave White the two bishops and robbed Black’s position of some
elasticity. I’m also not too happy with the knight on a6, which seems
to have limited prospects of activity. AlphaZero’s play is natural and
direct, continually gaining space and draining activity from Black’s

pieces. It looks so effortless, and there seems to be nothing that
Stockfish could have done about it!
14.h4 ♗d6 15.h5 ♕d8
Black is reluctant to stop the h-pawn advancing with 15…h6 as this
would weaken the kingside light squares and give White the
additional attacking resource of ♕f5 and ♗e4.
16.h6 g6
AlphaZero’s rook’s pawn march weakens Black’s kingside dark
squares, which ties down a defender and restricts the black king.
AlphaZero’s next step is to complete its development.
17.♖e1 ♘c7 18.♗d2 a5
18…b5 is what the crowd wants, but now we will understand the
reason for Stockfish’s 18…a5: 19.b4 cxb4 20.♖ac1 is very difficult
for Black as White’s rook will come to c6 and White’s queen will
come to g4 and capture the pawn on d4.
19.a4
18…a5 was an ugly but necessary move. However, after 19.a4, Black
will never get any counterplay on the queen’s wing.
19…b6 20.♖e2 ♖e8 21.♖xe8+ ♘xe8 22.♖e1

White has control of the e-file but no immediate breakthroughs, so
AlphaZero improves its position little by little, Magnus Carlsen-style.
22…♖b8 23.b3 ♘c7 24.♖e2 ♖a8 25.♔f1 ♖b8 26.♗h3 ♖a8 27.♖e4 ♖b8
27…♘xd5 28.♖e1 ♘c7 29.♕c6 is very awkward. The pawn on d5
hinders White from invading Black’s weak light squares.
28.♖e1 ♖a8 29.♗c1 ♖b8 30.♖e2 ♗f8 31.♖e5 ♗d6 32.♖e1 ♗f8 33.♗g2
♗d6 34.♗d2 ♖c8 35.♗f4 ♕d7
Black continues to hold steady. An active move like 35…f5 would be
met by 36.g4, when the opening of the h3-c8 diagonal will give
White another entry channel into the black position.
36.g4

After some manoeuvring, AlphaZero looks to take a grip of the
kingside dark squares, possibly with a later g4-g5.
36…♖e8 37.♖e4 ♖d8 38.♗g5 ♖e8 39.♕f6
All of a sudden the black position, that looked solid, collapses.
39…♗f8 40.♕c6 ♕xc6 41.dxc6 ♗d6 42.f4 ♔f8 43.f5 gxf5 44.gxf5 ♖xe4
45.♗xe4 ♗e5 46.f6 ♔g8 47.♗f5
Again we see the power of the march of the rook’s pawn: the black
king is tied to the defence of the pawn on h7, leaving the white king
free to roam. Black is lost.

47…♘e8 48.♔f2 ♗c7 49.♔f3 ♗b8 50.♗f4 ♗xf4 51.♔xf4 1-0

Section C – Breaking the fortress with
sacrifices
A common theme of the match between AlphaZero and Stockfish is
AlphaZero pushing Stockfish into passivity with its dynamic play, and
Stockfish doing an amazing job absorbing pressure and keeping
AlphaZero at bay under seemingly impossible circumstances. In
several games, it was not obvious how AlphaZero was going to break
through Stockfish’s obdurate resistance. It seems that in such
positions, AlphaZero had planned an additional sacrifice to finally
push Stockfish’s position over the precipice.
Game: ‘Exchanging all the dark-square defenders’
AlphaZero
Stockfish 8
London 2018

1.
2.
3.
1.
2.
3.
4.
A remarkable game, in which AlphaZero takes control of dark
squares in Stockfish’s territory at an early stage and expands the
plan to every area of the board.
Game themes:
Safer king
Weakness of the h7-pawn, created by advancing a rook’s pawn to
h6
Breaking the fortress with a sacrifice
59.♗f3
It is amazing what White has achieved without Black’s position
falling over yet! White has:
Rook’s pawns on a6 and h6, providing outposts for major pieces
on b7 and g7 while also providing targets on a7 and h7 in the
ending (win one of those pawns and a rook’s pawn will queen!).
Control of the open b-file.
License for the white queen to roam over Black’s kingside and
central dark squares.
A far superior minor piece.
Black has only four reasonable moves in the position – …♗a8, …
♕d7, …♖e7 and …♖d8. Yet it isn’t easy to think how White will
finish things off. Black is covering the b6, b7 and b8 entry points on
the b-file whilst the white queen alone cannot effect a breakthrough
on the kingside.
Plans involving the white king moving to d4 or g5 could be
considered but feel unreasonably fraught!
Then I asked why AlphaZero had played its rook to the strange b4-
square. And a thought struck me. However, I needed the calculating
power of the engines to turn the idea into reality.
59…♖d8

60.♖xc4
Once Stockfish has been reduced to passivity AlphaZero often uses
an exchange sacrifice as a way of breaking through.
60…dxc4 61.♗xc6
This position looked very promising to me, but I couldn’t work out a
way to beat Black’s most natural defence. My engines could
however!
61…♖d2

Sacrificing the exchange has taken away some squares from the
black rook, but also freed up three new squares on the d-file.
These are the defences to check:
A) 61…c3 62.♕e6+ ♖d7 (on 62…♔b8 63.♕b3+ ♔c8 64.♗b7+
♔b8 (64…♔d7 65.♕f7# is a beautiful mate!) 65.♗d5+ ♔c8
66.♗e6+ wins) was a defence that caused me a lot of anxiety.
However, the passed c-pawn turns out to be dangerous, but just not
dangerous enough!) 63.♗xd7+ ♕xd7 64.♕b3 ♕d2 65.♔g2 c2
66.♕b7+ ♔d8 67.♕a8+ ♔e7 68.♕xa7+ (as we said earlier: if a7
falls, the rook’s pawn on a6 will prove to be very useful) 68…♔f6
69.♕b6+ ♔e7 70.♕b7+ ♔e6 71.♕b3+ ♔e7 72.a7 ♕d1
(threatening 73…♕g4+ with a draw)73.♕xc2 ♕xc2 74.a8♕ ♕xc5
75.♕b7+ ♔e6 76.♕xh7. Now the other h-pawn comes in handy!;
B) 61…♖d1 62.♕e6+ ♔b8 63.♗d5 ♕xc5 64.♕e5+ ♕c7
65.♕b2+ ♕b6 66.♕h8+ ♔c7 67.♕xh7+ ♔d6 68.♕xg6+ ♔xd5
69.♕xb6 axb6 70.h7 wins!
62.♕e6+ ♔b8 63.♗d5
Blocks the rook from covering the back rank.
63…♕xc5
63…♖xf2+ 64.♔g3 ♖a2 65.♕e8+ ♕c8 66.♕b5+ ♔c7 67.♕c6+
♔b8 68.♕a8+ ♔c7 69.♕xa7+ ♔d8 70.♕xh7 – those rook’s pawns
again! White is easily winning!
64.♕e5+ ♕c7
64…♔c8 65.♗b7+.
65.♕e8+ ♕c8 66.♕b5+ ♔c7 67.♕a5+
Picks up the rook on d2! Amazing geometry!

Analysis of AlphaZero and Stockfish king
mobility
We round off this chapter by looking at the king mobility of
AlphaZero and Stockfish. This short section complements the
analyses of individual games by making observations about king
mobility when viewed across the entire database. The reason we
have chosen to look particularly at king mobility is in part for
simplicity: the king is the only piece that is never exchanged. In
addition, the observations in this chapter give us a strong steer that
AlphaZero both values its own king mobility and likes to take active
steps to restrict the mobility of the opponent’s king.
To show this visually, we took all the AlphaZero-Stockfish games
from our database and plotted the number of legal king moves on
each turn for both sides. As a comparator we also plotted the legal
king moves from the Series 11 TCEC Superfinal (the final of the 2018
computer world championship between Stockfish and Houdini).
Each chart below has four lines, being the average number of
king moves for White and Black, at each move of the game. Sure
enough the graphs show a marked difference between AlphaZero
and Stockfish (the first chart immediately below), but not between
Stockfish and Houdini (the second chart below):

In the chart above, the solid white and black lines relate to
AlphaZero being White and Black. The dotted white and black lines
are Stockfish White and Black. The exciting part of the chart is
between about moves 20 and 40, where AlphaZero opened up a
considerable lead in the number of legal moves available to its king.
With the same analysis but from Stockfish vs Houdini games there
is no clear difference overall between the two engines in terms of
number of legal king moves, though Houdini achieved a slightly
increased king mobility with white and reduced with black.

The main difference appears to be that whilst Stockfish tends to
have between 3 and 3.5 king moves when playing Houdini, it has
between 2.5 and 3 when playing AlphaZero. This would appear to
support our theory that AlphaZero sets out to play moves to restrict
the opponent’s king.
As we have seen, restricting the king’s mobility gives a host of
possibilities for active play, particularly based around the opening of
files. The game ‘Get the rooks into action with a pawn
transaction’ is a good example of this: AlphaZero was not afraid to
start play that would open files for Black on the queenside knowing
that the weakness of the back rank – caused by the restriction of the
black king with a pawn on h6 – would prevent Black from fully
exploiting those opportunities. The restriction of the opponent’s king
is a factor that can last deep into the endgame, as shown by the
game ‘Inexorable constriction’.

CHAPTER 9
Attacking the king: the march of the rook’s
pawn
In this chapter, we examine scenarios in which AlphaZero pushes its
rook’s pawn as far as it possibly can on the wing where the
opponent’s king is castled. Typically, AlphaZero pushes its h-pawn
towards an opponent’s king castled on the kingside. If the h-pawn is
not blocked, it will continue its march onwards as far as h6 (for
White) or h3 (for Black), where it is both a menace to the opposing
king in the middlegame (due to the risk of a snap checkmate on
g7/g2) and a threat in an endgame (just two steps away from
queening if the opposing h-pawn on h7/h2 is captured).
In this chapter, we explore ways in which the advance of the
rook’s pawn is typically met and we’ll see some great examples of
both attacking and defensive play. The scenario in which the march
of the h-pawn is stopped by …h7-h6 (Black) or h2-h3 (White) shows
some wonderful examples of great minds thinking alike: Karpov,
Kasparov and AlphaZero!

Chapter 9 – Attacking the king: the march of the rook’s
pawn – key points
Theme
Launching the rook’s pawn against the opponent’s
king’s position.
Purpose
Weaken the squares and pawn structure around the
opponent’s king, restrict the movement of the
opponent’s king, create targets for the next wave of
the attack.
In how many games did
AlphaZero use it?
As White, when left to choose its own opening,
AlphaZero pushed its h-pawn to h4 before the 25th
move in 48% of its games in our sample. With black,
the h-pawn was pushed to h5 in 37% of the games
in our sample.
What are the prerequisites? A static centre, or good control of the centre. The
opponent must not be able to launch a counterattack
in the centre to counter a wing attack with the rook’s
pawn.
What are the risks?
The rook’s pawn can become weak or exposed.
Unique implementation by
AlphaZero
AlphaZero pushes the rook’s pawn sooner and more
frequently than common in grandmaster games.
AlphaZero even plays this idea in unexpected
openings (such as the quiet 4.g3 Queen’s Indian).
AlphaZero is also extremely successful in situations
where it has pushed the rook’s pawn all the way to
the sixth rank (e.g. h2-h4-h5-h6).
Who can use it?
Everyone! From beginners to experts.
Complexity of resulting
positions
The opponent has a number of reactions (when/if to
block the advance of the rook’s pawn), which
increases complexity. However, AlphaZero has
provided (beautiful) blueprints against all scenarios.
Any tips?
Don’t forget to involve the rest of your pieces in the
attack! AlphaZero’s success comes from combining
all its forces in the attack.
Who does it remind us of?
Kasparov, Karpov.

In this chapter, AlphaZero pushes the rook’s pawn as far as it can to
induce a weakening in the opponent’s king’s position. Stockfish
meets this attacking theme in a variety of ways: by allowing the
pawn to advance or blocking its path at various stages. We will
examine these defensive strategies in turn. First however, we
demonstrate AlphaZero’s basic idea.

AlphaZero’s basic idea
For ease of discussion, we examine the scenario in which White
pushes the h-pawn from h2 all the way to h6 to attack the black
kingside. Note however that this could also take place with reversed
colours (we see examples of this later in this chapter) and it could
also take place on the opposite wing if Stockfish were to castle
queenside.
When White pushes the h-pawn to h6, the threat is to take on g7
and open Black’s king position. Black’s normal reaction to h5-h6 is to
play …g7-g6.

1.
2.
3.
4.
1.
2.
The white pawn on h6 causes Black some discomfort on the king’s
wing.
These are the results:
A black pawn is forced to leave g7, after which Black no longer
has control of the f6-square.
The g7-square is taken away from the king, which restricts the
king’s movement.
The black king is in danger! A white queen could potentially land
on g7 and deliver mate.
In the ending, the black h7-pawn is a potential weakness and the
h6-pawn is close to queening.
On the negative side, there are a couple of points to consider:
White no longer has the chance to open the h-file after Black
meets h5-h6 with …g7-g6.
The h6-pawn may become weak (it is an easy target to attack as
it is so close to the black position). A white piece may become
tied down to the defence of the h-pawn.
Note that the success of this operation depends on central control or
a stable, solid centre. AlphaZero only launches such an attack with

its rook’s pawn when central counterplay from Stockfish is not on the
agenda.
We start off with the basic theme: the rook’s pawn goes all the way
to h6. In subsequent sections, we examine scenarios where Black
attempts to stop the rook’s pawn at an earlier moment.

1.
2.
3.
 
Section A – The h-pawn reaches h6
Game: ‘Putting the king in a box’
In this game, AlphaZero demonstrates model strategy in the
Grünfeld ending structure. AlphaZero restricts the black kingside
pieces (the dark-squared bishop and the king) through a solid, fixed
central structure (pawns on d4 and e5) and by pushing the h-pawn
all the way to h6 at an early stage. To keep its grip, AlphaZero
sacrifices two pawns, winning a magnificent game with Black
completely helpless at the end.
Game themes:
Fixing the centre [15.e5]
Using a rook’s pawn to weaken the opponent’s king’s position
[19.h6]
Sacrificing material to reduce the opponent’s activity [20.♘g5,
24.♖bc1]
AlphaZero
Stockfish 8
London 2018
1.d4 ♘f6 2.c4 g6 3.♘c3
These games were part of a series made to satisfy my curiosity
about AlphaZero’s opening choices against other moves. In these
games, the moves up to move 3 (3.♘c3) were specified, after which
Stockfish went consistently for the Grünfeld.
3…d5 4.cxd5 ♘xd5 5.♘f3 ♗g7 6.e4 ♘xc3 7.bxc3 c5 8.♗e3 ♕a5 9.♕d2
♘c6 10.♖b1 a6 11.♖c1 cxd4 12.cxd4 ♕xd2+ 13.♔xd2 e6
A fairly popular Grünfeld line, with which White has scored +19, -14
in 56 games (54.5%) against an average of 2487, which is pretty

much par for the course for the advantage of the white pieces. The
large number of Black wins indicates though that White can get
things wrong too!
14.♗d3 ♗d7 15.e5
The first new move of the game, and it might catch you by surprise
the first time you see it. Without being forced to, White concedes
some central light squares (d5 and f5) and provides Black with an
outpost on d5 for its knight or bishop. On the positive side, however,
White reduces the activity and mobility of the bishop on g7 whilst
also reducing the number of pieces which need to defend the pawn
on d4. White also highlights some dark-square weaknesses in the
black position (due to the combination of …g7-g6 and …e7-e6),
creating potential outposts for pieces on f6 and d6. And finally,
White makes the centre stable and fixed, which AlphaZero likes to do
before launching a rook pawn attack.
15…0-0 16.♖b1
White’s rook manoeuvre 10.♖b1, 11.♖c1 and 16.♖b1 might puzzle
you. It’s always going to be unclear whether the weaknesses that
AlphaZero creates through its rook manoeuvres (10…a6 weakened
the queenside dark squares due to lessened control of b6, while

after 16…b5 Black can no longer control the c5-square with a pawn)
are worth the time that Stockfish gains to move its pawns closer to
queening and gain space on the queenside (for example, due to the
‘free’ moves …a7-a6 and …b7-b5, Stockfish has gained an outpost
on c4 for its knight). 16.♖b1 is also played to prevent 16…♘b4,
which would gain a tempo on the pawn on a2 and bishop on d3 to
transfer the knight to d5.
16…b5
17.h4
AlphaZero decides that it is time to start squeezing the kingside by
gaining space with its h-pawn.
17…♘e7
After seeing the game, you may wonder why Black did not play 17…
h6 to stop White’s pawn advance. In fact, Black is already suffering
from constricted pieces on the kingside, caused by White’s move
15.e5, and White has a sharp way to exploit this: 18.h5 g5 19.♘xg5
hxg5 20.h6 ♗h8 21.h7+ ♔g7 22.♗xg5 (threatening 23.♗f6 or
23.♗h6 mate! See how constricted the black king has become by
the push of the h-pawn) 22…f6 23.exf6+ ♖xf6 (23…♔f7 24.♖h6)

24.♗xf6+ ♔xf6 25.♖h4 is very promising for White: the pawn on
h7 is enormous.
If you are wondering how White would continue if Black tried to stop
the h-pawn right away with 17…h5, we will deal with this reaction in
a later section.
18.h5 ♗c6 19.h6 ♗h8
Here, my engines are looking at the natural 20.♖bc1 or 20.♖hc1,
concluding that Black is fine after the freeing …f7-f6. However,
AlphaZero has a different conception of the game: it played h5-h6 to
restrict and constrict, and it will do anything – including sacrificing
material – to maintain that grip.
20.♘g5
Offering a pawn to stop …f7-f6.
20…♗xg2 21.♖hc1 ♗d5
Protects e6 and thus threatens to free Black’s position with 22…f6. It
also avoids a possible f2-f3, trapping the bishop on g2.
22.♖c7 ♘f5
A logical move, attacking the pawn on h6. Note that …♘xh6 cannot
be met by ♖h1 as the ♗d5 is now covering h1 after having
captured the pawn on g2.

23.♘e4
A stunning idea, sacrificing a second pawn to keep Black bottled up.
Here just enjoy the rest of the game: we look at it more closely in
the ‘Activity’ chapter!
23…♖fc8 24.♖bc1 ♖xc7 25.♖xc7 ♗xa2 26.♘c5 ♗d5 27.♘d7 ♘xe3
28.♘b6 ♖b8 29.fxe3 ♖e8 30.♘d7 ♗f3 31.e4 ♖a8 32.♖b7 ♗g4 33.♗b1
♗h3 34.♔e2 g5 35.♗d3 ♗g4+ 36.♔e3 ♗d1 37.d5 exd5 38.exd5
38…♖e8 39.♗e4
The pawn on e5 is immune due to the weakness of the back rank.

39…♗g4 40.♘f6+ ♗xf6 41.exf6 b4 42.d6 b3 43.♔d4 ♖d8 44.♔e5
♖e8+ 45.♖e7 ♖f8 46.♗d5 b2 47.♖b7 ♖e8+ 48.♔d4 1-0
HISTORICAL PARALLEL
Kasparov’s system against the French Winawer
In the 1990’s the great Garry Kasparov developed a dangerous
system against the French Winawer Variation (1.e4 e6 2.d4 d5
3.♘c3 ♗b4). In this system, Black gives up the dark-squared
bishop at an early stage to create and fix pawn weaknesses in
White’s position (4.e5 c5 5.a3 ♗xc3+ 6.bxc3) which can then be
attacked with minor pieces and the black queen. Garry’s concept
for White was to create weaknesses on the other side by pushing
the h-pawn to h6 to expose dark-square weaknesses there, willing
even to sacrifice his central pawn chain to expose additional dark
squares!
The following phenomenal game against Predrag Nikolic is a
typical example:
Garry Kasparov
2810
Predrag Nikolic
2655
Paris 1994 (4)
1.e4 e6 2.d4 d5 3.♘c3 ♗b4 4.e5 c5 5.a3 ♗xc3+ 6.bxc3 ♘e7 7.♕g4
♔f8 8.h4

8…♕c7 9.♕d1
White retreats the queen to deal with the threat of 9…cxd4 and
then 10…♕c3+, winning the rook on a1. Black takes the
opportunity to nick the d-pawn, but this merely signals the start of
a powerful assault.
9…cxd4 10.cxd4 ♕c3+ 11.♗d2 ♕xd4 12.♘f3 ♕e4+ 13.♗e2 ♘bc6
14.h5 ♘xe5 15.h6

Black’s capture of White’s central d4- and e5-pawns has cleared
the a1-h8 diagonal for White’s dark-squared bishop and now
Kasparov uses his h-pawn to loosen things up even further.
15…gxh6 16.♗xh6+ ♔g8 17.♖b1 ♘7g6 18.♖b4
Fantastic mobility of the white rooks. Everything is going to
participate in the attack.
18…♘xf3+ 19.gxf3 ♕e5 20.f4 ♕c3+ 21.♔f1 f5 22.♖b3 ♕f6 23.c4 b6
24.cxd5 ♗b7 25.♖d3 ♖e8 26.♖g1 b5 27.dxe6 ♖xe6 28.♖d8+ ♔f7
29.♖d7+ ♖e7 30.♖xb7 1-0
A wonderful game that contains the features that we admired in
AlphaZero’s games: the rapid advance of the rook’s pawn,
disregard for material equality, sacrificing for open lines and
extreme mobility of the pieces.

1.
Garry Kasparov against the French also pushed his h-pawn to press on the dark
squares.
Having seen this game, it was striking to see this game of
AlphaZero’s when forced to open 1.e4 and play against the French
Winawer. There is a sense of great minds thinking alike!
Game: ‘Attaquer comme Kasparov!’
A Kasparov-style attack against the French Winawer!
Game theme:
Using a rook’s pawn to weaken the opponent’s king’s position
[7.h4, 8.h5, 15.h6]
AlphaZero
Stockfish 8
London 2018
1.e4 e6 2.d4 d5 3.♘c3 ♗b4 4.e5 ♘e7 5.a3 ♗xc3+ 6.bxc3 c5 7.h4 ♕c7
8.h5 cxd4 9.cxd4 ♕c3+ 10.♗d2 ♕xd4 11.♘f3 ♕e4+ 12.♗e2 ♘f5

13.♖b1
A novelty in this position: 13.♔f1 (looking for ♗d3 targeting the
exposed black queen) is the main move. In response, Black has
been trying 13…b6 to counter 14.♗d3 with 14…♗a6. AlphaZero
avoids this defence by inserting 13.♖b1 first (threatening 14.♖b4)
and drawing out 13…♘c6. Only then does it play 14.♔f1 as …b7-b6
and …♗a6 is no longer a threat. There is the little matter of the
pawn on e5 though…
13…♘c6 14.♔f1 ♘xe5 15.h6 gxh6

AlphaZero has devised an identical attacking scheme to Kasparov’s.
Just like Kasparov, AlphaZero follows up by mobilising its major
pieces. Stockfish defends by provoking a crisis, using its temporary
activity to interfere with the stability of White’s pieces.
16.♘xe5 ♕xe5 17.♗d3 ♖g8 18.♖h5 ♕g7 19.♕f3 ♘d4 20.♕h3 e5
21.♕h2 e4 22.c3 exd3 23.cxd4 b6 24.♖xd5 ♗e6 25.♖d6 ♕g4 26.♔g1
♕e2 27.d5
It looks winning for White, but Stockfish has planned an astounding
resource, sacrificing a piece to reach an equal endgame a piece
down!
27…♗h3 28.♖e1 ♖xg2+ 29.♕xg2 ♕xe1+ 30.♗xe1 ♗xg2 31.♔xg2 ♖c8
32.♖c6 ♖xc6 33.dxc6 ♔d8 34.♔f3 ♔c7 35.♔e3 ♔xc6
Black is just in time to win the bishop for its queenside pawns and
head back before White can capture all of Black’s kingside pawns.
36.♗b4 ♔b5 37.♔xd3 ♔a4 38.♔e4 b5 39.♗f8 a5 40.♔f5 b4 41.axb4
axb4 42.♗xh6 ♔a3 43.♗f8 ♔b3 44.♔g5 ♔a4 45.♗g7 ♔a3 46.♗f8 ♔a4
47.♗g7 ♔a3 48.f4 b3 49.f5 b2 50.♗xb2+ ♔xb2 51.♔h6 ♔c3 52.f6 ♔d4
53.♔g7 h5 54.♔xf7 h4 55.♔g6 h3 56.♔g5 h2 57.f7 h1♕ 58.f8♕
And the game was soon drawn.
HISTORICAL PARALLEL

Aronian’s rook’s pawns
The wonderfully creative Armenian elite player Levon Aronian has
introduced many opening ideas involving rook’s pawn pushes
against the opponent’s kingside so it’s only right to show one of
his games here. This game impressed me greatly. Its themes are
those we see in many AlphaZero games: Levon exchanges off the
opponent’s active pieces and leaves him with passive pieces,
increasing the mobility of his own pieces, and uses an advanced
rook’s pawn to constrict and attack the opponent’s king.
The creative Levon Aronian is also feared for pushing his h-pawn in the
opening.
Levon Aronian
2648
Evgeny Vorobiov
2544
Moscow 2004
1.c4 c5 2.♘f3 g6 3.d4 cxd4 4.♘xd4 ♘c6 5.♘c2 ♗g7 6.e4 ♘f6 7.♘c3
0-0 8.♗e2 d6 9.0-0 ♘d7 10.♗d2 ♘c5 11.b4 ♘e6 12.♖c1 ♘ed4
13.♘xd4 ♘xd4 14.♗e3 ♘xe2+ 15.♕xe2 b6 16.♖fd1 ♗b7 17.♗d4

Just like AlphaZero, Aronian’s strategy swaps off Black’s active
pieces and leaves him with passive ones. In this case, Black’s
advantage of the two bishops is neutralised and the main
defender of Black’s kingside disappears from the board.
17…♗xd4 18.♖xd4 ♕c7
19.h4
With Black unable to generate counterplay quickly, Aronian
introduces fresh pressure points on the black position. The march
of the rook’s pawn will give White the opportunity either to open
the h-file or to target Black’s weakened kingside dark squares with
h5-h6.
19…♖ac8 20.h5 a6 21.♘d5 ♗xd5 22.exd5

The transformation of the pawn structure was the key reason for
this exchange. After 22.exd5, White’s rook on d4 gains free access
to the central and kingside files, vastly increasing its mobility.
Moreover, White’s major pieces are ready to combine together to
target the e7-pawn. Meanwhile, look at Black’s major pieces,
devoid of scope on the two back ranks. It’s an illustration once
again of the profound truth spoken by the great Tigran Petrosian
(World Champion between 1963 and 1969) that the biggest
difference between an attacking and a defensive position is in the
activity of the major pieces.
22…♖fe8 23.♖e4 ♕d7 24.♖e1 b5 25.cxb5 axb5 26.h6

The smallest soldier on the board, but an absolute monster in this
position!
26…♔f8 27.♕b2
The threat of mate on g7 forces a weakening of Black’s kingside
and that gives White a tactical opportunity to finish the game.
27…f6 28.♖xe7 ♕xe7 29.♖xe7 ♔xe7 30.♕e2+ ♔f7 31.♕xb5 ♖c1+
32.♔h2 ♖c2 1-0
After 33.a4 ♖xf2 34.a5, White’s pawns will queen without any
problems. If 32…♖c2 33.a4 ♖xf2 34.a5 ♖ee2 35.♕d7+ ♔f8
36.♕g7+ ♔e8 37.♕h8+ ♔d7 38.♕xh7+ ♔d8 39.♕xg6 easily
neutralises Black’s attempted kingside counterattack.
Next, we will examine games in which Stockfish prevents AlphaZero
from establishing a pawn on h6.

1.
2.
 
Section B – Black stops the h-pawn with …h7-
h5
In this structure, AlphaZero likes to attack Black’s kingside in the
following way:
It places the dark-squared bishop on g5, attacking the dark
squares that were weakened when Black moved the kingside
pawns to light squares.
It storms the most advanced black kingside target on h5 with g2-
g4.
Game: ‘You don’t need a queen to attack’
This game in the Grünfeld Defence was run especially for this book.
Black decides to block the advance of White’s h-pawn with …h7-h5.
AlphaZero’s reaction is very strong!
Another wonderful Grünfeld ending from AlphaZero in which the
absence of queens barely seems to detract from the vigour of
White’s kingside attack!

1.
Game theme:
Fixing the centre [15.e5]
AlphaZero
Stockfish 8
London 2018
1.d4 ♘f6 2.c4 g6 3.♘c3
I had asked for a game with these opening moves.
3…d5 4.cxd5 ♘xd5 5.♘f3 ♗g7 6.e4 ♘xc3 7.bxc3 c5 8.♗e3 ♕a5 9.♕d2
♘c6 10.♖b1 a6 11.♖c1 cxd4 12.cxd4 ♕xd2+ 13.♔xd2 e6 14.h4 h5
A novelty from Stockfish.
15.e5 0-0
16.♖g1
A great concept!
16…♖d8 17.♗d3 ♘b4 18.♗e4
AlphaZero is happy to give Black the a-pawn in return for time to
attack on the kingside.
18…♗d7
18…♘xa2 19.♖b1 ♗f8 20.g4 and good luck dealing with that!
19.♗g5

Establishing the bishop on the g5-outpost (aiming at the weakened
black kingside dark squares).
19…♖db8 20.a3 ♘d5 21.g4
My engines have a muted opinion of White’s position: 0.01 is a
pretty common evaluation. AlphaZero is at a 79.6% expected score
for White and from the black side, I’m cowering behind the sofa!
This looks very strong for White.
21…hxg4 22.♖xg4 ♖c8 23.♖cg1

Now the engine evaluations start to increase for White!
23…♗b5 24.h5 ♖c3 25.a4 ♗xa4 26.hxg6 ♖a3 27.♗xd5 exd5 28.♗e7
♖a2+ 29.♔e3 f6 30.exf6 ♗xf6 31.♗xf6 ♖a3+ 32.♔f4 ♖f8 33.♘h4
♖xf6+ 34.♔g5 ♖xf2 35.♖e1
Black has done amazingly to get this far, but the position is still very
difficult. AlphaZero is at an 82.6% expected score, and the other
engines’ evaluation for White continues to rise the longer you let
them analyse.
35…♖c3 36.♖e5 ♗d1 37.♖g1 ♗c2 38.♖xd5 b5 39.♖d7 b4 40.♖e1
♗xg6 41.♔xg6 ♖g3+ 42.♔h5 ♖f7 43.♖e8+ ♔g7 44.♖dd8 ♖g1
45.♖g8+ ♔f6 46.♖xg1 ♖h7+ 47.♔g4 1-0

1.
 
Section C – Black blocks with …h7-h6, White
attacks with g4-g5
A common way to contain the threat of the rook’s pawn is to block it
with the move …h7-h6. This avoids dark-square weaknesses with …
g7-g6 but gives White a target that can be used to open the
kingside. In such situations, AlphaZero likes to follow up the advance
of the h-pawn by advancing the g-pawn to attack the h6-pawn and
force open the g-file.
Game: ‘Feint on the queenside, punch on the kingside!’
From a quiet English Opening, AlphaZero outmanoeuvres White,
conceding the open c-file and an invasion square on c6 for chances
to attack on the kingside. White’s advantages turn out to be mirages
while Black’s kingside attack proceeds at a ferocious pace.
Game themes:
Avoiding the automatic occupation of an open file

2.
3.
Sacrificing to sow disharmony in the opponent’s set-up [23…a5]
Opening a second front [26…g4]
Stockfish 8
AlphaZero
London 2018
1.c4
In these games, I stipulated 1.c4 as the opening move for White.
AlphaZero always reacted in the same way.
1…e5 2.♘c3 ♘f6 3.♘f3 ♘c6 4.e3 ♗b4 5.♕c2 ♗xc3 6.♕xc3 ♕e7 7.♗e2
0-0 8.d4 e4 9.♘e5
Varying from the game Osmanovic-Hort, Decin 1979, in which
9.♘d2 was played.
9…♘d8 10.h3 h5
Played to threaten to trap the knight with …d7-d6 by covering the
g4-square rather than to start a kingside attack, but not a move that
AlphaZero is unhappy with in general.
11.c5 d6 12.cxd6 cxd6 13.♘c4 b5
An unexpected move that is part of a far-reaching plan to develop
Black’s pieces to their most active squares and to simultaneously

disrupt White’s coordination. The white knight was well-placed on
c4, targeting the d6-pawn. If White could consolidate the queenside
structure with a2-a4 followed by b2-b3 and ♗a3, then its pieces
would exert irritating pressure on Black’s position. From that point of
view, 13…b5 is understandable. However, it also feels loosening: the
b5-pawn is under attack from the bishop on e2 (and can be further
attacked by a2-a4) while from a5 the white knight cannot be
attacked by a pawn, eyes the outpost on c6, and takes away the
most natural development square for the knight on d8.
However, this is where the second part of AlphaZero’s plan comes
into view. Black is not planning to place its knight on the natural c6-
square, but on its best square: d5. There it is invulnerable to attack
from a pawn. After driving away the white knight, Black’s next few
moves are thus aimed at protecting the b5-pawn and on covering
the c7-square to allow the black knight to move to d5 via e6-c7.
Since the white queen is on c3, Black can secure c7 for its knight
with gain of tempo.
14.♘a5 ♗d7 15.0-0 ♘e6 16.♗d2 ♖fc8 17.♕b3 h4
AlphaZero uses a spare moment to tighten the screw on the
kingside. By fixing the white pawn on h3, Black puts the conditions

in place for a future kingside pawn break with …g5-g4.
18.♖fc1 ♘c7 19.♖c2 ♘cd5
The long knight manoeuvre …♘d8-e6-c7-d5 has been completed.
20.♖ac1
It looks like there are going to be major exchanges taking place on
the c-file. However AlphaZero takes another non-standard decision.
It envisages opening the g-file on the kingside with a future …g5-g4.
To exploit the resulting file against the white king, it will need at
least one major piece. For that reason, AlphaZero does not want to
allow mass exchanges on the c-file. AlphaZero thus breaks a general
rule and leaves the c-file in White’s possession.
20…♖xc2 21.♖xc2 a6
Black has not been able to cover all the entry points on the c-file,
but AlphaZero has assessed correctly that the white knight’s entry on
the c6-square is an empty shot. For now, White has no way to
exploit the c-file.
22.♕a3
Played to achieve ♘c6 without allowing Black the reply …♕e8 (as
d6 is now hanging). If 22.♘c6 ♕e8 23.♘b4 ♘b6 with …a6-a5 to
follow.
22…♕e6 23.♘c6 a5
A little diversion from AlphaZero on the queenside to draw away the
opponent’s pieces… we analysed this episode deeply in the ‘Activity’
chapter. Now just sit back and enjoy as Stockfish desperately tries to
get its queen back to the kingside and AlphaZero launches one of its
trademark lightning attacks!
24.b4 a4 25.♗xb5

25…g5
The start of AlphaZero’s attack. Almost imperceptibly, White’s forces
have gravitated to the queenside, which makes Black’s kingside
attack all the more dangerous.
26.♕c1 g4 27.hxg4 ♕xg4 28.♕f1 ♕g5 29.♖c1 ♔h8 30.♘a5 ♗g4
31.♗e2 ♗f3 32.♔h1 ♗xe2 33.♕xe2 ♘h5 34.♔h2 ♖g8
35.f4 ♕g3+ 36.♔g1 ♕f3 37.♕xf3 exf3 38.g4 ♘g3 39.♔f2 ♘e4+
40.♔xf3 ♘xd2+ 41.♔e2 ♘e4 0-1

HISTORICAL PARALLEL
Garry Kasparov’s rook pawn revival
At the end of 2017, ex-World Champion Garry Kasparov came out
of retirement to take on the world’s strongest players at a blitz
tournament in St Louis. His most striking contribution to chess
theory at that tournament was a rook’s pawn idea in the 4.♕c2
Nimzo Indian. His game against Hikaru Nakamura was extremely
impressive and reminded me of AlphaZero’s play in the game
above: when Black blocked the advance of the h-pawn with …h7-
h6, Garry – just like AlphaZero – threw the g-pawn forward to
open up the black kingside.
Garry Kasparov
2812
Hikaru Nakamura
2792
St Louis blitz 2017 (13)
1.d4 ♘f6 2.c4 e6 3.♘c3 ♗b4 4.♕c2 0-0 5.a3 ♗xc3+ 6.♕xc3 d5 7.♘f3
dxc4 8.♕xc4 b6
9.h4

The h-pawn starts! It looks like an idea that AlphaZero might like,
but it prefers the normal 9.♗g5 in this position. I think that the
centre is a little too open for AlphaZero’s taste to be playing this
rook’s pawn push. In blitz however, it was mighty effective for
Garry!
9…c5 10.dxc5 bxc5 11.h5 h6
Nakamura doesn’t want to accept dark-squared weaknesses on
the kingside after h5-h6, …g7-g6 and blocks the h-pawn before it
gets to h6. However, that doesn’t mean that Black’s kingside is
safe!
12.g4
Garry intends g4-g5, targeting the exposed black pawn on h6, just
as we saw AlphaZero doing in the previous game. Black is already
under severe pressure.
12…♕d5 13.♕xd5 ♘xd5 14.g5 hxg5 15.♗xg5

White’s game is very pleasant: Black has weak queenside pawns,
an unstable knight on d5 (e2-e4 will drive it away) and worries
about White targeting the g7-pawn in front of the black king with
major pieces. Nakamura was tricky as always, but Kasparov kept
things together to put him away convincingly.
15…f6 16.♗d2 ♘c6 17.♖c1 ♘d4 18.♖xc5 ♘xf3+ 19.exf3 ♗d7
20.♖h4 ♖fb8 21.b4 a6 22.♖d4 ♗b5 23.♗g2 ♖e8 24.f4 f5 25.♗f3
♔h7 26.♗c3 ♖e7 27.♔d2 ♖d8 28.♗xd5 exd5 29.♖dxd5 ♖xd5+
30.♖xd5 ♖d7 31.♖xd7 ♗xd7 32.♔e3 g6 33.h6 ♔xh6 34.♔d4 ♔h5
35.♔c5 ♔g4 36.♗d2 ♔f3 37.♔b6 ♗b5 38.a4 ♗f1 39.b5 axb5 40.axb5
♔xf2 41.♔c6 ♔e2 42.♗c1 ♔d1 43.♗a3 ♔d2 44.♗e7 1-0
HISTORICAL PARALLEL
Karpov’s kingside pawn storm
This game is from one of Garry Kasparov’s great rivals: his
predecessor as World Champion, Anatoly Karpov. I had seen it in a
collection of best games by Karpov, but I only sat up and took
notice while browsing through the excellent book Small Steps to
Giant Improvement by Sam Shankland, the young American 2700
player and 2018 American Champion (one of the toughest titles on
the planet with Fabiano Caruana, Hikaru Nakamura and Wesley So

as competitors!). This game was played three years before Karpov
became World Champion and I can’t imagine a more perfect
human equivalent to AlphaZero’s approach!
Anatoly Karpov
2630
Mark Taimanov
2590
Moscow 1972
1.e4 c5 2.♘f3 e6 3.d4 cxd4 4.♘xd4 a6 5.♗d3 ♗c5 6.♘b3 ♗b6 7.0-0
♘e7 8.♕e2 ♘bc6 9.♗e3 ♘e5 10.c4 ♗xe3 11.♕xe3 ♕c7 12.c5 ♘xd3
13.♕xd3 b6 14.cxb6 ♕xb6 15.♘1d2 d5 16.e5 ♗d7 17.♖fc1 0-0
18.♕d4 ♕b8 19.♘f3 ♘c6 20.♕e3 ♖c8 21.♖c5 a5 22.♖ac1 a4
23.♘bd4 ♘a5 24.♖xc8+ ♗xc8 25.b3 ♗d7
26.h4
We’re not surprised by this move! If left unchecked, the h-pawn
will run all the way up to h6 and exert unpleasant pressure on the
black king. Not only are Black’s pieces all on the queenside, Black
needs to keep his queen there to stop White from invading on the
c-file with his rook.

26.h4 was also AlphaZero’s choice when we showed it this
position!
26…h6
Taimanov decides to stop the h-pawn before it gets to h6. Karpov
now uses the pawn on h6 as a ‘hook’ (to quote Shankland) to
open up the kingside, just as we have seen AlphaZero do.
27.g4 ♕b7
28.h5
28.g5 h5 29.g6 was also a strong option as Shankland points out.
After 29…fxg6 30.♕d3 Black finds it impossible to defend g6 and
e6: 30…♔h7 31.♘g5+. However, 28.h5 is thematic for us!
28…♘c6 29.g5
And here is the breakthrough: White’s advance of the h-pawn
teased out a kingside weakness from Black which White can use
to open lines on the kingside.
29…♘xd4 30.♘xd4 hxg5 31.♕xg5 ♔h7 32.♖c3

Another typical manoeuvre: the rook is moved to the kingside via
the third rank.
32…♕b4 33.♖g3 ♖g8 34.♘f3
34.h6 ♕f8 35.hxg7 ♖xg7 36.♕xg7+ ♕xg7 37.♖xg7+ ♔xg7
38.b4 is Shankland’s preferred way of ending the game. Karpov’s
way is good enough however and is also extremely elegant! It
feels quite AlphaZero to me to finish the game by bringing the
knight into the attack.
34…axb3 35.axb3 ♕xb3

36.♕c1
A lovely move, freeing g5 for the knight, covering any back-rank
checks and preparing to invade on the seventh rank with the
queen if necessary.
36…♕a2 37.♘g5+ ♔h8 38.♘xf7+ ♔h7 39.♕g5 ♕b1+ 40.♔h2
And Black resigned. The beautiful mate would be 40…♗e8
41.♕g6+ ♕xg6 42.hxg6# (see diagram).
This early game by Anatoly Karpov provides a perfect human equivalent to
AlphaZero’s kingside pawn storm approach.

In the following section, we will look at some other typical ideas that
have cropped up in AlphaZero’s games.

Section D – Other ideas
I. Opening the h-file
1.hxg6 hxg6

1.
2.
A common use of the h-pawn thrust is to open the h-file against the
opposing king. This happens relatively rarely in AlphaZero’s games –
it tends to like to push the pawn to h6 in general – but there is an
excellent demonstration of opening up the h-file with hxg6 in the
following game.
Game: ‘Never safe in the ending!’
A masterpiece from AlphaZero in the Grünfeld ending. Again,
AlphaZero fixes the centre with e4-e5 and then pushes its rook’s
pawn to launch a wing attack on the kingside.
The disposition of Black’s forces is different to previous examples,
which means that h5-h6 would be less effective. AlphaZero switches
to a different type of kingside attack, opening the h-file. The attack
is so dangerous that Stockfish is compelled to offer a pawn, an
advantage that AlphaZero converts in 104 moves.
Game themes:
Using a rook’s pawn to weaken the opponent’s king’s position
[17.h5]
Fixing the centre [18.e5]
AlphaZero
Stockfish 8
London 2018
1.d4 ♘f6 2.c4 g6 3.♘c3
The last move specified for both sides in this series of games.
3…d5 4.cxd5 ♘xd5 5.♘f3 ♗g7 6.e4 ♘xc3 7.bxc3 c5 8.♗e3 ♕a5 9.♕d2
♘c6 10.♖b1 a6 11.♖c1 cxd4 12.cxd4 ♕xd2+ 13.♔xd2 e6 14.h4 0-0
15.♗d3 ♖d8 16.♖c4 ♗d7 17.h5 ♗e8
A new concept from Stockfish. 17… b5 18.♖cc1 ♗e8 19. e5 ♘b4
20. ♗g5 ♘xd3 21. ♔xd3 ♖dc8 22. hxg6 fxg6 23. ♘d2 was
pleasant for White in Epishin-Polovodin, Podolsk 1992.
18.e5 ♖d5

19.hxg6
I was intrigued by this as AlphaZero tends to follow up the
manoeuvre h4-h5 by pushing the h-pawn to h6 to cramp the black
king and the black pieces; it uses h4-h5 as a way of opening the h-
file much less frequently.
It is interesting to compare this decision to eschew h5-h6 and open
the h-file with the opposite decision AlphaZero took in a similar
position. It shows the subtlety involved in the successful handling of
this technique (see diagram):
AlphaZero
Stockfish 8
London 2018

If we compare the position with that game after Black’s 18th move,
we see one fundamental difference: the black minor pieces are
considerably more active. The light-squared bishop is on the long
diagonal, ready to remove White’s knight on f3, the black knight is
already aiming for the light-square holes – d5 and f5 – around
White’s dark-square central pawn structure, and even the rook on f8
is better-placed on f8 than d8.
If White tries to cash in on its h4-h5 manoeuvre with 19.hxg6 hxg6
20.♗g5 then Black can simply reply 20…f6, preventing White from
entrenching itself on Black’s kingside dark squares and starting
counterplay against the white centre and kingside (the knight on f3
and the pawn on f2 will be vulnerable when the f-file gets opened
for the black rook).
In other words, in that position, Black is still fighting: AlphaZero feels
that it needs to tighten the screw further and squeeze more life out
of the black pieces and position before it can turn its attention to the
king. For that purpose, it uses the advance h5-h6.
In the position in our main game, the black minor pieces are rather
passive: the light-squared bishop is a pure defensive piece on e8
while the knight on c6 is fruitlessly attacking White’s solidly defended
central d4-e5 structure. In this case, AlphaZero doesn’t need to try

1.
to restrict the activity of Black’s pieces, or to constrict the black
position further: it can already start exploiting the potential of its
own pieces, which means opening the h-file and starting to entrench
its pieces in the porous black kingside dark squares.
Now back to our game after 19.hxg6.
19…hxg6 20.♗e4 ♖b5
It is interesting to compare AlphaZero’s approach here with that of
the engines: 21.♖hc1 and 21.♖b1, challenging for the open files,
dominate the principal candidate moves, while even 21.♖a1 gets a
look in (defending a2 so that 21…♖b2+ can simply be met by
22.♔c3) for a short while. AlphaZero however is now focused on the
execution of its plan, which is targeting the black king on the other
wing. Black’s single-piece activity on the queenside doesn’t remotely
interest it!
21.♗g5
Stopping the black knight on c6 from regrouping to the good
defensive square e7 and preparing ♗f6.
21…♖b2+ 22.♔e3 ♘a7
22…♖xa2 23.♗f6 with two threats:
♖c1, ♖h4, ♖ch1 and ♖h8 with mate and:

2. ♘g5 and ♖h7 with very dangerous threats.
23…♖c8 24.♖cc1 (avoiding tricks based on the loose rook on c4
and preparing ♖h4 and ♖ch1. 24.♘g5 ♘xe5 25.♖xc8 ♘g4+
26.♔f3 ♘xf6 27.♗xb7 ♗f8 was what I wanted to try. White is
better, but Black has reasonable chances to fight) 24…♘a7 and
now:
A) 25.♖b1 ♘b5 26.♖h4 ♘c3 27.♖bh1 ♖e2+ gives Black a
lightning counterattack: 28.♔d3 (28.♔f4 ♖xe4+ followed by …
♖xh4 breaks White’s attacking structure) 28…♗b5#;
B) 25.♖xc8 ♘xc8 26.♘g5 ♗xf6 27.exf6 ♘d6 28.♖h7 a5 (the
machine defence style! Don’t make desperate attempts to escape:
just let your king hang on the parapet and queen on the other side!
Neither I nor my engine could find more than perpetual) 29.♖g7+
♔h8 30.♖h7+ ♔g8;
C) 25.♗xb7 ♖xc1 (25…♖b8 26.♗e4 is very strong for White. The
net result of moves 24-26 is that White has gained additional entry
points via the c-file (on top of the existing idea of doubling on the h-
file) while Black’s knight has been banished to a7. The open b-file
that Black has for the rook is of no value; 26…♖b3+ 27.♔f4 ♖xf2
28.♖h2 followed by ♖ch1 and ♖h8+ leads to mate) 26.♖xc1 is a
simple way to a better position for White. Black’s pieces are very
poor and will suffer together with Black’s constricted king when
White gets a rook to the seventh or eighth ranks.
23.♖c7 ♖c8 24.♖xb7 ♖xb7 25.♗xb7
Stockfish has bailed out at the cost of a pawn, but its pieces are still
passive. AlphaZero makes no mistakes converting the advantage.
25…♖c3+ 26.♔f4 ♖c2 27.♗e4 ♖c4
A) 27…♖xf2 28.♖b1 ♘b5 (28…♗b5 29.a4) 29.a4;
B) 27…♖xa2 28.♖c1 ♗f8 29.♖c7 ♘b5 30.♖c8.
28.♗d3 ♖a4 29.♖c1 ♗c6 30.♗c4 ♗b7 31.♗b3 ♖b4 32.♖c7 ♗xf3
33.♔xf3 ♘b5 34.♖c8+ ♔h7 35.♖c4 ♘xd4+ 36.♔e4 ♘c6 37.♖xb4
♘xb4 38.♗e7 ♘c6 39.♗d6

Very powerful. AlphaZero has returned the pawn but has a total grip
on the position.
39…♘a5 40.♗d1 f5+ 41.exf6 ♗xf6 42.♗e2 ♘b7 43.♗a3 a5 44.♔d3
♗e5 45.♗g4 ♘d8 46.♗c5 ♗c7 47.♔c4 ♘b7 48.♗a7 ♘d6+ 49.♔c5
♘e4+ 50.♔c6 ♗f4 51.♗xe6 ♘c3 52.♗d4 ♗d2 53.♗c4 g5 54.♔d7 g4
55.♔e6 ♔g6 56.♔e5 ♘d1 57.♗b3 ♘c3 58.a4 ♘e2 59.♗b6 ♔g5 60.g3
♗c3+ 61.♔e4 ♗b4 62.♔e3 ♘c3 63.♔d3 ♔f5 64.♗c2 ♔e6 65.♗d4 ♘d5
66.♗b3 ♔d6 67.♔e4 ♘e7 68.♔f4 ♘c6 69.♗e3 ♘e5 70.♔e4 ♘f3 71.♗d1
♘h2 72.♔f5 ♘f1 73.♗f4+ ♔e7 74.♔xg4 ♘d2 75.♗c2 ♔e6 76.♗e3 ♘f1
77.♗b6 ♗c3 78.♔h3 ♘d2 79.f4 ♘f3 80.♗d1 ♘d4 81.♗c5 ♔d5 82.♗a7
♔e4 83.♗b6 ♔d5 84.♗g4 ♘b3 85.♗d8 ♘c5 86.♗d1 ♔c6 87.♗e7 ♘e4
88.♗f3 ♔d7 89.♗a3 ♘d2 90.♗e2 ♘e4 91.♔g2 ♗b4 92.♗b5+ ♔e6
93.♗b2 ♗c3 94.♗c1 ♔d5 95.g4 ♘d2 96.♔g3 ♘b3 97.♗a3 ♗e1+
98.♔h3 ♗d2 99.f5 ♘d4 100.♔h4 ♗c3 101.♗d3 ♘c6 102.♗e2 ♔e4
103.♔h5 ♔f4 104.♗c1+ 1-0
II. The rook lift
Another common use of the rook pawn push is the rook lift:

1.
The aim of this manoeuvre is to free the rook for action along the
third rank, which can be a surprisingly effective attacking
manoeuvre. There is a wonderful example in one of AlphaZero’s
games, although the actual rook lift idea remained hidden in the
notes:
Game: ‘The pincer movement’
AlphaZero plays aggressively from the start, targeting the h7-pawn
with a set-up involving the knight on g5, a pawn on h4 and the
queen on c2. AlphaZero delays castling to prevent Black from being
able to drive away the knight with …h7-h6.
To increase its pressure, AlphaZero pushes the rook’s pawn on the
other wing. The idea seems purely positional at first sight: to
prevent Black from expanding on the queenside with its queenside
pawns. However, digging into the variations, it emerges that
AlphaZero had another idea: to reinforce its kingside attack with a
lift of the queen’s rook to the kingside.
Game themes:
Using a rook’s pawn to establish an outpost for a knight [11.♘g5,
12.h4]

AlphaZero
Stockfish 8
London 2018
1.d4 ♘f6 2.c4 e6 3.♘f3 b6 4.g3 ♗b7 5.♗g2 ♗b4+ 6.♗d2 ♗e7 7.♘c3 0-
0 8.♕c2 ♘a6 9.a3
A clever, flexible novelty from AlphaZero, neutralising the disruptive
…♘b4 and keeping all castling options open.
9…c5 10.d5 exd5 11.♘g5 ♘c7 12.h4
AlphaZero has played the opening aggressively. This move protects
the knight on g5, anticipating Black’s attack on the knight with …h7-
h6.
12…h6 13.♘xd5
A good way to capture on d5, freeing c3 for White’s dark-squared
bishop to reach the long a1-h8 diagonal.
13…♘cxd5 14.cxd5
Black is unable to capture the knight with 14…hxg5 as 15.hxg5
opens the h-file and allows the queen and rook to combine against
the h7-square. 15…♘xd5 allows mate with 16.♕h7. This common
attacking scheme has one drawback: White cannot castle kingside!
If the rook leaves h1, then White’s threats against h7 disappear and

Black can capture the knight. White’s dilemma is how to increase the
pressure on Black’s position. If Black can neutralise White’s pressure
against h7 in the next few moves, then White may have nothing
better than to retreat the knight, leaving Black in control.
14…d6 15.a4
I was puzzled by this move, especially when I saw White’s next
moves (17.0-0-0!).
Why on earth would White loosen its queenside structure and then
castle on that wing afterwards? Of course, 15.a4 holds back Black’s
queenside pawn advance with 15…b5, but simply 15…a6 renews the
threat of …b6-b5.
15…♕d7
The game continuation felt odd to me as it puts the queen in the line
of a tempo gain with ♗h3. We will examine the further course of the
game in detail below, but first I would like to look at the natural
move 15…a6:
A) 15…a6 seems much more natural, reintroducing the typical idea
of queenside expansion with …b6-b5 which White prevented with
a4: 16.♖a3.

This rook loft was an idea of mine and, bizarrely, not an idea that
any of the engines come up with within any reasonable period of
time. It is exceptionally strong: the inclusion of the rook into White’s
attack, either stopping the king’s escape via the e-file from e3 or
helping to attack Black’s defender of the h7-square – the knight on
f6 –, is deadly for Black. It was of course also AlphaZero’s intended
choice. 16…b5 17.g4 (17.♖f3 ♖e8 18.♗c3 b4 19.♗xf6 ♗xf6
20.♕h7+ ♔f8 21.♕h8+ ♔e7 22.♕xg7 ♗xg7 23.♖xf7#

was my main line, which seems good enough. AlphaZero had a
totally different idea) 17…c4 18.♖f3 (18.♖g3 ♕e8 19.♘e4 ♘xe4
20.♗xe4 was a calmer line of AlphaZero’s which it assessed as a
79.9% expected score. This position is unpleasant for Black: White is
intending to storm the black kingside with g4-g5) 18…♖e8 19.♘xf7
♔xf7 20.g5 ♔g8 21.♕g6 was AlphaZero’s main line, which it
assessed as a massive 88.7% expected score;
B) Another alternative is 15…♖e8, a flexible defensive move,
dealing with the threat of ♗d2-c3xf6 and ♕h7+ by leaving f8 free
for the black king. 16.♖a3 and now:
B1) 16…♗f8 17.♖f3 (threatening 18.♖xf6) 17…g6 (17…hxg5
18.hxg5 ♘e4 19.♖f4
Amazing rook mobility! The rook is going to the h-file via ♖a1-a3-f3-
f4-h4!) would be the ideal solution for Black, blocking the b1-h7
diagonal with a pawn and covering the kingside dark squares (h6)
with the dark-squared bishop. The bishop would then be transferred
to its natural Modern Benoni diagonal on g7. However, Black’s
kingside is too tactically vulnerable for this to work immediately:
18.h5 and my engine sees a disaster in the making;

B2) 16…♗c8 was an engine line, aiming for either …♕d7-f5 or …
♗g4(-h5-g6) to harass White’s pieces before they can point in
combined fashion towards the kingside: 17.♖e3 (intending ♗c3 and
♗xf6, having first cut off the black king’s escape square along the e-
file) 17…♕d7 (the idea of …♗c8, to block the b1-h7 diagonal with
…♕f5; 17…g6 18.♘e6 ♕d7 19.h5 g5 20.♗c3 and ♕f5 to follow)
18.♖f3, now that Black cannot play …♗g4(-h5-g6) in response.
Black is in big trouble.
C) 15…♗c8 16.♖a3 ♗g4 is a possible idea, preventing ♖f3 and
preparing …♕d7 and …♗f5/…♕f5. 17.♗c3 (17.♖e3 ♕d7 18.♗c3
♗f5 19.♖xe7 ♗xc2) 17…♖e8 18.♗xf6 ♗xf6 19.♕h7+ ♔f8
20.♗f3 is my engine’s find, with a great position for White: 20…
♗xf3 21.♖xf3 hxg5 22.hxg5 ♗xg5 23.♕h8+ ♔e7 24.♕xg7 ♔d7
25.♖h7 ♗e7 26.♖xf7 followed by ♕g7-f6-e6+, winning the bishop.
16.♗c3
16.♖a3 also looks very strong here. However, there is nothing
wrong with AlphaZero’s move.
16…♖fe8 17.0-0-0 ♗d8
17…b5 18.♘xf7 ♔xf7 19.♗h3 ♕c7 (19…♕d8 20.♗e6+ ♔f8
21.♕g6) 20.♗e6+ ♔f8 21.♗a5 is the beautiful idea (21.♕g6
♗d8):

If 21…♕xa5 22.♕g6 wins.
18.e4 ♘g4
With 18…b5 19.axb5 ♕xb5 Black achieves the …b6-b5 break, but its
pieces are not well-placed to cause White problems on the
queenside, e.g. 20.f4 followed by e4-e5; or 18…a6 19.f4 b5 20.e5 –
White is so fast!
19.♗h3 hxg5 20.f3 f5 21.fxg4
21…fxg4

A) 21…♖xe4 22.gxf5 ♕xa4 (22…♖xa4 23.f6 g4 24.f7+ ♔f8
25.♖df1 was my engine’s solution; 26.♕h7 is a big threat!) 23.b3
♕a3+ 24.♗b2 ♕b4 25.f6 ♗xf6 26.♗xf6 gxf6 27.hxg5 looked
winning to me, and my engine agrees;
B) 21…fxe4 felt like a better defence to me: the kingside has a
better chance of remaining closed. 22.♗f1. Not only does the bishop
aim for b5, White also introduces the idea of hxg5 and ♕h2,
invading along the h-file (on 22.♔b1 ♗a6 felt annoying). 22…♕xg4
(22…a6 23.♗g2 – going for this line now that Black does not have
the defensive resource …♗a6(covering f1)-d3: 23…♕xg4 24.♗h3
♕xg3 25.hxg5 looks too dangerous for Black to survive) 23.♗e2
♕f5 24.♔b1 g4 (trying to keep the kingside closed) 25.♖hf1 ♕g6
26.♖f4 ♗c8 27.♗b5 ♖f8 28.♖xf8+ ♔xf8 29.♖f1+ ♔g8 30.h5
♕h7 31.♗e8 and the attack just keeps on coming.
22.♗f1
Making wonderful use of the pawn on a4!
22…gxh4 23.♗b5 ♕f7 24.gxh4
In the rest of the game, AlphaZero simply lines up all its major
pieces against Black’s weakened kingside pawn structure. Even
Stockfish doesn’t manage to keep things together.
24…♗f6 25.♖hf1 ♖f8 26.♗xf6 gxf6 27.♖f4 ♕g7 28.♗e2 ♕h6 29.♖df1
g3 30.♕d3 ♔h8 31.♕xg3 ♖ae8 32.♗d3 ♗c8 33.♔b1 ♖f7 34.♕f2 ♗d7
35.h5 ♖ef8 36.♗c2 ♗e8 37.♖f3 ♖e7 38.♖xf6 ♕xf6 39.♕xf6+ ♖xf6
40.♖xf6 ♔g7 41.♖xd6 ♗xh5 42.♔c1 ♖e5 43.a5 bxa5 44.♔d2 ♗e8
45.♖a6 ♖h5 46.♗d3 a4 47.d6 ♗f7 48.d7 ♖h8 49.e5 1-0
HISTORICAL PARALLEL
Tal’s rook lift
It’s nice to compare this game with a famous rook lift by arguably
the world’s greatest ever attacking player: ex-World Champion
Mikhail Tal. Not content with a rook lift on the third rank, Tal
managed this one on the fourth rank!
Mikhail Tal

2615
Robert Hübner
2595
Montreal 1979
1.e4 c6 2.d4 d5 3.♘d2 dxe4 4.♘xe4 ♗f5 5.♘g3 ♗g6 6.h4 h6 7.♘f3
♘d7 8.h5 ♗h7 9.♗d3 ♗xd3 10.♕xd3 ♘gf6 11.♗f4 ♕a5+ 12.♗d2
♕c7 13.0-0-0 e6 14.♘e4 0-0-0 15.g3 ♘xe4 16.♕xe4 ♘f6 17.♕e2
There is no inkling here that Black’s king could be in danger from
the rook on h1, but all it takes is one incautious move…
17…c5 18.dxc5 ♗xc5 19.♖h4

The rook is heading over to c4, pinning the bishop to Black’s
queen and king.
19…♔b8 20.♗f4 ♗d6 21.♖xd6 ♖xd6

Mikhail Tal, the ‘Magician from Riga’, managed a rook lift on the fourth rank in
this game.
22.♘e5
A fantastic exchange sacrifice: Black gets out the way of a pin on
the c-file, and runs into a pin on the h2-b8 diagonal. 23.♘xf7 is
the threat.
22…♔a8 23.♘c4 ♘e8 24.♖g4 ♕e7 25.♘xd6 ♘xd6 26.♖xg7
White has won a pawn and shattered Black’s pawn structure to
boot.
26…♘f5 27.♖g4 ♖d8 28.♗e5 f6 29.♗c3 e5 30.b3 a6 31.♔b2 ♕e6
32.♕c4 ♕e8 33.♖g6 ♖c8 34.♕a4 ♕d8 35.♕e4 ♘d6 36.♕d3 ♕c7
37.♗b4 ♘b5 38.♖xf6 a5 39.♗d6 ♘xd6 40.♖xd6 e4 41.♕d2 1-0

CHAPTER 10
Attacking the king: colour complexes
In this chapter we see AlphaZero taking control of complexes of
squares of the same colour in the centre of the board or around the
opponent’s king. AlphaZero demonstrates how to use these colour
complexes as a channel of attack against the opponent’s king. We
see some fine examples of attacking with opposite-coloured bishops:
many pawns will be sacrificed to open lines for AlphaZero’s pieces!
We also see AlphaZero combining an open file and an open
diagonal against the opponent’s king to set up a long-lasting attack
that is hard to shake. Its assessment of these positions is strongly
positive, whilst other engines are usually less certain. AlphaZero
often finds a way to keep increasing the pressure, exploiting its
opponent’s passive pieces to push the win home.
Matthew throws his hat into the ring, taking on Smallfish on his
iPhone in positions from this chapter, which shows how hard it is to
beat Stockfish, no matter what hardware it’s running on! Finally, we
compare AlphaZero’s techniques with some games by Larsen,
Alekhine and Polgar.

Chapter 10 – Attacking the king: colour complexes – key
points
Theme
Creating a weak complex of same-colour squares
around the opponent’s king.
Purpose
To create a channel of attack that the opponent
cannot block.
What are the prerequisites?
AlphaZero tries to combine the following three
factors: an open file in front of the opponent’s
king, an open diagonal pointing towards the king
and the restricted position of the opponent’s
king.
What are the risks?
Sacrifices are often required to open files and
remove defenders of the colour complex.
Unique implementation by
AlphaZero
AlphaZero executes this plan with astonishing
consistency. Its evaluations are clearly positive
when it gets the chance to implement this
scenario.
Complexity of resulting positions Medium complexity. In many games, AlphaZero
has been attacking with a substantial material
deficit (several pawns). This requires good
nerves and self-belief.
Any tips
Don’t rush! AlphaZero doesn’t attempt to deliver
checkmate immediately but ensures first that all
of its prerequisites are present. The defence
does not hold in the long run.
Who does it remind us of?
Larsen, Alekhine, Polgar.
AlphaZero likes the squares around the opponent’s king to be weakly
defended and achieves this in many different ways. In this chapter,
we see AlphaZero intent on controlling a complex of same-colour
squares around the opponent’s king, even at the cost of substantial
material investment (the exchange or several pawns).
AlphaZero is particularly strong in positions with opposite-coloured
bishops in which its own pieces can move freely along the squares of
one colour, uninhibited by resistance from the opponent. This is true

even in the endgame: AlphaZero has scored some unlikely wins
against Stockfish in endings with opposite-coloured bishops and
major pieces.
We group the games in this chapter into two categories:
1. Section A – Material sacrifice to achieve control of a
colour complex
2. Section B – Control of a colour complex through
positional means

Section A – Material sacrifice to achieve
control of a colour complex
Weaknesses – such as a vulnerable complex of same-colour squares
– arise in a position as a result of pressure. This pressure is most
powerful if it is exerted simultaneously from several directions.
AlphaZero demonstrates its insight in the following game by
combining pressure along the a1-h8 diagonal with pressure along
the g-file, pointing towards the black king (see diagram).
AlphaZero frequently uses material or positional sacrifices to achieve
this goal (for example, sacrificing the g-pawn to open the g-file). At
move 20 in our next game, these goals still seem far away, but
AlphaZero has a wonderful idea of how to achieve them.
Game: ‘Rooks on the rampage’
After a quiet opening, AlphaZero frees the long a1-h8 diagonal for its
dark-squared bishop, opening its sights on the g7-pawn just in front

1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
of the black king. AlphaZero then engineers the opening of the g-file
and adds the power of its major pieces to the attack.
The sequence between moves 28 and 33 is exceptional – AlphaZero
installs its rooks in the heart of Black’s kingside. It then sacrifices
rook for knight and exchanges off the queens to leave Black with
passive rooks. A desperate sacrifice by Black cannot stave off defeat.
Game themes:
Opening a file to support an attack along a diagonal [24.gxf3]
Advanced rook outposts [31.♖g5, 33.♖f6]
A slow-burning attack
Improving the position of the king before the next wave of attack
[41.♔h3, 44.♔h4]
Exchanging off the opponent’s active pieces to leave passive ones
[45.♕d5, 49.♕c6]
Difference in king activity [46.♔xh5]
AlphaZero
Stockfish 8
London 2018
1.♘f3 e6 2.c4 ♘f6 3.♘c3 ♗b4 4.♕c2 0-0 5.a3 ♗xc3 6.♕xc3 d6 7.b4 e5
8.♗b2 ♘bd7 9.e3 ♖e8 10.d3 ♘f8 11.♗e2 a5
Stockfish plays the first novelty. 11…♘g6 12.0-0 ♗d7 13.a4 a5
14.b5 c5 15.♘d2 ♗f5 16.♗f3 was Meribanov-S. Zhigalko, Minsk
2016, with a slight edge for White.
12.0-0 ♗g4 13.h3 ♗h5 14.♕c2 h6 15.♗c3 b6 16.b5 ♘6d7 17.♖ad1 ♘c5
18.♗a1 ♗g6 19.♕b2 ♘a4 20.♕a2 ♘c5
The opening phase has been uneventful with little engagement
between the two sides. With its last two moves, assessing the
position as 0.00 on my computer (and just a slight edge for White
on the machine used to face AlphaZero) Stockfish has offered a
repetition that AlphaZero – with two bishops and the potential for a

central break with d3-d4 – does not agree to. AlphaZero envisages
the long a1-h8 diagonal being opened, which would leave the dark-
squared bishop on a1 unopposed, glaring at the g7-pawn in front of
the black king. An assault along just one diagonal is not enough to
cause Black unsolvable problems, but AlphaZero has an idea!
21.d4 exd4 22.♘xd4
The time Black wasted with the manoeuvre …♘c5-a4-c5 meant that
the advance d3-d4 could come at a moment when Black was unable
to maintain the pawn on e5. That isn’t a disaster, but it feels like a
concession. Stockfish does not agree however: its assessment – 0.00
– is the same now as on move 19 and it sees the extra activity that
White gains for its pieces – the open a1-h8 diagonal, access to the
c6-square for its knight, and to the h1-a8 diagonal for its light-
squared bishop via f3 – as manageable developments. In fact,
Stockfish thinks it has an easy way to neutralise the latter possibility:
exchange the light-squared bishop if it comes to f3 and thus also
neutralise White’s advantage of the bishop pair.
22…♗e4 23.♗f3
23.f3 ♗h7 24.e4, establishing a solid central presence, would be
natural, and would also guarantee White a persistent advantage. It

would however take considerable effort for White to open lines on
the kingside. AlphaZero’s idea has a touch of fantasy about it and
achieves its desired attacking structure in double-quick time.
23…♗xf3 24.gxf3
AlphaZero takes on structural weaknesses (a damaged kingside
pawn structure) to realise its goal of opening the g-file, an extra
channel of attack against the black king. White’s resulting kingside
weaknesses are the sort of thing you warn beginners against, and
often you would be right. However, AlphaZero never exposes its own
king recklessly. The doubled f-pawn prevents Black from starting
central or kingside play (…♘e4 or …♖e8-e4-h4) by taking control of
the e4-square.
Remember from the ‘march of the rook’s pawn’ chapter: before
AlphaZero embarks on a wing attack, it likes to have the centre
either static, or under control. The coming moves are an excellent
illustration of the theme ‘slow-burning attacks’ that we will see in
many games in this book. These AlphaZero attacks progress
inexorably while Stockfish struggles to create anything. Despite that,
Stockfish’s evaluation frequently reaches 0.00 in the next phase.
24…♘fe6 25.♔h2 ♘xd4 26.♖xd4 ♔h7

26…♕e7 27.♖g4 f6 28.♖g6 followed by ♖fg1 gives White a
fearsome attack. Stockfish – and all my other engines – reason that
Black has to play …g7-g6 to hold back White’s play on the g-file.
27.♕c2+ g6
The next sequence shows AlphaZero’s class. It finds a fantastic way
to deploy both its rooks to maximum activity.
28.♖f4 ♕e7 29.♖g1

This already looks fearsome with both white rooks, a bishop and the
queen pointing at the black king. Now see how White tightens the
screw.
29…♖g8 30.h4
Threatening 31.h5. Black’s reply is forced.
30…h5 31.♖g5 ♔h6
Amazingly, my engines still believe in Black’s defensive structure: all
the evaluations, including Stockfish, are 0.00 or close to it.
AlphaZero is at a 70.2% expected score, which indicates a solid
advantage. The next sequence bumps that advantage to 82.6% by
move 41.
32.e4 ♘e6 33.♖f6

The point of White’s play: Black’s knight is one of the few pieces left
that can defend the kingside dark squares from a reasonably active
post. AlphaZero is happy to sacrifice the exchange to rid Black of this
piece.
33…♘xg5 34.hxg5+ ♔h7 35.f4 ♖ae8 36.♕d3 ♖g7 37.f3
Complete domination. Compare this position with the position at
move 24 and see how much White has achieved and how little Black

has been able to do. AlphaZero proceeds to encroach still further
forwards.
37…♔g8 38.♕d4
38…♔f8 39.♗c3 ♖g8 40.a4
Stockfish is still claiming 0.00 on my machine: it still feels it hasn’t
done anything wrong! It’s only when you start to show it some
moves ahead that the evaluation begins to drop very seriously.
40…♖d8 41.♔h3
Vintage AlphaZero, improving the position of its king to the utmost
before launching the next wave of attack. Here the white king is an
integral part of the attack.
41…♖d7 42.f5 gxf5 43.♖xf5 ♕e6
43…♖xg5 44.♕h8+ ♖g8 45.♗g7+.
44.♔h4 ♖e7 45.♕d5

A move typical of AlphaZero: the queen is Black’s most active piece,
so AlphaZero attempts to exchange it to leave Black with only
passive pieces.
45…♖g6 46.♔xh5 ♖e8 47.♗f6
Black is helpless as White deploys its pieces to the maximum.
47…♕d7 48.♔g4 ♖c8 49.♕c6
AlphaZero insists on the queen exchange and prevents any
counterplay with …c7-c6.
49…♕e8 50.♕xe8+ ♔xe8 51.♖d5 ♖xf6
51…♔d7 52.♔f5 c6 53.♖d2 cxb5 54.cxb5 ♖c5+ 55.e5 is no better
for Black.
52.gxf6 ♔d7 53.♔f5 c6 54.bxc6+ ♔xc6 55.f4 ♖h8 56.e5 1-0
Game: ‘The matrix’
AlphaZero achieves a grip on the position from the opening but is
not immediately able to make progress. On move 38, AlphaZero
initiates a sequence of pawn sacrifices to first open diagonals against
the black king and then also a file. In the opposite-coloured bishop
major piece middlegame, AlphaZero sacrifices a total of four pawns
to open channels of attack towards the opposing king. By move 82

1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
Black is three pawns ahead but completely tied up. AlphaZero has
control of a matrix of dark squares and the end arrives quickly.
Game themes:
Sacrificing material to open diagonals [38.f5, 45.e6]
Advanced queen outpost [50.h6]
Sacrificing material to open lines against the opponent’s king
[56.♔a2]
Weakness of the h7-pawn, created by advancing a rook’s pawn to
h6 [variation to Black’s 60th move: 60…♕c6]
Exchanging off the opponent’s active pieces to leave passive ones
[61…♖xb1]
Improving the position of the king before the next wave of attack
[75.♔a3]
AlphaZero
Stockfish 8
London 2018
1.d4 e6 2.e4 d5 3.♘c3 ♘f6 4.e5 ♘fd7 5.f4 c5 6.♘f3 ♘c6 7.♗e3 ♗e7
8.a3 b6 9.♗b5 ♕c7 10.h4
9.♗b5 is rarely played (9.♗d3 is most common) and 10.h4 leads us
into new pastures.
10…♗b7 11.♕e2 a6 12.♗xc6 ♗xc6 13.0-0-0 c4 14.♘g5 ♘f8 15.♕h5
♗d8 16.♖hf1 g6 17.♕h6 f5 18.exf6 ♗xf6 19.♘f3 0-0-0 20.♖de1 ♔b7
21.♗d2 ♕e7 22.h5 ♖e8 23.♖e2 ♕f7 24.♖fe1 ♘d7 25.♖h1 ♘b8
26.♖ee1 ♕g8 27.♘e2 ♘d7 28.♘e5 ♗g7 29.♕g5 ♗f6 30.♕g4 ♗d8
31.♕h3 ♘xe5 32.dxe5 ♗e7 33.♗c3 g5 34.g3 g4 35.♕h2 ♗c5 36.♖hf1
♕f7 37.♘d4 ♖hf8

1.
2.
We start from this position. AlphaZero has a pleasant game: its
space advantage, grip on d4 and central dark-square control keep
Black’s dynamic plus – the bishop pair – under wraps.
AlphaZero takes the committal decision to transform this stable
advantage into an opposite-coloured bishops middlegame a pawn
down. In return for the pawn, AlphaZero gains the following
advantages:
The activity of Black’s pieces is reduced as AlphaZero forces Black
to give up the bishop pair.
AlphaZero gains a channel of attack towards the black king – the
g1-a7 diagonal – which Black cannot oppose with any minor piece
(as AlphaZero has induced Stockfish to exchange its dark-squared
bishop for White’s knight).
In other words, AlphaZero grabs the chance to reduce the activity of
Black’s pieces and get a clear path towards the black king. That’s
worth a pawn for AlphaZero!
38.f5 ♗xd4 39.♗xd4 exf5

AlphaZero has secured a path of attack along the a7-g1 diagonal
against the black king. However, this single path is not enough for a
decisive attack. White will need to open more lines of attack. Ideally,
that would be a file – for example the b-file – from which the white
rooks can combine with White’s queen and bishop to get at the black
king.
It isn’t easy, but White’s advantage is that Black has few positive
actions to take because its pieces are so passive. Black’s bishop on
c6 is hampered all over the board by its own pawns, while Black’s
queen and rooks are balked by the dark-square barrier formed by
the bishop on d4 and pawn on e5. White has all the time in the
world to prepare the attack.
40.♕g1
Targeting the only pawn still on a dark square.
40…b5
40…♕c7 41.e6 would immediately increase AlphaZero’s activity so
Black is compelled to accept additional dark-square weaknesses on
the queenside.
41.♗c5 ♖g8 42.♕d4 ♕e6 43.♗b4 ♗d7 44.♗d2
After creating additional weaknesses with a bishop and queen
battery against b6, AlphaZero swaps around its bishop and queen

and prepares to invade with the queen on a7. This is dangerous, but
not decisive even if we give White an extra move:
44… – Black passes! 45.♗e3 ♕c6 46.♕a7+ ♔c8.
There is no clear way for White to increase the pressure and Black is
threatening to drive White’s queen away with …♕b7, ♕c5+ …♕c6.
You can only get so far with diagonals: you also need files to really
make the opponent suffer.
44…♕c6 45.e6

1.
2.
I like this move very much. It opens another diagonal towards the
black king – the f4-b8 diagonal – and more importantly, it opens the
e-file. AlphaZero turns the e-file into the entry channel it needs for
its rooks. Stockfish tries to barricade the door with the e6-bishop,
reinforcing it with support from its queen and rooks. With this
second pawn sacrifice, AlphaZero ties down Black’s pieces still
further.
45…♗xe6 46.♗e3 ♖a8 47.♗f2 a5
Advancing the pawn loosens Black’s queenside a little, but it has two
advantages:
Black frees the a6-square for its rook. From a6, the rook covers
the white queen’s invasion squares on a7 and b6 and protects the
bishop on e6.
Black takes back some control of a few queenside dark squares
and introduces some threats (…b5-b4 and …c4-c3).
48.♖e2
AlphaZero doubles rooks on the open e-file to tie Black’s pieces to
the defence of the e6-bishop.
48…♖a6 49.♖fe1 ♖e8 50.h6
A characteristic AlphaZero move, taking the opportunity of a pause
in the play to gain space and to create an invasion outpost for the
white queen on g7.
50…♕d7
A fascinating position.

1.
a.
b.
c.
2.
3.
Black is two pawns up but has a number of serious problems:
Passive pieces:
the queen’s rook is tied to a6 to prevent White’s queen from
entering on b6 or a7.
the bishop is glued to e6 to block White’s rooks from invading
along the e-file.
two of Black’s major pieces are tied to the defence of the bishop
on e6.
Vulnerable king: Black’s pawn structure is a mass of holes, which
means that the black king has no safe place anywhere on the
board. The black king will have to rely on pieces to defend it, as
the pawns have already left home.
White entry points: by pushing the h-pawn to h6, White has given
itself an advanced entry point for its queen with ♕g7 (White
might even consider a manoeuvre like ♖e1-h1-h5-g5-g7).
Together with the doubled rooks on the e-file attacking the e6-
bishop, ♕g7 causes Black some anxiety.
And yet, for all that, Black is by no means lost. White has no easy
way to open the position further. A move like b2-b3 is possible, but
White must be careful of its own king’s safety.

A typical idea for White would be to move its king over to the
kingside – for example to g1 – to be able to make pawn moves
freely on the queenside, but it takes some organisation and, of
course, the kingside – with the exposed pawn on h6 – is also not
completely safe. For now Stockfish has sufficient resources to defend
its extended territory. The engines give the position a value of 0.00 –
absolutely equal – though you may wonder whether such an
assessment encompasses the difficulty of defending such a position.
AlphaZero starts to manoeuvre, trying out various invasion points
with its queen to see how Black reacts.
51.♕g7 ♖e7 52.♕f6 b4
Not a bad move, forcing White to pay attention to possible
counterattacks against its own king. However, the tension on the
queenside gives White fresh hope of opening lines in that area.
White’s manoeuvring has induced Black to take action on the
queenside.
53.♕d4 ♕d6 54.♔b1
A very interesting moment. What happens after 54…bxa3, you may
ask? Doesn’t Black just win a pawn? If you don’t mind, we’ll leave

this question until later in the game as an almost identical situation
arises….
54…♕c7 55.♗e3
Hinting at ♗g5, when the black rook on e7 will have to either give
up the seventh rank (when ♕g7, attacking the h-pawn, becomes
strong for White) or loosen its defence of the e6-bishop by moving
to f7.
55…bxa3
A crucial moment. Stockfish takes the risky decision to open the
queenside, eyeing a concrete continuation against White’s most
obvious reply.
We examined the 0.00 evaluation and the effect on Stockfish’s play
in this position in the chapter ‘ZeroZeroZero’. For now, back to the
game: Stockfish thinks it has spotted something clever!
56.♔a2
A fabulous idea! AlphaZero isn’t remotely interested in pawns: it
wants to open lines, and it does not want to give Black the exchange
of queens.
Stockfish had planned to meet the obvious 56.bxa3 with 56…f4
(56…c3 57.♔a1 ♕c4, activating the queen, is another key idea.

White cannot leave the black queen on c4, while the exchange of
queens removes the biggest source of danger for Black’s king)
57.gxf4 (57.♗xf4 ♕b6+ swaps queens) 57…♗f7. White no longer
has ♗f4 in reply to …♗f7 so Black can release the pin on the e-file.
Suddenly Black’s pieces become active too and the idea of …c4-c3 is
still in the air.
AlphaZero has a much better idea however…
56…♔a8
Moving off the soon-to-be-opened b-file, the black king retreats into
a cage: it soon won’t have any moves whilst the rook on a6 will be
rooted to its spot to defend against the mate threat on a7. The
activity of Black’s pieces has not increased as a result of 55…bxa3.
A) 56…axb2 57.c3.
This beautiful idea prevents Black’s counterplay with …c4-c3 and
prepares ♖xb2, bringing the rook to the b-file. The resulting attack
with a rook assisting on the open b-file is unstoppable! 57…♔a8
58.♖xb2 ♖e8 59.♗f4 ♕d7 60.♕e5 ♔a7 61.♔a1 followed by
♖eb1 is an attack that convinces even my engines;
B) 56…f4 57.♗xf4 ♕b6 is the other tactical idea, to try to relieve
the tension by returning some material in return for exchanging

queens. However, the tactics don’t always have to work for
Stockfish: 58.♖xe6 ♕xd4 (if 58…♖xe6 59.♕g7+ ♔a8 60.♖xe6
♕xe6 61.♕h8+ ♔b7 62.♕xh7+ ♔c6 63.♕c7+ ♔b5 64.h7 wins. So
useful having that h-pawn already so advanced) 59.♖xe7+ ♔c8
(59…♔c6 60.♖1e6+ ♔b5 61.♖b7+ ♔c5 62.♖xa6 wins: the rook
on b7 cunningly defends against the mate on b2) 60.♖e8+ ♔d7
61.♖1e7+ ♔c6 62.♖c7+ ♔b5 63.♖b7+ ♔c6 (63…♖b6 64.♖xb6+
♔xb6 (64…♕xb6 65.♖b8) 65.♗e3 is the cute idea) 64.♖ee7
(threatening 65.♖ec7 mate) 64…♔c5 65.♗e3;
C) 56…c3 also looks tempting, trying to achieve …♕c4+, swapping
off queens. However, 57.b3 is worrying for Black. White will follow
up with ♗g5 and ♖e3, winning the c3-pawn. Black’s 55…bxa3 has
only ended up weakening its queenside while White’s king is still
safe. 57…a4 58.♖b1 is again scary for Black. If 58…axb3+
59.♖xb3+ ♔a8 60.♗f4 wins as ♖b8+ is in the air.
57.♖b1 ♕c8 58.c3
Another key move, preparing to capture on a3 without allowing
counterplay with …c4-c3. The last three moves 56.♔a2, 57.♖b1 and
58.c3 are exceptional: White is doing its utmost to open the b-file
towards the black king whilst snuffing out any hope Black has of

exchanging queens. The next challenge is to stop Black from using
the outpost on b3 to block the b-file.
58…♖b7 59.bxa3 ♖b3
60.a4
60.♖xb3 cxb3+ 61.♔xb3 ♕c4+ would allow the exchange of
queens, so AlphaZero has to work out another way of keeping its
initiative going. If Black is forced to exchange the rook on b3, then
its remaining rook is passive, tied to a6 to cover the mate threat on
a7. AlphaZero starts with the risky-looking 60.a4 to stop Black from
cementing its rook on b3 with …a5-a4.
60…♗d7
A dangerous move, looking to get in …♕c6 with maximum effect,
but perhaps too ambitious.
60…♕c6 directly feels like the best defence to me. AlphaZero
provided the following line, which matches my own analysis (for a
short while!): 61.♖xb3 cxb3+ 62.♔a3 (if 62.♔xb3 ♖b6+ is
AlphaZero’s ingenious defence, exploiting a tactical opportunity to
activate the rook on a6) is very dangerous for Black, but I didn’t find
a win.

One of the threats is ♖e2-b2xb3:
A) 62…♕c4 63.♕h8+ ♕c8 64.♕xh7 ♕xc3 65.♕g7 ♕b4+ 66.♔b2
♕xa4 67.♕f8+ ♔b7 68.♕e7+ ♗d7 (68…♔c8 69.h7 ♕a2+ 70.♔c1
♖c6+ 71.♗c5 ♕a1+ 72.♔d2 ♕b2+ 73.♔e3 wins for White)
69.♕a3 was my main line, and AlphaZero’s too. White forces the
exchange of queens after which its h-pawn is a monster! AlphaZero
gives itself a 73.8% expected score at the end of this line;
B) 62…♗d7 was my favourite defensive attempt but didn’t figure in
AlphaZero’s most examined moves. We asked AlphaZero to analyse it
all the same: 63.♗f4 (63.♖b2 ♖b6 is Black’s clever trick, activating
the rook on the b-file: 64.♕xb6 ♕xa4#) still looks fraught for Black:
the rook is coming to e7. 63…♖a7 is the engine attempt at working
defensive miracles: Black attempts to activate the rook without
leaving the rook hanging on b6: this should give Black a better
chance of launching counterplay with …♕xa4:
B1) 64.♕h8+ was the dangerous idea I was keen on, but Black
seems to hold: 64…♔b7 65.♕b8+ ♔a6 66.♕b5+ ♕xb5 67.axb5+
♔xb5 (67…♗xb5 68.♖e6+ ♔b7 69.♗e3 ♖a6 70.♖e7+ wins the
h-pawn and leaves Black in disarray) 68.♖e7 was the idea, aiming
just as in the other variation to win the h7-pawn while Black has lost

coordination. 68…♖b7 69.♖xh7 ♔c6 70.♗c1 (the bishop will not
find it easy to assist the advance of the h-pawn from here. If
70.♔b2 a4 and suddenly the threat of 71…a3+ leaves White in
danger) 70…f4 71.gxf4 ♗f5 neutralises the threat of the h-pawn and
leads to a draw;
B2) 64.♖d2 AlphaZero’s main line of analysis now continues 64…b2
65.♖xb2 ♖b7 66.♗e3 ♕d6+ 67.♔a2 ♕c7 68.♕xd5 ♗c6 69.♕d3
♖xb2+ 70.♔xb2 ♔b7 71.♕xf5 ♗xa4 72.♕xg4 ♗e8 73.♕e4+ ♗c6
74.♕d4 ♗e8 with a 58.9% expected score according to AlphaZero.
After all those sacrifices, White has emerged a pawn up, but Black
should be able to hold for a draw;
C) 62…f4 is AlphaZero’s main line, which I had not considered:
63.gxf4 ♕c4 64.♕h8+ ♕c8 65.♕g7 ♕c6 66.f5
Another pawn sacrifice for an open file! 66…♗xf5 67.♖f2 b2
68.♖xf5 b1♕

69.♖f8+ ♕b8 70.♖xb8+ ♔xb8 71.♗f4+ ♔c8 72.♕h8+ ♔d7
73.♕xh7+ ♔e8 74.♕h8+ ♔e7 75.♕e5+ ♔f7 76.♕g7+ ♔e8
77.♗e3 is the end of AlphaZero’s analysis, with a 61.3% expected
score. Anyway, back to the game where Stockfish played the risky
60…♗d7.
61.♖d2
Another excellent move with a great tactical point! 61.♕xd5+ ♕c6
would lead to the exchange of queens.
61…♖xb1
Again all the engines are in agreement, but it feels like a big
concession. With White’s major pieces lined up on the d-file, the
exchange of queens on c4 was quite risky for Black but it feels even
more risky to give White the b-file!
A) 61…♗xa4 62.♕xd5+ ♗c6 (62…♕b7 63.♕g8+ ♕b8 64.♕xc4;
62…♕c6 63.♕g8+ ♔b7 64.♕xh7+) 63.♕xc4 ♖xb1 64.♖d8 wins –
the point of 61.♖d2!;
B) 61…♕c6 62.♖xb3 cxb3+ 63.♔xb3 ♕c4+ 64.♕xc4 dxc4+
65.♔a3 is awkward for Black: it isn’t easy to stop White’s rook from
getting at the h-pawn.
62.♔xb1 ♗xa4

At the cost of an additional pawn, White has exchanged off Black’s
active rook.
63.♖a2
Another clever move and a big decision for Stockfish: does it block
the b-file with 63…♗b3, or does it retreat the bishop and give White
free rein over the b-file?
63.♕xd5+ ♕b7+.
63…♕e8
63…♗b3 feels right, but it doesn’t solve Black’s problems:
64.♕xd5+ ♕b7 65.♕d8+ ♕b8 66.♖d2 ♗a4+ 67.♔c1 ♕xd8 (Black
must exchange queens) 68.♖xd8+ ♔b7 69.♖h8. The passed h-
pawn will be very difficult to stop. Stockfish takes a different
decision, relying on its fantastic tactics to keep White at bay from its
draughty king’s position.
64.♕xd5+ ♗c6 65.♕c5
From this point onwards, AlphaZero’s evaluation rises rapidly
(undaunted by the subsequent loss of the h6-pawn), starting at
60.9%. moving to 67.1% after 66.♔a1, 76.4% after 75.♔a3 and
85.8% after 82.♖f6. By a show of activity with its queen, Stockfish
keeps the white pieces far away for now (67.♗g1, 68.♖h2) but

once White has secured the king with 75.♔a3, there is little hope for
Black. With the black bishop and rook paralysed by White’s queen
and bishop battery on the g1-a7 diagonal, it is only a matter of time
before White finds a decisive entry point for its rook on one of the
four files open to it: b, d, e and f (via d6-f6). Black’s defences are
overloaded by the cumulative effect of the lines that AlphaZero has
opened, and the disparity in the relative activity of White’s and
Black’s forces. No amount of pawns (well, almost) can make up for
that in AlphaZero’s world!
65…♕e4+ 66.♔a1 ♕h1+ 67.♗g1 ♕xh6 68.♖h2 ♕e6 69.♗e3 ♕d7
70.♖d2 ♕e8 71.♖d6 ♔b7 72.♔b2 ♕b8 73.♔a2 ♕c8 74.♖d2
The engine evaluations now start to show a big plus for White (until
71…♔b7, Stockfish was evaluating the position as 0.00) as they spot
the idea of ♔a3, which avoids any perpetual check counterattacks
by Black.
With the white king permanently safe, Black can only wait for the
moment of execution.
74…♕e8 75.♔a3 ♔a8 76.♗g5 ♕e1 77.♔a2 ♕e4 78.♗e3 ♕e8 79.♖d6
♔b7 80.♔a3 ♕h8 81.♗d4 ♕e8 82.♖f6 f4
Desperation. The position is already lost.

If Black passed, White would finish off by invading on the eighth
rank: [82…--] 83.♖f8
A) 83…♕d7 84.♖g8 (threatening ♖g7) and now:
A1) If 84…♕c7 85.♗e5 wins;
A2) 84…♕e6 85.♖g7+ ♗d7 86.♕b5+ ♔c7 87.♗e5+ (87.♖xd7+
♕xd7 88.♕xa6 ♕d6+ would not be a clever way to proceed as
Black gets chances on the kingside) 87…♔d8 88.♕b8+ ♗c8
89.♕c7+ ♔e8 90.♖xh7 wins cleanly.
B) 83… ♕e6 84.♗e5 (threatening 85.♖b8 mate) 84…♖a8
85.♖xa8 ♔xa8 86.♕xa5+ ♔b7 87.♕c7+ ♔a6 88.♗d4 ♗b7
89.♔b4 forces mate with 90.♕a5+.
83.gxf4 ♕d7 84.♖d6 ♕c7 85.f5 ♗d7 86.♕xc7+ ♔xc7 87.♖xa6 ♗xf5
88.♖f6 ♗c2 89.♔b2 1-0
A remarkable opposite-coloured bishops middlegame from
AlphaZero.
55…bxa3, opening the queenside, was the key moment of the game.
I was intrigued how White would have continued if Black had waited
with a move like 55…♖e8 or 55…♕d7.
It wasn’t easy to analyse this position. With the engines regularly
assessing lines as 0.00 and suggesting draws by repetition as their
main lines, it was difficult to use the engines to predict what
AlphaZero might have played.
I decided to supplement my analysis by turning my daily 15-minute
game against Smallfish (the Stockfish 9 engine ported to the iPhone)
into a training exercise and doing my very best AlphaZero
impression! This is not meant to give a definitive analysis of the
position – I am fully aware that Stockfish 9 is not at full strength on
the iPhone! – but at least to give an idea of the possibilities available
to both sides. I forced Smallfish to play 55…♖e8 and then began to
work my magic!
Matthew Sadler
Smallfish 9

1.
2.
a.
b.
London 2018
After some tries, I was attracted to two ideas:
It was difficult to open the queenside by force, but I had some
success with the idea of a3-a4 followed by installing my queen on
b5 (mirroring the unusual idea of a queen outpost on g7 on the
kingside supported by the pawn on h6). From b5 the queen
exerts unpleasant pressure on the rook on e8 (which affects the
stability of Black’s blockade of the e-file) and the queen turns out
to be very difficult to shift!
I liked the idea of transferring my king to the kingside, where it
would be safe if White manages to break open the queenside,
and well-placed to invade through the kingside dark squares to
Black’s h7-pawn if the queens get exchanged.
Here’s one of my games to give you a flavour of the position. At the
very least I think we can learn two things from this:
The position remains tricky for Black, even if it resists any
temptation and tries to stay still.
Beating Stockfish is not for humans!
1.♔a1

I grew to like this flexible move. As White I was never keen on
playing axb4 as the open a-file seemed more dangerous for my king
than for Black’s. I anticipate …bxa3 from Black (as the b1-square is
already free for my rook to occupy the b-file) whilst also making my
king safer if I ever force open the queenside with b2-b3.
1…c3 2.b3
Following AlphaZero’s lead: I don’t want to give Black the chance to
swap queens with …♕c4.
2…♕d7 3.a4

My next goal is to uncover the rook battery on the e-file and then
move my queen to b5. It took me quite a while to decide where my
bishop should go. In the end, I chose d4, blockading the d-pawn and
preventing Black from attacking the queen on b5 with its rook.
3…♕c6 4.♗f2 ♖e7 5.♖e5 ♖e8 6.♖1e2 ♔b8 7.♕f4 ♕c7 8.♗d4 ♔c8
White is in control as Black can undertake nothing, so I first explored
my other queen outpost on the kingside.
9.♕g5 ♔b7 10.♕g7 ♖e7 11.♕f8 ♕d7 12.♔b1
Once the queen arrives on b5, Black will gain the possibility of
exchanging off the queens, so my king must be ready to invade
through the kingside and attack Black’s h7-pawn. 12.♔b1 brings my
king to the centre behind the ‘umbrella’ of my bishop and rooks.
12…♖e8 13.♕c5 ♕c6 14.♕b5+

14…♔c7 15.♔c1 ♔c8 16.♔d1 ♔d7 17.♔e1
If Black waits any longer, then I will move my king into g5 via f2-e3-
f4.
Black decides to resolve the situation on the queenside.
17…♕xb5 18.axb5 ♖aa8 19.b6 ♖ac8 20.♔f2 ♖b8 21.♔e3 ♗f7 22.♔f4
♖xe5 23.♖xe5

This is the ideal situation for White: Black’s pieces are passive and
White’s king is moving towards the weakness on h7. The only thing
White must watch out for is related to White’s deficit in pawns: Black
can give a few back to create a passed pawn. I thought this was
winning for White, but Stockfish is an astonishing defender, even on
my mobile phone!
23…♔c6 24.♖xf5 ♗g6 25.♖f6+ ♔b7 26.♖xg6 hxg6 27.♔g5

As we saw in the ‘Activity’ chapter, sacrificing to break through a
Stockfish fortress is an AlphaZero technique so I was proud and
confident to do the same. However…
27…a4 28.bxa4 ♖e8 29.h7 b3 30.cxb3 c2 31.♗b2 d4 32.a5 ♔a6 33.b4
♔b5
I spent all my time here looking for a way to win, but found nothing
better than a draw:
34.b7 ♔a6 35.♔xg6 d3 36.♗c1 ♔xb7 37.b5 ♖d8 38.♗d2 ♔c7 39.♔f5
♔b7 40.♔e4 ♖h8 41.♔xd3 ♖xh7 42.♔xc2 ♖h5 43.b6 ♖f5
And the game was drawn some moves later.
HISTORICAL PARALLEL
Bent Larsen’s rook’s pawns
This game would sit equally well in the chapter ‘The march of the
rook’s pawn’: no other top-class player was so associated with the
use of the rook’s pawn as an aggressive weapon than the Danish
grandmaster Bent Larsen (1935-2010). I found his remarks about
his own use of rook’s pawns and flank attacks in his Best Games
collection to be very perceptive: ‘Polugaevsky has written that I
like to push the rook pawns. Gligoric has stated that there are
more flank attacks in my games than in those of other

contemporary masters. There is probably some truth in this. One
amusing characteristic that my flank attacks have is that they do
not always lead to simplifications. If the attack is rebuffed, there
will usually be chances to initiate another course of action in a
different sector.’
Perhaps the best demonstration of Larsen’s aggressive style and
his use of the h-pawn is his famous game against the Hungarian
grandmaster Lajos Portisch, which featured a fantastic AlphaZero-
style assault on his opponent’s dark squares.
Bent Larsen
Lajos Portisch
Amsterdam Interzonal 1964 (15)
1.e4 e6 2.d4 d5 3.♘c3 ♗b4 4.exd5 exd5 5.♕f3
A creative opening wrinkle from Bent Larsen, who loved to set his
opponents unusual problems as early as possible.
On his fourth move, Larsen resolved the central tension, which
makes it likely that play will be mainly on the wings.

5…♘c6 6.♗b5 ♘ge7 7.♗f4 0-0 8.0-0-0 ♘a5 9.♘ge2 c6 10.♗d3 b5
11.h4
The push we have grown to know and love! Larsen – just like
AlphaZero – uses the rook’s pawn as the first wave of his attack to
soften the black kingside and create the first dark-square
weaknesses. Black’s dark-squared bishop – out on a limb on b4 –
is not assisting the defence of Black’s kingside in any way.
11…♘c4 12.h5 f6 13.g4 ♕a5 14.♗xc4 dxc4 15.a3 ♗xc3 16.♘xc3 ♕d8
17.♖he1 a5 18.♕g3 ♖a7 19.h6

19…g6 20.♗d6
Building pressure on Black’s central dark squares to add to the
weaknesses created by the push h2-h4-h5-h6.
20…♖e8 21.♕f4 ♔f7 22.♗e5 f5 23.♗b8 ♖b7 24.♕e5 ♖g8 25.g5
Total dark-square domination!

The rook’s pawn was a dangerous weapon in the hands of Danish super
grandmaster Bent Larsen.
25…b4 26.♕f6+ ♔e8 27.♕xc6+ ♔f7 28.♕f6+ ♔e8 29.d5 ♖f8
30.♕c6+ ♕d7 31.♗d6 ♖f7 32.♗xe7 bxc3 33.♗b4+ 1-0
A fantastic game!
Perhaps the ultimate example of sacrificing material to combine
rooks on open lines and queen and bishops on open diagonals
against the opposing king is the following majestic attack by
AlphaZero.
Game: ‘Exactly how to attack’
Both authors enjoy listening to Costa Rican GM Alejandro Ramirez’s
excellent DVD on the Réti. In it he shows ‘exactly’ how to play the
positions. Ramirez’s use of the word ‘exactly’ is strangely reassuring
– it is nice to know exactly how to play. Here AlphaZero conducts a
model kingside attack and shows us exactly how to play it.
AlphaZero clears lines on the kingside from the opening, forcing
Black to take first White’s g-pawn and then the h-pawn. Just as in
the previous games, having opened one channel of attack (this time

1.
2.
3.
the files) against the black king, AlphaZero focuses its efforts on
opening a second channel: the diagonals. To do so, AlphaZero
advances then sacrifices its d- and e-pawns.
The position on move 43 is an astonishing picture: all of White’s
pieces are focused against Black’s king’s position with AlphaZero
bringing another unit – the f-pawn – into play to finally break Black’s
resistance down.
Game themes:
Sacrificing material to open lines against the opponent’s king
[10.b5, 16.♖g4]
Sacrificing material to open diagonals [28.♖he1, 30.d5]
Improving the position of the king before the next wave of attack
[23.♔a1]
AlphaZero
Stockfish 8
London 2018
1.♘f3 ♘f6 2.c4 e6 3.♘c3 ♗b4 4.♕c2 0-0 5.a3 ♗xc3 6.♕xc3 a5 7.b4 d6
8.e3
The first new move of the game. 8.♗b2 and 8.g3 have been tried
until now.
8…♘e4 9.♕c2 ♘g5 10.b5

White denies Black the chance to exchange rooks with 10…axb4 and
11…♖xa1 and instead offers Black a pawn to open the g-file against
the black king on g8.
10…♘xf3+ 11.gxf3 ♕f6 12.d4
A noteworthy move: I would have expected 12.♗b2 ♕xf3 13.♖g1
to immediately put some pressure on the black kingside. AlphaZero
is not too bothered to act quickly: it clearly believes in its long-term
compensation for the pawn.

12…♕xf3 13.♖g1 ♘d7 14.♗e2 ♕f6 15.♗b2 ♕h4 16.♖g4
Another remarkable move: AlphaZero offers another pawn to open
the h-file against the black king. Note however that there is certainly
no mate in sight! AlphaZero assesses the position after 16.♖g4 as
54.4%, no better than its evaluation after the first move. Stockfish
on my machine is quite bullish at -0.68 and the other engines have
similar values.
16…♕xh2 17.♖g3 f5 18.0-0-0

AlphaZero offers a third pawn, though this one is a little poisoned.
18…♖f7
18…♕xf2 19.♖dg1 ♖f7 20.♖1g2 ♕e1+ 21.♗d1 puts the black
queen in a very tight spot:
A) 21…f4 22.exf4 ♘f6 23.♖g1 ♕e4 24.♕d2 followed by ♗c2 and
d4-d5 will be killing;
B) 21…♕h1 22.♖h2 ♕e4 (22…♕f1 23.♖gh3 (threatens both
24.♖h1, trapping the queen, and 24.♖xh7) 23.♕e2 f4 24.♖gh3
fxe3 25.♗c2 ♕f4 26.♗xh7+ ♔f8 27.♗d3 again looks very powerful
for White. Black’s king is open and its development is poor, which
should give White more than enough compensation for just one
pawn (e3 will soon fall).
19.♗f3 ♕h4 20.♖h1 ♕f6
AlphaZero’s play in the next few moves is explained if you think of
AlphaZero’s course of action in the previous games. In those games,
the opening of a diagonal came first, and then AlphaZero put all its
efforts into opening a file for its rooks to point at the black king.
Here, two(!) files – the g- and h-files – have already been opened by
pawn sacrifices, so AlphaZero now concentrates on opening
diagonals. Where you might expect it to transfer the queen over to

the kingside and hammer away with its major pieces at Black’s g6-
and h7-pawns, AlphaZero regroups its pieces and prepares for a
massive advance – in fact, a wholesale sacrifice – of its central
pawns to open diagonals towards Black’s king. Once that happens,
AlphaZero will have its ideal attacking structure and carnage should
ensue!
In the next few moves, AlphaZero puts its king on a1 (we have seen
how aware AlphaZero is of safe king positions), out of the range of
any random checks when the centre gets opened, and supports the
advance of the c-, d- and e-pawns.
21.♔b1 g6 22.♖gg1
Such an unexpected move: the rook seemed to be ideally placed on
g3, allowing White to double rooks on either the g- or the h-file.
Instead AlphaZero redeploys the rook so that it can support the
queenside break c4-c5 ! I would not have considered this move.
22…a4 23.♔a1 ♖g7 24.e4
24…f4 25.c5

25…♕e7 26.♖c1
After preparation, White is launching its central pawns forward at
breakneck speed. White’s major pieces on the c-file also give White
the possibility of opening the c-file with cxd6 and invading there.
AlphaZero is once again playing over the whole board.
26…♘f6 27.e5 dxe5 28.♖he1
A great move once again! 28.dxe5 would close the a1-h8 diagonal,
which just isn’t AlphaZero’s style: it would rather sacrifice another

pawn to force the diagonal open.
You will not be surprised after seeing the previous games that
AlphaZero is not scared of allowing Black to achieve opposite-
coloured bishops with 28…e4 29.♗xe4 ♘xe4 30.♕xe4: just look at
the difference in activity of White’s and Black’s bishops when White
plays d4-d5 on the next move!
28…e4
A crucial moment in the game, and I don’t like this move: it feels as
if Black underestimates the power of the subsequent sacrifice d4-d5,
opening the a1-h8 diagonal for the dark-squared bishop. Two
alternative defences do a better job of trying to block the h1-a8
diagonal:
A) 28…♘d5 is the most obvious defence, to meet 29.♖xe5 with
29…c6 when the d4-pawn is safely under lock and key. 29.c6 was
my best attempt, preventing 29…c6 and aiming to attack the
blockade on d5 starting with ♖xe5. 29…e4 was the unanimous
choice of my engines after many hours of analysis (29…bxc6
30.♕xc6 was my main line: 30…♖a7 31.♖xe5 ♗b7 32.♕c5 ♖a5 (if
32…♖a8 33.♗xd5 ♗xd5 34.♖xd5 wins) 33.♗g4 looked awkward
for Black. My engines give it +2 for White). 30.♖xe4 bxc6 31.♖e5

♖b8 32.bxc6 ♕d6 33.♕xa4 White has excellent compensation for
the pawn: two bishops, restricted black pieces and central control;
B) 28…c6 was my favourite line, and was also the choice of
Smallfish when I played some training games from this position.
Black gives back material to neutralise White’s bishop pair and to
orchestrate counterplay against the white king along the b-file.
29.bxc6 (29.d5 exd5 30.♖xe5 ♕f7 is similar to the game, but
White’s light-squared bishop is less potent on f3 than on d3. This
should give Black a little more time to defend) 29…bxc6 30.♗xc6
♗b7 31.♗xb7 ♕xb7 32.d5 exd5 (not a human move, but the
engines’ favourite. 32…♘xd5 and now a move I missed in my
practice games: 33.♕e4, preparing to recapture on e5 with the
queen. White has excellent chances). Now either 33.c6 or 33.♖xe5
look very dangerous for Black.
29.♗xe4 ♕f8 30.d5

Another pawn sacrifice! This one opens the unopposed a1-h8
diagonal for White’s dark-squared bishop and also opens the e-file
for White’s rook. Note that – strangely – White’s rooks have
gravitated from the kingside (where you would expect them to be)
to the queenside and centre. However, the result is that White has
opened the centre and activated its bishops. Black’s light-squared
bishop does now gain access to the c8-h3 diagonal, so White must
ensure that this bishop is kept under wraps. We examined
AlphaZero’s thought processes leading up to this sacrifice in the
chapter ‘How AlphaZero thinks’.
30…exd5 31.♗d3
Still aiming towards the black king and preventing 31…♗f5.
31…♗g4 32.f3

32…♗d7
32…♗xf3 33.♖f1 ♗e4 34.♖xf4 ♖f7 35.♖cf1 is horrific for Black.
33.♕c3 ♘h5 34.♖e5
AlphaZero is at 80.3%, which indicates strong winning chances. The
engines now start to show an advantage for White.
34…c6 35.♖ce1 ♘f6 36.♕d4
You won’t see much better centralisation than this!

This is a lovely creeping move from White, attacking the pawn on f4
and making sure that Black’s pawn structure – which hampers the
scope of Black’s minor pieces – stays fixed where it is.
36…cxb5
36…♖e8 is an obvious move, but White then completes the
suffocation of Black’s pieces with 37.♖xe8 ♘xe8 38.b6.
Find a move for Black! 38…♕f7 39.♗a6. Worth a diagram!

39…bxa6 40.b7 queens and 39…♗c8 40.♖xe8+ mates.
37.♗b1
A new weakness (d5) appears and the light-squared bishop is re-
routed to a2 to attack it.
37…♗c6 38.♖e6
Black’s position is crumbling: its pieces can’t hold their outposts.
38…♖f7

Black hopes to give back a piece to break the attack and survive
thanks to its four extra pawns. But White keeps the attack going for
a while.
If 38…♘h5 39.♗a2 ♖d8 40.♖1e5, aiming for ♖d6 and ♗xd5.
Black will not be able to keep its king out of harm’s way.
39.♖g1 ♕g7 40.♕xf4 ♖e8 41.♖d6 ♘d7 42.♕c1 ♖f6 43.f4
You would have thought that White would have run out of pawns by
now! AlphaZero brings another unit into the attack. Look how single-
mindedly AlphaZero has focused everything against Black’s kingside,
and see how crucial the g-file has become again.
43…♕e7 44.♖xf6 ♘xf6 45.f5 ♕e3
Stockfish manages to break the attack, but at the cost of too much
material. White is winning.
46.fxg6 ♕xc1 47.gxh7+ ♔f7 48.♖xc1 ♘xh7 49.♗xh7 ♖e3 50.♖d1 ♔e8
51.♔a2 ♗d7 52.♗d4 ♖h3 53.♗c2 ♗e6 54.♖e1 ♔d7 55.♔b2 ♖f3
56.♖e5 ♖g3 57.♖e3 ♖g2 58.♔c3 ♖g4 59.♖f3 ♔e8 60.♖f2 ♖g3+
61.♔b4 ♖g4 62.♖d2 ♗d7 63.♔a5 ♖f4 64.♗e5 ♖f3 65.♖d3 ♖f2 66.♗d1
♗c6 67.♔b6 1-0
Let’s see another example of Alpha-Zero’s approach. Once it has
opened line(s) against the opposing king, it will then do its utmost to
open a diagonal as a second channel of attack. I am constantly
surprised at how powerful this technique is: Stockfish is rendered
helpless while AlphaZero methodically tightens the screw.
Game: ‘When a plan comes together’
An early sacrifice of the g-pawn is followed not by a direct assault,
but by a period of play in which AlphaZero first stifles the opponent’s
minor pieces and then lures Black’s central pawn barrier (the
d6/e5/f6 structure) to e4 and f5. This gives AlphaZero its desired
attacking structure: open file, open diagonal and a queen, bishop
and rooks to attack with. Stockfish is again reduced to complete
passivity.

1.
2.
3.
4.
Game themes:
Sacrificing material to open lines against the opponent’s king
[12.♘d2]
Opening a diagonal to support an attack along a file [15.d5,
19.♗c2, 23.♖d4]
Improving the position of the king before the next wave of attack
[40.♔a3, 89.♔g3]
A slow-burning attack [move 24-40]
AlphaZero
Stockfish 8
London 2018
1.♘f3 e6 2.c4 ♘f6 3.♘c3 ♗b4 4.♕c2 0-0 5.a3 ♗xc3 6.♕xc3 a5 7.d4 b6
8.♗g5 d6 9.e3 ♗b7 10.♗d3
The first new move of the game (10.♗e2 was played previously).
10…h6 11.♗h4 ♘bd7 12.♘d2
This idea of sacrificing the g2-pawn is a recurrent theme in many
variations of this opening. I have analysed many such positions with
my engines. To a human eye, taking the pawn is exceptionally risky;
however, the engines are unanimously sceptical, giving Black a

slightly favourable assessment. The interesting thing about this
game is AlphaZero’s approach, which differs considerably to that
suggested by my engines. The goal is to shut in Black’s pieces
behind White’s pawns, and to force Black to open the a1-h8
diagonal. There is no immediate attempt to mate Black: the goal is
to achieve the AlphaZero attacking structure we know well: open file
against the king; open diagonal converging against the king’s
position; queen, bishop and rooks in support.
12…♗xg2 13.♖g1 ♗b7 14.♗c2
A clever regrouping, giving White the option both of ♗a4 (exerting
pressure against the knight on f6 by attacking the supporting knight
on d7) and ♕d3, targeting h7. Leaving the queen on c3 allows
White to exert pressure on the black kingside along the a1-h8
diagonal.
14…♕e8 15.d5
Threatening 15.♗xf6, winning a piece.
15…e5

When I saw this move, I pulled a face to myself: Black’s bishop on
b7 is passive behind White’s central pawns on d5 and c4. My first
instinct was to avoid removing Black’s strongest source of pressure
on the white position and attempt to maintain active possibilities.
However, analysis with my engine convinced me that Black has no
choice:
15…♔h8 is strongly met by 16.♘e4 ♘h5 (16…e5 17.♘xf6 ♘xf6
18.♗xf6 gxf6 19.♕d3 e4 20.♕xe4 ♕xe4 21.♗xe4 is a simple route
to a pleasant endgame for White) 17.♖xg7 (a great move spotted
by my engine after quite some time) 17…♘xg7 18.♘f6 ♕e7 (18…
♕d8 19.♘h5 f6 20.♕d3 ♘f5 21.dxe6) 19.♕d4 (threatening
20.♕f4) 19…♘f5 (19…e5 20.♕e4) 20.♗xf5 exf5 21.♘xd7+ is
clearly better for White.
16.0-0-0 ♔h8
16…b5 is the move I want to play, hitting at White’s central
foundations to distract White from a measured kingside build-up.
This move was played by Stockfish in 8 games of the series of
games prepared for the Science magazine publication. AlphaZero
scored 6 out of 8 and the following is a typical example of the play:
17.♕b3 b4 18.♕d3 (forcing the advance of the b-pawn removed
pressure from the white centre, which frees AlphaZero free to start

turning the screws on the kingside) 18…g6 19.f4 ♔h7 20.♖df1 ♘c5
21.♕e2 bxa3 22.bxa3 ♘fd7 23.f5 e4 24.♖f4 ♕e5 25.♘xe4 ♕a1+
26.♔d2 ♕xg1 27.♘xc5 ♘xc5 28.♖f1, trapping the queen!
AlphaZero won in 56 moves.
17.♗a4
Threatening 18.♗xf6 and preventing any future counterplay
attempts with …b6-b5 or …c7-c6.
17…♘h7 18.f4
Putting pressure on the e5-pawn.
18…f6 19.♗c2
Now falling back to the weakened b1-h7 diagonal: White’s aim is to
force Black to block this diagonal with …e5-e4 and …f6-f5, which
would then open the a1-h8 diagonal.
19…♘c5 20.♘b3 ♘xb3+ 21.♕xb3

AlphaZero has exchanged off the active knight on c5, leaving Black
with awful minor pieces: a bishop on b7 hampered by the white
pawns on c4 and d5 and a knight on h7 with no moves. White’s
threat is to play 22.♗g6 and then 23.♕d3, so Black is forced to
close the centre.
21…e4 22.♖g2 ♖g8 23.♖d4 f5
First goal complete. White will now redeploy its pieces so that the
dark-squared bishop and queen can line up on the a1-h8 diagonal

and the white rooks are doubled on the g-file. White is also not
averse to exchanging off its light-squared bishop for the black knight
to leave itself with another thematic opposite-coloured bishops
middlegame.
24.♖d1 ♕h5 25.♗e1 ♕h3 26.♖dd2 ♘f6 27.♗d1
AlphaZero is in no hurry: it deals first of all with Stockfish’s activity,
understanding that the structure it has envisaged will be strong
whether it arrives in 5 or 50 moves! Stockfish ends up again at a
0.00 evaluation or thereabouts in different variations. AlphaZero is at
64.2%, which indicates that it is not looking to force a draw just yet!
27…♖af8 28.♖df2 ♘h5 29.♔b1 ♗c8 30.♗xh5 ♕xh5 31.♗c3

Mission accomplished. White’s task in the next few moves is to
tighten the screw and prevent Black from creating any counterplay,
either on the kingside (with a possible …g7-g5 break) or on the
queenside (with a possible …b6-b5 or …c7-c6 break). Once
AlphaZero has established that control, it can redeploy its pieces and
focus completely on the g7-square.
31…♔h7 32.h4

Typically, AlphaZero will use its rook’s pawns in the next few moves
to tighten the screw. This prevents any possibility of …g7-g5 from
Black. Taking the h-pawn is always too dangerous: 32…♕xh4
33.♕d1 ♖f7 34.♕g1 ♗d7 35.♖g3 ♕e7 36.♖g6 with ♖h2 and
♗xg7 to follow! Easy!
32…♗d7 33.♖g1 ♔h8 34.a4
It would have been better for Black to play 33…a4 on the previous
move to keep open the possibility of future counterplay with …b6-
b5. Now Black has no counterplay whatsoever and must simply wait
while White points its cannons towards the g7-pawn.
After 34.a4, AlphaZero’s evaluation jumps to 76.7%.
34…♔h7 35.♖fg2 ♖f7 36.♔a2 ♕f3 37.♗d4 ♗e8 38.♕c2 ♕h5 39.♖h2
♖d7 40.♔a3

An interesting moment. Black’s next move is condemned by all the
engines so I was intrigued to know whether Black could stay still and
survive. I therefore took on the Black side against one of my
engines… and got destroyed. Once again AlphaZero’s attacking
structure – open file against the king, open diagonal against the
king, opposite-coloured bishops, queen, rooks and bishop on the
board – proves to be exceptionally strong.
40…♕f7
A) 40…♖e7 41.b3 ♖d7 42.♕c1 ♖e7 43.♖g3 ♖d7 44.♖hg2 ♖e7
45.♕g1 g6 46.♖g5 ♕f3 47.♖f2 ♕h3 48.♖g3 was winning for
White: 48…♕xh4 49.♖h2 wins the queen with mate following soon
after;
B) 40…♖f7 41.b3 ♗d7 42.♖hg2 ♕xh4 (a brave, but foolish
attempt!) 43.♖h2 ♕e7

44.♗xg7 (a gorgeous combination!) 44…♖gxg7 45.♖xh6+ ♔g8
46.♕h2 with forced mate!;
C) 40…♕f3 41.h5 ♗xh5 42.♖gh1 g6 43.♖h3 ♕g4 44.♕h2 ♖e8
45.♖e1 and 46.♖g3 will win the black queen!
41.h5 ♕f8 42.♕d1 g5 43.hxg6+ ♖xg6 44.♖g5 ♖f7 45.b3 ♖e7 46.♕h1
♖d7 47.♗c3
If Black stays passive, White will further increase the pressure on
Black’s position with ♖h4, ♕h3 and then ♖hh5 if necessary, putting

unbearable pressure on the f5-pawn. Stockfish weakens itself to
create some play but it’s to no avail.
47…c6 48.♖xg6 ♗xg6 49.dxc6 ♖c7 50.♔b2 ♖xc6 51.♕d1 ♗e8 52.♖g2
♗g6 53.♕d5 ♕c8 54.♔a2 h5 55.♗b2 ♔h6 56.♖g1 ♔h7 57.♔b1 ♕e8
58.♖g2 ♕c8 59.♔a1 ♕e8 60.♔a2 ♔h6 61.♗c3 ♔h7 62.♖g5 ♕c8
63.♔b1 ♔h6 64.♔b2 ♕e8 65.♔a2 ♕c8 66.♔b1 ♔h7 67.♗b2 ♔h6
68.♖g1 ♔h7 69.♗c3 ♕e8 70.♖g3 ♕c8 71.♕d4 ♕f8 72.♖g2 ♔h6
73.♕d5 ♕e8 74.♔c2 ♔h7 75.♗b2 ♕c8 76.♖g5 ♔h6 77.♔b1 ♔h7
78.♗a1 ♔h6 79.♖g3 ♕e8 80.♗c3 ♕c8 81.♔b2 ♕e8 82.♖g5 ♕c8
83.♔c1 ♕e8 84.♗b2 ♕c8 85.♔d2 ♕e8 86.♔e2 ♔h7 87.♔f2 ♔h6
88.♕d4 ♕f8 89.♔g3
A typical sequence in computer play has taken place where the
superior side has tried many possibilities without undertaking direct
action. Now however, White’s king is coming to h4 and White will
pressure the d6-pawn with ♗a3 and ♕d5.
89…♖c5
89…♔h7 90.♔h3 ♔h6 91.♔h4 ♔h7
92.b4 (the astonishing winning idea!) 92…axb4 93.a5 ♖c8 (if 93…
bxa5 94.♕a7+ ♔h6 95.♕d7 ♖c5 96.♕e6 wins) 94.♕xb6 ♖xc4
95.a6 ♖c2 96.a7 ♖xb2 97.♕b7+ wins. A fantastic illustration of
what is possible when an opponent is tied down completely!

90.♗a3 ♖c6 91.♕d5
Now the d6-pawn cannot be held.
91…♕c8 92.♗xd6 ♔h7 93.♗e5 ♖e6 94.♔h3 ♕c6 95.♖g1 ♕xd5 96.cxd5
♖e8 97.♖c1 ♗f7 98.♖c7 ♔g6 99.♖d7 ♗g8 100.♖d6+ ♔f7 101.♖xb6
♖d8 102.d6 ♔e6 103.♖b5 ♖a8 104.♖b7 ♔d5 105.♔h4 ♖d8 106.♔xh5
♗e6 107.♖a7 ♗d7 108.♗f6 ♖f8 109.♖xd7 1-0
HISTORICAL PARALLEL
Judit Polgar’s unstoppable attacks
Perhaps it isn’t surprising that when looking for parallels to
AlphaZero’s fantastic attacking play in human chess, the strongest
resemblance we should find is in Judit Polgar’s games. The former
World Top-10 player and the world’s strongest ever female player
was a wonderful attacker – one of the best ever – whose Best
Games collection is replete with attacking gems.
I like Judit’s win against Nigel Short (one of the strongest English
players of all time and Garry Kasparov’s challenger for the 1993
World Championship) as it mirrors the attacking approach that we
see so often in AlphaZero’s games.
Judit Polgar
2670
Nigel Short
2660
Dortmund 1997 (3)
1.e4 c5 2.♘f3 e6 3.d4 cxd4 4.♘xd4 ♕b6 5.♘b3 a6 6.♘c3 d6 7.♗f4
♘f6 8.♕d2 ♗e7 9.0-0-0 0-0 10.g4

Judit was highly dangerous on the White side of the Sicilian (as I
found out to my cost!) and here she uses a technique which we
have often seen in AlphaZero’s games: a pawn is offered to open a
file in front of the opponent’s king.
10…♘xg4 11.♖g1
The rook occupies the newly-opened file. If AlphaZero were
playing White, we would expect it to ensure that one of its bishops
was pointing towards the black king. Just look at how Judit plays
the attack!
11…♘e5 12.♕e2 ♕c7 13.♗e3 b5 14.f4 ♘c4 15.♗d4

Just like AlphaZero, Judit has followed up the opening of a file in
front of the opponent’s king with the transfer of a bishop to an
attacking diagonal pointing at the same point. Having achieved
this, and with a constricted black king unable to make a single
move, Judit starts cranking up the pressure against the black
kingside.
15…g6 16.♕h5 ♘d7 17.♕h6 ♗f6 18.♖d3

Another rook joins the party. This one is headed to the h-file to
attack h7!
18…♗xd4 19.♘xd4 ♖e8 20.♖h3 ♘f8 21.e5
21.f5 was even stronger, but the text is thematic, preparing
AlphaZero-style to bring a knight into the attacking mix via e4-f6.
21…d5 22.♗d3
22.♘f5 was again a quicker way to win: the engine gives the
attractive line 22…f6 23.♗xc4 bxc4 24.♘d6 ♖d8 25.f5, which is
very aesthetically pleasing! However, Judit’s move is again a
perfect illustration of the techniques we have seen in AlphaZero’s
games: since the dark-squared bishop has been exchanged, Judit
points the light-squared bishop at the kingside instead!
22…♘xe5 23.fxe5 ♕xe5
A good defensive attempt by Short, sacrificing a piece to break up
White’s attacking pawn structure. However, Black is under great
pressure and Judit – just as AlphaZero does – starts a long knight
manoeuvre to the kingside.
24.♕h4 ♗b7 25.♖f3 ♖ac8 26.♘ce2
Here it comes!
26…♖c7 27.♖f6

This move reminded me of Alpha-Zero’s game ‘Risky rooks’. The
rook occupies an unusually advanced position on which you feel it
should be vulnerable to attack, but simply cannot be chased away!
27…♖ee7 28.♔d2 ♖ed7 29.a3 ♔g7 30.♘f4 ♖c8 31.♖g5 ♕c7
32.♘fxe6+
Amazing coordination: every piece of White’s is involved in the
attack!
32…♘xe6 33.♖xe6 ♕a5+ 34.b4 ♕xa3 35.♘f5+ ♔g8 36.♘e7+ ♖xe7
37.♖xe7 ♕c3+ 38.♔e2 d4 39.♕f4 1-0
One of the things that surprised me was the amount of success that
AlphaZero enjoyed in opposite-coloured bishop endings with rooks,
but without queens. This was especially striking in positions where
AlphaZero had sacrificed material and then played full out for the
win despite being a pawn or two down in an ending!
Game: ‘Reasoning the AlphaZero way’
Fresh out of book, AlphaZero sacrifices a central pawn for activity
and the chance to worry the still uncastled black king. After some
complex skirmishes, AlphaZero initiates a series of exchanges which
lead it to a rook and opposite-coloured bishops ending a pawn

1.
2.
3.
down. As compensation AlphaZero has its advantages: a dangerous
open file, an open diagonal pointing towards the opponent’s king,
and a restricted black king. These dynamic advantages not only
compensate for the pawn, they condemn Black to complete
passivity. The ending is then easy to round off.
Game themes:
Sacrificing material to open lines against the opponent’s king
[9.c3]
Opening a diagonal to support an attack along a file [18.♗f4,
19.♗g3, 27.♕xe5]
Difference in king activity [23…♔a8]
AlphaZero
Stockfish 8
London 2017
1.e4 c6 2.d4 d5 3.e5 ♗f5 4.♗e3 e6 5.♘d2 ♘d7 6.♘gf3 ♘e7 7.♗e2 ♕c7
8.0-0 f6 9.c3 fxe5 10.♘xe5 ♘xe5 11.dxe5 ♕xe5 12.♖e1 ♕c7 13.♗h5+
♘g6 14.g4 ♗d3 15.♘b3 ♗c4 16.♘d4 e5 17.b3 ♗a6 18.♗f4 0-0-0
19.♗g3 ♖e8 20.a4 ♔b8 21.b4 ♗d6 22.♘f5 ♗c4 23.♕d2 ♔a8 24.♕g5
♖e6
The opening has been very interesting. Magnus Carlsen sacrificed a
pawn, opening lines against the black king, with 9.c4 against Bareev
in 2009, but AlphaZero’s own take on this – 9.c3 – is a novelty.

Playing through the game quickly, I felt that AlphaZero had missed a
trick as the game now seemed to be degenerating into exchanges
and an equal opposite-coloured bishops ending.
25.♘xd6 ♖xd6 26.♗xg6 ♖xg6 27.♕xe5 ♕xe5 28.♖xe5 ♖xg4 29.f3
♖g6 30.a5
A confusing position! When I first saw it, the subsequent moves and
the result, I was somewhat perplexed.

1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
White’s position doesn’t look that amazing: Black is a pawn up,
Black’s pawn structure is better than White’s, Black’s bishop looks
active on c4 while the white bishop on g3 is pinned to its king. How
bad can this be?
However, let’s try and evaluate the AlphaZero way. White has control
of the open e-file and this file can be used to attack the black king:
after ♖ae1, White threatens ♖e8+ and mate. White’s bishop on g3
is pointing towards the black king on the h2-b8 diagonal. In fact, this
bishop keeps the black king pinned to a8.
And that leads us to the last important factor: the black king is very
restricted. White’s last move – 30.a5 – was important, preventing
Black from giving its king room with 30…b6. 30…a6 does not help
Black’s king as on a7 the king will be vulnerable to a bishop check on
f2 (or b8 if White has control of the eighth rank).
The more you look at it, the more you realise that these ‘AlphaZero
factors’ are incredibly important, possibly decisive. AlphaZero is very
positive about its position, assessing it at 76.9% after 30.a5.
AlphaZero’s plan is simple:
AlphaZero will double rooks on the e-file, threatening back-rank
mate.
The threat to mate on the eighth rank will keep Black’s rooks tied
down.
White will play a rook to the seventh rank (ready to double if
given the chance) and fix Black’s kingside pawn structure on light
squares.
White will advance the king to attack the kingside pawns, and
advance its kingside pawns as far as possible.
White will sacrifice an exchange to create a passed pawn on the
kingside which Black’s rook will be powerless to stop. Black’s king,
pinned to the corner by White’s dark-squared bishop, will be
unable to help.

This describes what happened in the game, and it also describes the
course of two games I played against my engines with white.
Against accurate play, Black seems powerless to defend.
30…♖f6
30…d4 31.♖ae1 is unpleasant for Black (31.cxd4 ♖e6 would relieve
the pressure) 31…♖d6 (31…b6 32.axb6 axb6 33.♖a1+ ♔b7
34.♖e7+ ♔c8 35.♖a8#) 32.♖c5.
31.♖ae1 ♖ff8 32.♔f2 g6 33.♖e7 h5 34.♗e5 ♖hg8 35.♗g7 ♖c8 36.♗d4
This is an excellent square for the bishop, where it prevents …c6-c5
or …b7-b6.
36…♗b5 37.♔g3 ♗d3 38.♔h4 ♗f5 39.♔g5

39…♖cd8 40.♗g7 ♖c8 41.♖1e2 ♖cd8 42.h4
42…♖c8
42…a6 prevents White’s next but cannot delay the inevitable:
43.♖f7 ♖ge8 44.♖xe8 ♖xe8 45.f4 ♔b8 46.♗e5+ ♔a8 47.♖g7
with 48.♖xg6 to follow.
43.a6 bxa6 44.♗d4 ♔b8 45.♗xa7+ ♔a8 46.♗c5 ♔b8 47.♖a2 ♗d3
48.♖d2 ♗b1 49.♖d1 ♗c2 50.♗a7+ ♔a8 51.♖de1 ♗d3 52.♗b6 ♔b8
53.♗d4 ♗f5 54.f4 ♖cd8 55.♖a1 ♗d3 56.♖e3 ♗b5 57.♖ae1 ♔c7
58.♔h6 ♔c8 59.♖e6 ♗a4 60.♗c5 ♔b7 61.♖xg6

The game is over.
61…♖xg6+ 62.♔xg6 d4 63.♗xd4 ♗c2+ 64.♔xh5 c5 65.♗xc5 ♔c8
66.♖e5 ♖h8+ 67.♔g4 ♗d1+ 68.♔g3 ♖h7 69.♗d4 ♔d7 70.f5 ♖g7+
71.♔f2 1-0

1.
2.
3.
 
Section B – Control of a colour complex
through positional means
Amazing though it may seem, AlphaZero doesn’t always sacrifice
material to achieve its goals.
Game: ‘Exchanging all the dark-square defenders’
A remarkable game, in which AlphaZero formulates a plan of taking
control of dark squares in Stockfish’s territory at an early stage and
executes the plan on every area of the board.
Game themes:
Using a rook’s pawn to weaken the opponent’s king’s position
Exchanging off defenders of a colour complex [17.♗f4, 19.♕e3,
21.♕g5, 33.♘xd7+
Weakness of the h7-pawn, created by advancing a rook’s pawn to
h6
AlphaZero
Stockfish 8
London 2018
1.d4 ♘f6 2.c4 e6 3.♘f3 b6 4.g3 ♗b7 5.♗g2 ♗e7 6.♘c3 ♘e4 7.♗d2 d5
8.cxd5 exd5

As we saw in ‘The march of the rook’s pawn’, AlphaZero likes fixing
the opponent’s centre at an early stage, and this is usually an
indication that it is aiming for play on the wings.
9.♕a4+ ♕d7 10.♕b3
10.♕c2 has been White’s usual choice of retreat and after Black’s
next move we have left established theory.
10…♘xc3 11.♕xc3 ♘a6 12.a3

The start of a plan that will take control of dark squares all over the
board. This move removes access to b4 from the black knight on a6
and bishop on e7 and prepares the restraining advance b2-b4.
12…0-0 13.b4 ♖ac8
13…c5 14.bxc5 bxc5 15.♖b1 should give White a pleasant edge.
The black knight is poorly placed on a6, and to activate it, Black will
need to play …cxd4 to free c5. This gives White the advantage of
playing against an isolated pawn on d5. It isn’t very much, but it’s a
pull. Stockfish prefers to prepare the advance, aiming to transfer the
black knight to e6 (via c7) or even d6 (via c7-b5) before breaking.
14.♖b1 c6 15.h4
The rook’s pawn marches again! The h-pawn is heading to h6 to
weaken Black’s control of the kingside dark squares, but there is also
an extra point to the idea in this position.
15…♗d6 16.♗h3

There we are!
By delaying castling, AlphaZero has given itself the possibility of this
attack along the h3-c8 diagonal as the bishop is still defended by the
rook on h1. This move forces …f7-f5 from Black, which weakens
Black’s control of both the e5 and g5 dark squares.
16…f5 17.♗f4
White continues its dark-squared strategy by playing to exchange off
Black’s best defenders of dark squares. First of all: Black’s dark-

squared bishop.
17…♗xf4 18.gxf4
The doubled f-pawns give White an unshakeable grip on the central
dark squares and also open the g-file towards the black king.
18…♕e6 19.♕e3
Now White seeks to exchange off Black’s queen, which is also a
good defender of the weak dark squares.
19…♕h6

The exchange 19…♕xe3 20.fxe3 leads to a Y-pawn structure I have
never seen before! Despite this White’s chances are fairly good: the
white rooks can be lined up either on the c-file (targeting c6) or
along the g-file (targeting f5 and g7, perhaps together with a push
of the h-pawn) whilst breaks such as b4-b5 or e3-e4 are always in
the air.
20.♕e7 ♖c7 21.♕g5
Black has refused the exchange of queens so AlphaZero persists!
21…♕e6 22.h5

Stockfish has not fallen in with AlphaZero’s offer to exchange
queens, but now AlphaZero is able to complete its desired push of
the h-pawn to h6.
22…c5 23.bxc5 bxc5 24.h6 g6
AlphaZero’s dark-square strategy is a success and this strategy has
delivered clearly superior pieces. The white knight has a fantastic
outpost on e5, which compares well to Black’s lonely knight on a6.
The white bishop will be redeployed to g2 and attack the pawn on

d5, while Black’s own bishop on b7 has no scope whatsoever: almost
all of the black pawns are on the same colour as Black’s bishop.
After Black’s freeing attempt 22…c5, the white rook is well-placed on
b1, attacking the bishop on b7 and challenging for the only open file
on the board.
In the next few moves, AlphaZero redeploys its pieces to exploit the
open b-file, the weakness on d5 and the weakened black kingside
dark squares.
25.♗g2 c4 26.♘e5 ♗a8 27.0-0
Very late castling!
27…♘b8 28.♖b5

Another theme we see throughout this book: placing the rook on an
advanced (‘risky’) outpost. Here White’s rook combines with the
bishop on g2 against the weak pawn on d5.
28…♖fc8 29.♕g3 ♘d7 30.♕e3
Having forced h5-h6 and the resulting dark-square weaknesses on
Black’s kingside, there was no obvious continuation of the white
queen’s activity on g5 (even though it stands threateningly).

AlphaZero spies a possible invasion through Black’s central dark
squares.
30…♔f8 31.♖c1
A typical AlphaZero strengthening move: the rook on c1 prevents the
uninterrupted march of the c-pawn while White also eyes the
possibility of activating this rook along the e-file in a similar way to
White’s queen: ♖c1-c3-e3.
31…♕e8 32.a4
Solidifying the rook on b5 and taking the chance to gain space on
the queenside.
32…♕e6 33.♘xd7+
Exchanging off another defender of the dark squares. It’s a shame to
exchange off such a good knight, but it gives White’s queen the
opportunity to crawl over Black’s central and kingside dark squares
from a central position.
33…♕xd7 34.♕e5 ♖e8 35.♕h8+
See the enormous mobility that White has inside the black position.
35…♔e7 36.♕g7+ ♔d8 37.♕f6+ ♕e7 38.♕a6 ♗c6 39.♖c5 ♗a8 40.♖b1
♖xc5 41.dxc5 ♕c7 42.♕f6+ ♔c8

Stockfish’s ability to absorb pressure and survive a direct attack is
quite extraordinary! However, once again Stockfish has ended up in
a position with passive pieces in which it must wait while AlphaZero
methodically cranks up its activity a few notches more.
43.e3 ♗b7 44.♕d4 ♖d8 45.a5 ♗c6
45…♕xa5 46.♖a1.
46.♕f6 ♕d7 47.♖b4 ♖e8 48.a6
The rook’s pawn again! Establishing a new outpost for White on b7,
to match the one it already has on g7!
48…♖d8 49.♔h2 ♖e8 50.♗f3 ♕c7 51.♕b2 ♖f8 52.♔g1 ♖e8 53.♕f6
♕d7 54.♔g2 ♖e7 55.♔f1 ♖e8 56.♗g2 ♖d8 57.♔g1 ♖e8 58.♔h2 ♕c7
59.♗f3 c3

Stockfish grabs the chance for some activity, but AlphaZero is up to
the challenge. We examined the course of action if Black were to try
and stand still with 59…♖d8 in the ‘Activity’ chapter.
60.♗d1 d4 61.♖xd4 ♗e4 62.♗b3 ♕e7 63.♕xe7 ♖xe7 64.♖c4 ♖e6
65.♖xc3 ♖xa6 66.♖c1
The key factor in this position is the weak h7-pawn, caused by
AlphaZero’s trademark advance of the rook’s pawn to h6. White can
attack it either with the bishop on g8, the rook on h8 or the king on

g7, invading via g3-h4-g5-f6. Black can’t defend against all these
threats.
66…♖c6 67.♔g3 a5 68.f3 ♗d3 69.♔h4 ♖c7 70.♔g5 ♖a7 71.♗a4 ♗e2
72.e4 fxe4 73.fxe4 ♖b7 74.e5 ♖b4 75.♗e8 ♗d3 76.♗f7 1-0

CHAPTER 11
Attacking the king: sacrifices for time, space
and damage
This chapter introduces three main types of AlphaZero sacrifices:
A – Sacrifices for time
AlphaZero gives up material on one wing – or does not defend it – to
accelerate its attack against the king on the other wing.
B – Sacrifices for space
AlphaZero gives up material to open lines or diagonals for use
against the opposing king.
C – Sacrifices for damage
AlphaZero gives up material to damage or destroy the king’s pawn
cover.

Chapter 11 – Attacking the king: sacrifices for time, space
and damage – key points
Theme
Sacrifices to gain time for the attack, sacrifices to
create room for pieces to attack, sacrifices to
damage the opponent’s king’s structure as a
prelude to an attack.
Purpose
Increase attacking chances in return for a
material investment.
What are the prerequisites?
The sacrifice must be directed at bringing pieces
into play against the opponent’s king. In
particular, major pieces such as rooks must be
ready to quickly occupy open files created by
such sacrifices. 
What are the risks?
Sacrifices of structure or material (or both) are
inherently risky: they increase the chance of
defeat if things go wrong.
Unique implementation by
AlphaZero
AlphaZero is willing to sacrifice lustily whenever
the opponent’s king is in the potential firing line.
Complexity of resulting positions Medium complexity. It can be hard to understand
which positions offer long-term compensation
and which positions are just bad!
Any tips
Again: don’t rush! AlphaZero doesn’t attempt to
deliver checkmate immediately but ensures that
all of its pieces are joining in the attack,
sometimes even taking three or four moves to
play a knight close to the opponent’s king.
Who does it remind us of?
Blackburne, Shirov.
In ‘Colour complexes’, we saw AlphaZero creating and exploiting a
weak colour complex in the opponent’s position. Pawn and exchange
sacrifices were common in both the creation and exploitation
phases. Sacrifices – in particular, sacrifices directed at the
opponent’s king’s position – occur frequently in AlphaZero’s games.
In this chapter we take a broader look at AlphaZero sacrifices. We
have divided them into three categories. We will first briefly explain

each category before diving into some games.
Section A – Sacrifices for time
AlphaZero gives up material on one wing – or does not defend it – to
accelerate its attack against the king on the other wing.
Section B – Sacrifices for space
AlphaZero gives up material to open lines or diagonals for use
against the opposing king.
Section C – Sacrifices for damage
AlphaZero gives up material to damage or destroy the king’s pawn
cover.
As you might expect, there are some spectacular games in this
section!

1.
2.
3.
 
Section A – Sacrifices for time
Game: ‘The not-so-Quiet Game’
This was one of the first games of AlphaZero’s that made me realise
that I was heading for a special experience. In a Giuoco Piano
(literally, ‘Quiet Game’) AlphaZero gives away its kingside structure
and then sacrifices two pawns on the queenside to gain time to
transfer its knight to the kingside. AlphaZero develops an enormous
initiative which Stockfish somehow manages to survive at the cost of
the exchange. Stockfish is always on the back foot and eventually
succumbs in a long endgame.
Game themes:
Sacrificing structure to open lines against the opponent’s king
[11…gxh6]
Sacrificing material to gain time for an attack against the
opponent’s king [13…♘e7]
Long knight manoeuvre [13…♘e7, 16…♘g6, 17…♘f4]
Stockfish 8
AlphaZero
London 2018
1.e4 e5 2.♘f3 ♘c6 3.♗c4 ♗c5 4.d3 a6
A very unusual move order: 4…♘f6 or 4…d6 are always played.
Only a handful of games have been played with 5.♘g5 (none by
strong players) and after Stockfish’s seventh move, we have left
established theory already.
5.♘g5 ♘h6 6.0-0 d6 7.a4 ♗g4 8.♘f3 0-0 9.h3 ♗h5 10.c3 ♔h8

So far the opening has truly felt like an engine game with some
strange move orders and mysterious decisions. Now however,
AlphaZero starts to get motoring. With 10…♔h8, AlphaZero is
looking to get kingside play moving with …f7-f5. Stockfish takes
some precautions.
11.♗xh6 gxh6
The g-file is opened in front of the white king, which makes
AlphaZero happy. Note that its dark-squared bishop is pointing

towards the white king along the a7-g1 diagonal, although this
control is not uncontested: White may be able to play d3-d4 at a
later stage to block this channel of attack.
12.♘bd2 ♗a7 13.♗d5
White anticipates Black’s counterplay with 13…f5 by bringing the
bishop to d5, shoring up the kingside (see the next note).
13…♘e7

Stockfish had anticipated a line like this: 13…f5 14.exf5 ♘e7
15.♗xb7 ♖b8 16.♗e4 d5 17.b4 dxe4 18.dxe4, which – with three
pawns for the piece – it assesses as a very slight edge for White.
This is not a clear conclusion for me by any means – I really like
Black’s two bishops – but obviously Black will find it much harder to
generate an attack against the white king with so many pawn
weaknesses and the wall of white pawns on e4 and f5. AlphaZero’s
approach is different and typical: it understands that the white
bishop would contribute much less to the defence of the white king
if it were away on the queenside (for example a6). The fact that this
decrease in its opponent’s activity would cost AlphaZero a pawn is
never too much of a worry!
14.♗xb7 ♖b8 15.♗xa6 f5
Another great move. 15…♖xb2, regaining one of the sacrificed
pawns, features heavily in the engines’ top lines, either now or on
the next move. This was not AlphaZero’s plan. Time has been gained
for the move 13…♘e7 (to manoeuvre the knight close to the white
king via g6-f4) and the kingside break 15…f5. The b2-pawn is of
limited importance for now.
16.♔h1 ♘g6 17.exf5 ♘f4

Rather than regain some of its sacrificed material on b2, AlphaZero
has sacrificed another pawn (temporarily) on f5 to win time to bring
its knight to the excellent f4-square, attacking g2 and h3. Out of
nowhere, Black has an enormous attacking position and AlphaZero
plans to bring its major pieces to the f- and g-files!
AlphaZero is confident though not ecstatic with a 53.5% expected
score (an improvement on the 44.9% expected score AlphaZero
displays after 1.e4 e5). Stockfish is at 0.00 at move 40 and thus
considers it should be able to hold the balance. I would rather be
Black though!
I won’t comment too much on the rest of the game. Stockfish
defends as only it can, giving back the exchange to blunt Black’s
attack, and the game is murky for a long time. Stockfish however
falters in a difficult endgame and eventually loses.
18.d4 ♖xf5 19.♕c2 ♖f8 20.♖ae1 ♕f6 21.♖e3 ♕g7 22.♖g1 ♘d5
23.♗b5
23.♖ee1 exd4 is awkward, and White loses a piece after the natural
24.cxd4 ♘b4 25.♕c4 d5. White must therefore give up the
exchange. However, the two pawns Stockfish has (sacrificed by
AlphaZero) keep the position very unclear.

23…♗g6 24.♕c1 ♘xe3 25.fxe3 ♗f7 26.♖f1 ♗d5 27.♗c4 ♗a8 28.a5 e4
29.♘h2 ♕g5 30.b4 ♕xe3 31.♘g4 ♕g5 32.♕e1 h5 33.♘e3 h4 34.♗e6
♗c6 35.♗c4 d5 36.b5 ♗b7 37.♗b3 ♖bc8 38.a6 ♗a8 39.♗a4 ♗b6
40.♔g1 ♕g3 41.♕xg3 hxg3 42.♖a1 ♖f2 43.♘df1 ♖e2 44.♘f5 ♖g8
45.♘1xg3 ♖d2 46.♖f1 ♗a5 47.♖f2 ♖xf2 48.♔xf2 ♗xc3 49.h4 ♖f8
50.♔e3 ♗e1 51.♔e2 ♗xg3 52.♘xg3 ♖g8 53.♔f2 ♖g4 54.♗d1 e3+
55.♔f3 ♖xd4
And AlphaZero prevailed in 97 moves.
HISTORICAL PARALLEL
Blackburne’s dare
This game in which AlphaZero dares Stockfish to take on h6
reminded me of a cunning scheme practised by the great
attacking English player Joseph Henry Blackburne (1841-1924).
Against the French Defence, he liked to play an innocuous-looking
line in which he would tempt the opponent to saddle him with
weak f-pawns in return for an open g-file against the king. When
Black went for it, Blackburne generally scored a brilliant victory.
Joseph Henry Blackburne
Jacques Schwarz
Berlin 1881 (16)
1.e4 e6 2.d4 d5 3.♘c3 ♘f6 4.exd5 exd5 5.♘f3 ♗d6 6.♗d3 c6 7.0-0 0-
0 8.♘e2
Blackburne’s opening – the Exchange Variation against the French
– is unpretentious, but despite that Blackburne has attacking
intentions. The text was Blackburne’s favourite manoeuvre,
bringing the queen’s knight closer to the black kingside.
8…♗g4 9.♘g3 ♕c7 10.♗e3 ♘bd7 11.♕d2

A favourite idea of Blackburne’s, which he implemented several
times with success. White tempts Black to capture on f3. This
damages White’s pawn structure but it opens the g-file and gives
White increased access to the f5-square (as the bishop on g4 is no
longer there to defend it).
11…♖fe8 12.♖ae1 ♘e4 13.♕c1
Blackburne persists, and Black – tempted by the win of a pawn –
bites!
13…♗xf3 14.gxf3 ♘xg3 15.hxg3 ♗xg3 16.♔g2

Legendary English player Joseph Henry Blackburne liked to tempt his opponents
to saddle him with weak points in order to attack.
In principle, Black has won a pawn with a better position.
However, as we have seen in AlphaZero’s games, we should never
underestimate the power of bishops and major pieces pointing at
an opponent’s king along open diagonals and files.
16…♗d6 17.♖h1 ♘f8 18.♖h3 g6 19.♖eh1 ♖ad8 20.♗g5 ♖d7 21.c4

To open fresh lines against the black king.
21…dxc4
It all starts to go wrong here: Black would have done better with a
solid move such as 21…♗e7.
22.♗xc4 h5
A blunder.
23.♖h4
23.♖xh5 gxh5 24.♗f6 would have been very strong: 24…♗f4
(preventing 25.♕g5) 25.♖xh5 ♘g6 26.♕h1.
23…b5 24.♗b3
24.♖xh5 was still strong.
24…♘e6 25.♗f6 ♘f4+
25…♗e7 26.♗e5 ♗d6 is the computer repetition. The text loses
to a queen sacrifice.
26.♕xf4 ♗xf4 27.♖xh5 1-0
27….gxh5 28.♖xh5 and mate on h8 cannot be prevented.

1.
2.
 
Section B – Sacrifices for space
Game: ‘Raking bishops’
From the Two Knights Opening, AlphaZero sacrifices two pawns to
gain the advantage of the two bishops and clear two raking
diagonals pointing at the white king.
Stockfish seems unconcerned and even steals a third pawn on a7
(22.♘xa7). AlphaZero’s response is a quiet move (22…h6), removing
back-rank mates as a prelude to a fantastic combination that
remains hidden in the notes to the game. Stockfish realises at the
last moment that something is wrong and gives away a piece to
stave off immediate disaster but is unable to hold the game against
Black’s rook and two bishops.
Game themes:
Sacrificing material to free space for attacking pieces [6…c6, 10…
♘f4]
Lonely knight [22.♘xa7]
Stockfish 8
AlphaZero
London 2018
1.e4 e5 2.♘f3 ♘c6 3.♗c4 ♘f6 4.♘g5 d5 5.exd5 ♘a5 6.♗b5+ c6 7.dxc6
bxc6
A well-known main line of the Two Knights Opening in which Black
sacrifices a pawn in return for open lines.

Moreover, White’s minor pieces have wandered a touch too far
forwards and are thus targets for attack.
8.♗d3 ♘d5
The first attempt to exploit White’s advanced minor pieces: Black
uncovers an attack on the knight on g5 and prepares to transfer its
knight to f4 with tempo.
9.♘f3 ♗d6 10.0-0
10…♘f4

Offering another pawn to gain the two bishops and disrupt White’s
pawn structure (doubled d-pawns) and development (the pawn on
d2 prevents the dark-squared bishop on c1 from developing).
11.♖e1 ♘xd3 12.cxd3 0-0 13.♘xe5
White has tended to avoid taking this second pawn in recent
grandmaster games, preferring to develop the queenside with ♘c3
and b2-b3. Stockfish plays concretely, as you would expect.
13…c5
Preventing White from solidifying the knight on e5 with d3-d4 and
opening the long a8-h1 diagonal for the light-squared bishop.
14.♘c3 ♗b7 15.b3
15 ♘f3 ♘c6 was Howell-Nikolic, Leiden 2001, when Black is doing
very well according to the Dutch grandmaster Erwin l’Ami on his DVD
on the Two Knights. He describes the doubled d-pawns as ‘not very
pretty’.
15…♖e8
This natural move is a novelty according to my over-the-board
database though it has been played in a couple of correspondence
games.
16.♘c4 ♘xc4 17.♖xe8+

This is the real novelty: 17.dxc4 ♖xe1+ 18.♕xe1 ♗xh2+ 19.♔xh2
♕h4+ 20.♔g1 ♗xg2 with a draw by repetition occurred in both
correspondence games. The text removes this possibility and forces
AlphaZero to demonstrate its compensation for two pawns.
17…♕xe8 18.bxc4
18 dxc4 feels more natural. Black would continue with 18…♕e5
followed by …♖e8 and possibly …h7-h5-h4-h3 with free play.
18.bxc4 keeps more control over the central light squares and also
gives White the b-file to annoy Black with.
18…♕e6 19.♗b2 ♖b8 20.♘b5
Stockfish sees no concrete danger on the kingside and takes the
opportunity to grab another pawn on a7, which incidentally also
provides the white knight with a solid outpost on b5 (it cannot be
driven away with …a7-a6). However, this all feels a long way from
the kingside and it would be nicer to have the knight somewhere in
the general area to provide some cover and also potentially block
the a8-h1 diagonal with ♘d5 or ♘e4.
20.♖b1 was my favourite idea, covering the unprotected b2-bishop
and potentially ready to exchange off the rooks. After 20.♘b5, the
game enters a critical phase.
20…♕g6 21.♕f1 ♗f4 22.♘xa7 h6

Not a move that impresses my engines, but necessary preparation
for Black’s coming play on the kingside.
23.♗c3
A move showing little fear for what Black can do on the kingside!
White leaves its knight on a7, protects a loose pawn on d2 and
prepares ♖b1 (pinning the bishop to the rook on b8) or ♖e1.
In all fairness, the danger does not seem extreme in this position:
Black’s activity is clear but White seems very solid. You might expect
Black to start thinking about reducing the material deficit with …
♖d8 followed by capturing the pawn on d3. However, there is a
really active way to play and AlphaZero finds it!
23…♕h5 24.h3
After 24.h3, White gains the defensive resource of ♕d1 followed by
♕g4, breaking up the attack. AlphaZero needs to find an answer to
this idea to keep the initiative going. It introduces the rook into the
attack with a precise sequence.
24…♖a8
The white knight is chased back into play; on the other hand, Black
gains the possibility of …♖a8-a6-g6 without needing to move the
bishop first. It also deals with the threat of ♖b1, pinning the ♗b7 to
the ♖b8 and possibly forcing an exchange of rooks.
25.♕d1
Stockfish blinks! It clearly saw something it didn’t like after 25.♘b5
and decided to bail out but the resulting position is awful.
The key move is 25.♘b5.

We set this position as a puzzle in the ‘ZeroZeroZero’ chapter: can
you find Black’s killer move?
25…♗f3
BOOM! Effectively prevents 26.♕d1. The threat is …♖a8-a6-g6
(after 25…♖a6 26.♕d1 the black queen doesn’t have a good place
to hide from the exchange of queens, e.g. 26…♕g6 27.♕g4).
26.g3 is the best defence. g2-g3 will always be necessary and
White keeps the placement of its other pieces flexible. 26.gxf3 ♖a6

27.♔h1 ♖g6 threatening 28…♕xf3+; 26.♖e1 ♖a6 27.g3 ♖g6
28.♔h2 ♕h4 29.♖e8+ ♔h7 30.♕e1 ♖g5. The amazing idea!
31.♖e5 f5 and 32…♕xh3+ and 33…♖h5# is impossible to stop by
normal means. 26…♖a6 27.♔h2 27.♖e1 ♖g6 transposes to
26.g3.
27…♕h4 The very best move (27…♖g6 is also very strong and
was AlphaZero’s intention). 28.♕g1 If 28.♕e1 ♖e6 is the most

accurate move, chasing the queen away from e1 first; 29.♕g1 ♖g6
leads to 28.♕g1. 28…♖g6 29.♗a5 ♖g5 30.♗d8 f6
And 31…♕xh3+ and 32…♖h5# is unstoppable.
The last question is: why did Black play 24…♖a8? Why not 24…♗f3
25.♖e1 ♖b6? In that case, by a wonderful twist of fate, the knight
on a7 turns out to be a very strong piece: 26.♘c8! prevents 26…
♖g6 due to 27.♘e7+ and stops Black’s attack in its tracks!
25…♕xd1+ 26.♖xd1 ♖xa7
All credit to Stockfish for seeing the problems with 25.♘b5, but this
is not much better. Black’s rook and two bishops are bound to carry
the day.
27.♖a1 ♗c6 28.a4 ♖xa4 29.♖xa4 ♗xa4 30.♔f1 ♗b3 31.♔e2 ♗d6
32.♔e3 ♗e7 33.♗e5 f6 34.♗c7 ♔f7 35.♗b6 ♔e6 36.♔e2 ♔d7 37.♔e1
♔c6 38.♗a5 h5 39.♔f1 ♔d7 40.♗b6 ♗c2 41.♔e2 ♔c6 42.♗a5 ♗d6
43.d4 cxd4 44.d3 ♗a4 45.h4 ♔b7 46.♔f1 ♗d7 47.♔e2 ♔a6 48.♗d8 ♗f5
0-1
Game: ‘AlphaZero’s opening’
The first 10 published games between AlphaZero and Stockfish
contained a spectacular series of games in a sharp sacrificial line of
the 4.g3 Queen’s Indian Defence. This variation was less popular in

1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
the new match, but I can’t resist showing one more game in this line
that AlphaZero handles so well. After sacrificing a pawn in the
opening (6.d5) AlphaZero begins to take control of and target central
and kingside dark squares (14.e5, 17.h4, 18.♘d5, 21.♘xe7+),
culminating in the occupation of the advanced d6 outpost with a
rook (22.♖d6). In trying to free itself, Stockfish allows an
unexpected exchange sacrifice (26.♖xb7) that causes Black’s pieces
to lose coordination and leads to the exchange of the rock of Black’s
position: the knight on e6. With this knight gone, White’s e-pawn is
driven into the heart of Black’s position. Black’s rooks struggle to find
squares against White’s two powerful bishops. The game ends with
AlphaZero – very typically – exchanging off Black’s most active
pieces (the rook on d2 and the queen), leaving Black with a king
confined to the corner, and a chronically passive rook and knight.
Game themes:
Sacrificing material to free space for attacking pieces [6.d5]
Exchanging off defenders of a colour complex [18.♘d5,
21.♘xe7+]
Advanced rook outpost [22.♖d6]
Exchanging off the opponent’s active pieces to leave passive ones
[27.♘g5, 40.♖d1, 45.♕xe4]
Keeping the opponent’s king pinned in the corner [47.♗f6]
AlphaZero
Stockfish 8
London 2018
1.d4 ♘f6 2.♘f3 e6 3.c4 b6 4.g3 ♗a6 5.♕c2 c5 6.d5 exd5 7.cxd5 ♗b7
8.♗g2 ♘xd5 9.0-0 ♗e7 10.♖d1 ♘c6 11.♕f5

11…♘f6 12.e4 g6 13.♕f4 0-0 14.e5 ♘h5 15.♕g4 ♘g7 16.♘c3 ♖e8
A new move from Stockfish (16…♘e6 had been played before).
AlphaZero is not interested in recapturing the sacrificed pawn on d7
and instead continues to hammer at the weak dark squares around
that pawn.
17.h4 ♖b8 18.♘d5 h5 19.♕a4 ♘e6 20.♗e3 ♘b4 21.♘xe7+ ♖xe7
22.♖d6

22…♕f8 23.♖e1 ♘c6 24.♕c4 ♖ee8 25.♖xd7
25.♖ed1 also seems strong, keeping control of the position.
However AlphaZero spots a way of converting its current grip of the
position into something surprising! Again material does not seem to
matter as AlphaZero accurately assesses the enormous dynamic
potential of the resulting position set against the passivity of the
opponent’s pieces.
25…♖ed8 26.♖xb7 ♖xb7 27.♘g5 ♘xg5 28.♗xg5 ♖d4 29.♕b3 ♖c7
30.e6 ♔h7 31.♕f3 ♕e8 32.♗h3
The engines start to get nervous around here, and with good
reason. Black has no way to make any impression on White’s
position while White’s pieces are swarming around the black king.
32…♕f8 33.b3 f5 34.♗g2 ♘e7 35.♗f4 ♕d8 36.♗e5

Everything for activity instead of material!
36…♖d2 37.♗f1 a5 38.a4
A great move: now Black’s queenside majority is fixed and unable to
generate any distraction.
38…♖a7 39.♗c4 ♘d5 40.♖d1
Exchanging off Black’s most active piece.
40…♘b4 41.♖xd2 ♕xd2 42.♗f4 ♕e1+ 43.♔g2 ♘c2 44.♕d5 ♕e4+
45.♕xe4 fxe4

Black’s remaining pieces cannot hurt White’s position in any way. For
good measure AlphaZero boxes the black king into the corner.
46.♗g5 ♖a8 47.♗f6
47…♘d4 48.e7
The black king is pinned to the corner, unable to assist in the fight
against White’s passed e-pawn.
48…♘f5 49.♗b5 ♘d6 50.♗c6 ♖c8 51.♗d7 ♖a8 52.f3

Looking to bring White’s king into the equation and highlight the
difference in activity between the white and black king.
52…♘e8 53.♗g5 ♔g8 54.fxe4 ♘c7 55.♗f4 ♖e8 56.♗d6 ♔f7 57.♗xe8+
♘xe8 58.e5 1-0
58…♘g7 59.♗c7 costs Black the entire queenside.

1.
2.
 
Section C – Sacrifices for damage
We move on to an even more exciting part of this chapter: the
sacrifices that AlphaZero makes to expose the opponent’s king.
Game: ‘Wizard chess’
From a sedate anti-Berlin opening, AlphaZero spots a stunning way
to inject danger into the position with a double pawn sacrifice (14…
f5, 16…e3). The result is a sudden attack that delivers at least
perpetual. AlphaZero tries for more, but Stockfish holds firm.
Game themes:
Sacrificing material to free space for attacking pieces [14…f5]
Sacrificing material to damage the opponent’s king’s position
[16…e3]
Stockfish 8
AlphaZero
London 2018
1.e4 e5 2.♘f3 ♘c6 3.♗b5 ♘f6 4.d3 ♗c5 5.♗xc6 dxc6 6.c3 ♗d6 7.0-0
♗e6
A new move from AlphaZero. 7… ♗g4 8. h3 ♗h5 9. ♘bd2 ♘d7 10.
d4 exd4 11.cxd4 0-0 was played in Paravyan-Jakovenko, Khanty-
Mansiysk 2017.
8.b3 h6 9.♘bd2 ♘d7 10.♘c4 0-0 11.♖e1 ♖e8 12.d4 ♗xc4 13.bxc4 c5
14.d5
Whizzing through this game, I was expecting 40 or 50 moves of
tedium with some long manoeuvres from both sides. I wasn’t
prepared for AlphaZero’s solution!

14…f5 15.exf5 e4 16.♘d2 e3
A fantastic idea. 14…f5 and 15…e4 opened up the b8-h2 diagonal
for the dark-squared bishop to aim at the white king, and 16…e3
diverts the white pawn from f2, which prevents White from
establishing an effective pawn barrier on the b8-h2 diagonal.
A key enabler of this sacrifice is the damaged white queenside
structure. White could defend its kingside with the knight with
17.fxe3 ♕h4 18.♘f3, but after 18…♕xc4, White’s remaining pawn

structure is a disgrace. The bishop on c1 is restricted by the pawns
on c3 and e3 (which are both unable to move forward) while the d5-
and f5-pawns are vulnerable to attack.
If White had had a pawn on b3 (in other words, no doubled c-
pawns) then this sharp attack would not have worked. It’s an
interesting example of how a risky positional decision on the
queenside can free the opponent to take sharper action on the
kingside as the attacker is likely to have positional compensation to
fall back on if the attack is not decisive.
17.fxe3
17…♕h4 18.g3 ♗xg3 19.hxg3
19.♘f3 seemed obvious, taking the opportunity to bring the knight
towards the white king with gain of tempo. However, the engines are
not impressed! 19…♕h3 (19…♗f2+ 20.♔g2 ♕e4 21.♔xf2 ♖f8 is
my engine’s favourite line. White’s king escapes to the queenside,
but White’s pieces are tied up: 22.♘d2 ♖xf5+ 23.♔e2 ♕g2+
24.♔d3 ♘e5+ 25.♔c2 ♖f2 26.e4 ♘xc4. I prefer the idea of
keeping the white king in the centre of the board and you will be
glad to know that AlphaZero agrees with me!) 20.hxg3 ♕xg3+
21.♔f1 (21.♔h1 ♖e4 and the knight’s extra move to f3 – in

comparison to the main line – has drawbacks: it leaves the ideal e4-
square free for the black rook). Now:
A) 21…♖e4 was my choice, but AlphaZero’s second choice:
22.♔e2 (if 22.♕e2 ♖g4 wins. For this reason, White must run with
the king). 22…♕f4 was my idea. This move keeps the king in the kill
zone and prevents it from escaping to the queenside. 23.♖g1
(23.♔d3 ♕xf5; 23.♖f1 ♖ae8). 23…♖f8. Black has many other
options here (for example 23…♖ae8 and 23…♕xf5), all of which
seem promising. White has no easy way to get its king out of the
danger zone, and meanwhile Black will start undermining White’s
position by taking pawns, starting with f5 (…♕xf5) and c4 (…
♘b6xc4);
B) 21…♕h3+ was going to be AlphaZero’s choice: 22.♔e2 ♕xf5
23.♖f1 ♖f8 24.♘d2 ♕h5+ 25.♔d3 ♕g6+ 26.e4 ♘e5+ 27.♔c2
♖xf1 28.♕xf1 ♕g3 29.♔b3 ♖f8 30.♕d1 ♖f6.
Great mobility of the rook! 31.♕e2 ♖f2 32.♘f1 ♕h4 33.♕d1.

This was the end of AlphaZero’s analysis, which it assessed as a
55% expected score for Black, despite White’s extra piece. e4 is
going, of course, and White is still tied up with a weak king.
After 1 minute of analysis, my engines assess the position from 0.00
to -0.39, which is equality or better for Black.
19…♕xg3+ 20.♔h1
Black has a draw at least, but AlphaZero looks for more.
20…♖e5
20…♘e5 felt like a more natural way to continue, bringing the
knight close before trying to include the rook in the attack. However,
AlphaZero doesn’t like White’s next move 21.e4, after which it sees
nothing better than forcing a draw by repetition with 21…♕h3+ and
22…♕g3+.
21.♖e2
21.e4 ♘f6 is very dangerous for White. This is the reason that
AlphaZero did not want to play 20…♘e5: after 20…♖e5 21.e4 ♘f6,
White does not succeed in using its pawn chain as a wall against
Black’s attacking pieces: 22.♖e2 (22.♕e2 ♖ae8 23.♖g1 ♘xe4
24.♘xe4 ♕h4+ 25.♕h2 ♕xe4+ 26.♕g2 ♖xf5 27.♕xe4 ♖xe4 is
the engine line when at least two more pawns will fall while White’s
king is exposed. I would rather be Black) 22…♘xe4

23.♖xe4 (23.♘xe4 ♕f3+ 24.♔g1 ♖xe4) 23…♕h3+ 24.♔g1 ♖xf5
25.♘f1 ♖af8 26.♗e3 ♖h5.
21…♖xf5 22.♖g2 ♕h3+ 23.♖h2 ♕xe3 24.♗a3
A strange move (24.♗b2 is a more natural way of getting the bishop
out of the way to bring the rook on a1 into play) but it all seems
holdable for White.
24…♖e8 25.♕g4 ♖f7 26.♕h4 ♖ee7
Not 26…♘e5 as 27.♖e1 wins for White!
27.♖g1 ♘e5
Threatening 28…♘d3.
28.♖g3 ♕e1+ 29.♖g1 ♕e3 30.♖g3 ♕e1+ 31.♖g1 ♕e3 ½-½
Stockfish is happy to repeat and AlphaZero can’t avoid it.
Game: ‘Not enough time to defend, not enough time to counterattack’
AlphaZero plays the typical thrust 9.g4 to open the g-file against the
Black king, but goes a step further with a piece sacrifice (12.gxh6)
that removes not only the g-pawn but also the h-pawn from the
black king’s pawn cover. Stockfish faces an unenviable task as it has
little scope for counterplay while AlphaZero builds up its forces
further on the kingside. Stockfish’s chosen method of defence
involving disruptive actions with the queen is not successful and

1.
2.
leads to the rapid loss of the queen. AlphaZero converts the resulting
position easily.
Game themes:
Sacrificing material to open lines against the opponent’s kingside
[9.g4]
Sacrificing material to damage the opponent’s kingside structure
[12.gxh6]
AlphaZero
Stockfish 8
London 2018
1.♘f3 ♘f6 2.c4 e6 3.♘c3 d5 4.d4 c6 5.♗g5 ♗e7 6.e3 h6 7.♗f4
An unusual retreat. 7.♗h4, keeping the bishop on the h4-d8
diagonal, is more natural and much more frequently played, but the
text is reasonable too, certainly when combined with White’s
aggressive idea on the ninth move.
7…0-0 8.♕c2 ♘bd7
9.g4

A sharp assault on the black position. In all fairness, since the
Latvian players Shirov and Shabalov developed a sharp system with
g2-g4 against the Semi-Slav in the early 1990s, white players have
been trying to play g2-g4 in pretty much any position. g2-g4 is a
disruptive move, aiming for g4-g5 when the black knight on f6 will
have to find a new post. It works particularly well when Black has
weak control of e4 (as here). If Black cannot occupy a central post
with its knight after g4-g5, then Black’s position does not look that
attractive. Once the black knight leaves f6, White gains additional
control over the centre and pressure along the b1-h7 diagonal.
Of course, in this position the g4-pawn is en prise, but taking it is
too risky due to the weakness that was created with 6…h6. If 9…
♘xg4, then 10.♖g1 is very painful as 10…♘gf6 11.♗xh6 loses the
pawn back straightaway. The pawn on h6 saddles Black with another
problem: 9.g4 threatens 10.g5 when White unravels the black
kingside starting with the pawn on h6.
9…dxc4
An understandable reaction: Black releases control of the e4-square
but frees d5 for the knight as a possible central escape square. Black
will also meet White’s wing attack with central and queenside activity
via the follow-up …b7-b5, …♗b7 and …c6-c5. This exerts pressure
along the a8-h1 diagonal which White weakened by playing 9.g4.
10.♖g1
10.g5 hxg5 11.♘xg5 would have been my instant reaction.
AlphaZero takes a different route, which is also the first new move of
the game.
10…♘d5

Making use of the free square on d5 to get out of the way of g4-g5.
11.g5 ♘xf4 12.gxh6
An intuitive sacrifice that none of the engines really appreciate,
giving values of -0.18 to -0.82. There is certainly no immediate
checkmate, but with the open g-file, more space and Black’s
constricted development, you know that Stockfish is going to suffer
against AlphaZero.
12…♘h5

The best defence. It’s interesting to see how the various engines
look to proceed. Some of them are tempted by ideas involving ♗e2
and ♘e5, targeting the loose knight on h5 to try and regain the
sacrificed material. Stockfish – just like AlphaZero – is keener on
opening up the kingside with 13.hxg7 and letting White’s piece
activity do the rest. The difference is that while Stockfish’s
assessment is fairly lukewarm (+0.07) AlphaZero is already at a
70.7% expected score, which is a significant improvement over its
assessment of White’s chances at move one.
Intuitively, I’m closer to AlphaZero’s assessment: I wouldn’t want to
defend this black position.
12…♘g6 13.♖xg6 fxg6 14.♕xg6 ♖f7 (14…♗f6 15.♘g5 ♖e8
16.h7+ ♔h8 17.♘f7# is a pretty mate) 15.h7+ ♔h8 16.♕xf7 is
much better for White.
13.hxg7 ♘xg7 14.0-0-0
14.♗xc4 would also be very reasonable, but AlphaZero doesn’t stop
at involving a bishop in the attack: it wants to get the really big stuff
involved!
It’s time to assess the position. AlphaZero has sacrificed a piece to
rip away Black’s g- and h-pawns and open the g-file. White is still a

couple of moves away from creating concrete mating threats against
the black king, so why should this position be anything special for
White?
Black’s problem is that it isn’t clear what it can achieve in a couple of
moves. Black’s kingside is too damaged to be patched up quickly
whilst two moves will not be enough to distract AlphaZero by
organising counterplay against the white king.
It’s hard to know what to aim for as Black. I was most keen on 14…
b5, keeping the light-squared bishop away from the d3-square and
introducing the hope of some queenside counterplay with …b5-b4.
A) 14…b5 15.♕e4 (the big idea: AlphaZero deals in queens, not in
bishops! 15.♗xc4 bxc4 16.♖xg7+ ♔xg7 17.♖g1+ looks tempting,
but after 17…♔h8 there is no good way to continue. Bringing the
queen into the fray brings the danger of such a sacrificial
combination much closer).
A1) 15…f5 would be Black’s desired idea, to block the b1-h7
diagonal and take away more light squares from White’s pieces,
but… 16.♕xe6+ The knight on g7 is pinned! 16…♖f7 17.♕h6
followed by doubling on the g-file is awful for Black;

A2) 15…b4 16.♗d3 cxd3 17.♖xg7+ ♔xg7 18.♖g1+ ♔h8 19.♕g4
and mate follows very soon;
A3) 15…♘b6 was another idea, defending e6 and thus hoping to
achieve …f7-f5: 16.♗xc4. Wrong! 16…f5 (16…♘xc4 17.♖xg7+)
17.♗xe6+;
A4) 15…♖e8 frees f8 for the bishop to defend g7, and gives the
black king an escape route from the kingside via f8. This neutralises
the sacrifices on g7 for now. 16.♕f4 is very unpleasant, with ideas
of ♘e5 and ♘e4 as well as the standard sacrificial options (16.♗d3
cxd3 17.♖xg7+ ♔xg7 18.♖g1+ ♔f8 19.♕h7 ♗f6 and the king
escapes): 16…f5 17.♕h6 ♗f6 18.♘e5 ♕e7 19.f4 when White will
follow up with a combination of ♖g3, ♗e2, ♖dg1, ♖h3 and ♗h5.
It’s simply too much for Black to hold back.
B) 14…f5 was another idea that seemed logical, blocking the b1-h7
diagonal and stopping the white queen from moving to e4. This
keeps immediate disaster at bay, but it isn’t pleasant: 15.♗xc4 ♘b6
16.♗b3 followed by doubling on the g-file: 16…♘d5 17.♖g3 ♘xc3
18.♖dg1 ♖f7 19.bxc3 followed by ♘e5, f2-f4 and ♕g2 is a sample
line showing the rough ride that Black can expect.
Stockfish’s move tries to disrupt White’s attacking formation and
bring the queen into a defensive position on the kingside, but it is
completely ineffective: White barely notices the disruption caused by
the black queen whereas the queen is far too exposed on the
kingside.
14…♕a5 15.♗xc4 ♕f5 16.♕e2

Simply avoiding the exchange of queens and preparing to double
rooks. My Stockfish engine is still evaluating the position at 0.00,
despite the huge danger. However, by this stage the Stockfish
playing against AlphaZero had already dipped well below that.
16…♕h7 17.♖g3 ♔h8
All of a sudden after this move, Stockfish spots White’s big idea and
then the evaluation tumbles to +1.55.
18.♖dg1 ♘f5 19.♕f1
19…♘xg3 20.♖xg3

A neat idea: there is no defence to ♖h3, winning back the sacrificed
material and leaving Black with a still exposed king. Stockfish
struggles valiantly for a while, but there is no escape from this
position.
20…♖g8 21.♖h3 ♖g7 22.♖xh7+ ♖xh7 23.♗d3 ♖g7 24.♕d1 ♘f6
25.♘e5 ♗d7 26.♕f3 ♖f8 27.♘e2 ♔g8 28.a3 ♗e8 29.♔b1 a5 30.e4 b5
31.♗c2 b4 32.a4 ♔h8 33.♔a2 ♔g8 34.♘g3 ♖g5 35.♕d1 ♔h8 36.♗b3
♖g7 37.♕c2 ♘g4 38.♘xc6 ♗xc6 39.♕xc6 ♖h7 40.♕c7 ♗d8 41.♕f4
♖g8 42.♗d1 ♘f6 43.h4 ♘d7 44.h5 ♘f6 45.d5 ♖e8 46.d6 ♖g7 47.h6
♖h7 48.e5 ♘d5 49.♕d2 ♖g8 50.♗b3 ♗g5 51.♕d1 ♘b6 52.♘e4 1-0
HISTORICAL PARALLEL
Shirov’s g2-g4
In 1992, the great Latvian-born attacking player Alexei Shirov
introduced a stunning idea in a formerly quiet sideline of the Semi-
Slav. He played some fantastic games in this line, of which we will
present just one. Note how the g2-g4 thrust throws Black’s pieces
into disarray and confers a huge space advantage on White.
Alexei Shirov
2655
Throstur Thorhallsson
2425
Reykjavik 1992 (5)
1.d4 d5 2.c4 c6 3.♘c3 ♘f6 4.♘f3 e6 5.e3 ♘bd7 6.♕c2 ♗d6 7.g4

Here it is! Alexei’s Icelandic grandmaster opponent ignores the gift
for now.
7…0-0 8.g5 ♘h5 9.♗d2 f5

The great Latvian attacking player Alexei Shirov introduced the stunning idea of
7.g4 in a quiet Semi-Slav.
Black was obviously worried that his wayward h5-knight would
become a target after a later ♗e2 and ♘e5, but this move does
not help: White opens the g-file and Black’s kingside light squares
are weakened after the exchange of the f-pawn.
10.gxf6 ♘hxf6 11.♘g5 ♕e8 12.0-0-0 h6 13.h4

No going back! Shirov does not intend to retreat the knight from
its attacking post.
13…♗b4
Attempting to gain some central control of e4 by exchanging a
white defender (the knight on c3). However this moves an already
developed piece, weakens Black’s dark squares and does nothing
to bring Black’s queenside pieces into play.
14.♗d3 ♗xc3 15.♗xc3 hxg5
Probably taking the view that it is better to suffer with extra
material than with less!
16.hxg5 ♘e4 17.♗xe4 dxe4 18.♕xe4
An enormous position for White.
The h-file is the obvious way to penetrate the black position and
Shirov is also planning to crush Black with his centre pawns.
18…♖f5 19.♕h4 ♕g6 20.♕h8+ ♔f7 21.f4 ♘f8 22.♕h4 ♔e8 23.e4
♖f7 24.♖he1 ♔d8 25.d5

25…cxd5 26.cxd5 ♗d7 27.f5
27…exf5 28.e5

Such free-flowing attacking play! Black is helpless!
28…f4 29.e6 ♗a4 30.♖d2 ♖f5 31.♕f2 f3 32.♖e4 ♖xg5 33.♖xa4
♖g1+ 34.♖d1 ♖g2 35.♕h4+ ♔e8 36.♖e4 ♖c8 37.d6 ♖d8 38.♕e7#

CHAPTER 12
Attacking the king: opposite-side castling
AlphaZero relishes opposite-side castling scenarios in which it has
full licence to push and sacrifice pawns to open the opponent’s king’s
position. In this chapter, we look at some stunning examples in
which queenside castling was the prelude to a dangerous attack.

Chapter 12 – Attacking the king: opposite-side castling –
key points
Theme
Castling queenside, on the opposite side of the
board to the opponent.
Purpose
Placing the king on the opposite side of the
board to the opponent’s introduces many
additional possibilities for attack: for example,
pawn storms or pawn sacrifices.
What are the prerequisites?
The opponent’s king must be attackable – for
example, due to weak pawn cover or insufficient
defending pieces – otherwise you are simply
giving your opponent a target!
What are the risks?
Your opponent is also free to push and sacrifice
pawns against your king! Bear in mind that the
opponent’s counterplay against your king could
be dangerous.
Unique implementation by
AlphaZero
AlphaZero’s king never seems to be in trouble
when it castles queenside! AlphaZero manages
to continually reach positions in which its own
initiative keeps the opponent so busy that
counterplay never arrives.
Complexity of resulting positions High complexity. Positions with kings on opposite
sides of the board often lead to spectacular and
complex games in which a single tempo can
make a difference between a win and a loss.
Any tips
The schematic way in which AlphaZero builds up
an attack works particularly well with opposite-
side castling.
A noticeable feature of AlphaZero’s play is a tendency to castle on
the opposite side to Stockfish’s king. The reason for this is simple:
AlphaZero is keen to open lines against the opponent’s king (typically
on the kingside) by sacrificing pawns (typically a g-pawn at least)
and then occupy the opened lines with a major piece. It makes
sense for AlphaZero to place its king on the opposite side (typically
the queenside), both to keep the king safe, and to ensure that the

king does not affect the mobility of its rooks. AlphaZero exhibits this
tendency with both colours, although it gets more leeway to do so
with the white pieces.

1.
2.
3.
4.
 
Section A – Opposite-side castling with black
Game: ‘Cross-court decoy’
AlphaZero delays castling in the opening, but when it happens, it’s
on the queenside. Stockfish sniffs at a weak pawn on that wing, a
threat which AlphaZero ignores to gain time for a kingside pawn
push (11…g5). A further sacrifice on the kingside (15…g3) opens up
the g- and h-files and, seemingly out of nowhere, AlphaZero has
whipped up another dangerous kingside attack.
Stockfish regroups solidly and in the next phase, AlphaZero
concentrates on weakening White’s defences (by exchanging off a
good white defensive piece with 23…♗c5) and consolidating its own
king (26…♔b8) before concentrating its major pieces on the h-file.
AlphaZero plans a long knight manoeuvre to redeploy its knight to
the most advanced outpost possible: g3 (30…♘g7). Stockfish finds
an unexpected way to reach a position with rook and knight against
queen that it manages to hold in 166 painful moves!
Game themes:
Sacrificing material to gain time for an attack against the
opponent’s king (11…g5)
Sacrificing material to open lines against the opponent’s king
(15…g3)
Exchanging off the opponent’s active pieces to leave passive ones
(23…♗c5)
Long knight manoeuvre (…♘xc5-e6-g7)
Stockfish 8
AlphaZero
London 2018

1.e4 e5 2.♘f3 ♘c6 3.♗b5 ♘f6 4.♗xc6 dxc6 5.d3 ♗d6 6.0-0 ♕e7
This AlphaZero novelty keeps the option of queenside castling open.
7.a4 ♗e6 8.♕e2 h6
Flexible strategy from AlphaZero, preventing the disruptive ♘g5 and
introducing the aggressive idea of …g7-g5 combined with queenside
castling.
9.♗e3 a5
AlphaZero likes to block an opponent’s advance of the rook’s pawn
as soon as possible.
10.♖d1 0-0-0
A hyper-aggressive idea, especially as Black has already moved the
a-pawn in front of its king. White has a way to unravel AlphaZero’s
king’s position by tugging at the exposed a5-pawn. By contrast,
White has left its kingside untouched, which should make it harder
for Black to open lines there.
11.♗d2

White’s bishop is already developed on an active diagonal, and its
queenside is still undeveloped, so it feels unnatural to target the a5-
pawn with the bishop, particularly as the bishop does not accomplish
much on a5. Either the violent 11.b4 or the calm 11.♘a3 seem more
in keeping with the position.
AlphaZero needs no encouragement to get going on the kingside!
11…g5

By sacrificing the a5-pawn, AlphaZero gains several tempi for its
kingside attack.
12.♗c3
A zwischenzug to force Black’s knight to a more passive square.
After 12.♗xa5 Black can choose between 12…g4 13.♘e1 h5,
intending …g4-g3 as in the game (my engine’s favourite), or 12…
♘h5 (my favourite) 13.g3 g4 with the idea of 14.♘fd2 ♘f4.
12…♘d7 13.♗xa5 g4 14.♘e1 h5 15.♗d2
15… g3
A typical method of breaking open an opponent’s structure that is as
yet untouched: sacrifice a pawn to draw one of the opponent’s
pawns forward and then hit that one with another pawn!
16.fxg3 h4
Like this!
17.gxh4 ♕xh4

It’s time to take stock of the position.
AlphaZero has sacrificed two pawns: one on the queenside, for
which it has gained three tempi (White captured the pawn and
brought its bishop back into play), and one on the kingside through
which AlphaZero opened the g- and h-files for its major pieces.
White’s immediate task is to batten down the hatches, which
Stockfish, as always, does excellently.
18.♘f3 ♕h5 19.♗e3

White’s manoeuvre 15.♗d2 and 19.♗e3 could easily go unnoticed,
but it is a crucial part of Stockfish’s defensive structure.
From our examination of AlphaZero’s play in the ‘Colour complexes’
chapter, we know that AlphaZero would be keen to supplement its
open files with a diagonal pointing towards the white king. The a7-
g1 diagonal would be ideal, so redeploying White’s bishop to this
diagonal after capturing the pawn is an important first step in
limiting Black’s activity.
19…♖dg8 20.♔h1 f5 21.♘bd2
A crucial moment in Black’s concept. It would be foolish for
AlphaZero to assume that only it has attacking chances. White has a
trump in the advance a4-a5-a6 to open up the queenside and
expose Black’s king to attack.
My first thought – inspired by AlphaZero – was to deploy the knight
to a square close to the white king, either via …♘f6-g4, or (even
more tempting) …♘f8-g6-f4. However, in those cases, White’s
counterplay on the queenside proves extremely dangerous.
AlphaZero’s approach is more subtle. It sees that it cannot control
the a7-g1 diagonal with its dark-squared bishop and sees little future
for that piece. It decides to exchange it for a white defensive piece

and to activate its other bishop with …f5-f4 and …♗g4. AlphaZero
also takes a moment to consolidate its king’s position with …♔b8
and only then begins the transfer of the knight to an outpost close
to the white king: g3! AlphaZero intends to achieve this via d7-
c5(assisting the exchange of the dark-squared bishops)-e6-g7-h5!
21…f4 22.♗f2 ♗g4
Threatening 23…♕xh2+ and thus forcing a defensive move from
White.
23.♖e1 ♗c5 24.♗xc5 ♘xc5 25.♖f1 ♘e6
En route, the knight threatens to jump into d4 or g5.
26.♖f2 ♔b8
Consolidating Black’s king’s position.
27.♖e1 ♕h7 28.♕f1 ♖g6 29.h3 ♖h6 30.♖ee2 ♘g7
Here it comes, aiming for g3! This threat induces Stockfish to force
matters to clarify the situation.
31.♘xe5 ♗xh3 32.gxh3 ♖xh3+ 33.♕xh3 ♕xh3+ 34.♖h2 ♕c8 35.♖xh8
♕xh8+ 36.♖h2 ♕g8

The type of position that a human would lose very quickly, but my
engines consider it only slightly worse for White! Stockfish does a
sterling job of holding the position, but it’s clear that AlphaZero’s
opening concept was the moral victor at least!
37.b3 ♔a7 38.♘df3 ♘e6 39.♖g2 ♕d8 40.♖h2 ♘c5 41.♔g1 ♘a6 42.♔f1
♕d6 43.♘f7 ♕f8 44.♘h6 ♘b4 45.♘f5 ♕f6 46.♘e1 ♕d8 47.♔e2 ♕g5
48.♔f1 c5 49.♖h4 ♔b6 50.♖h2 ♔a6 51.♘h4 ♘c6 52.♘hf3 ♕g4 53.♖g2
♕e6 54.♔e2 ♕f6 55.♖g4
And Stockfish held on for 166 moves!

1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
 
Section B – Opposite-side castling with white
There are many examples of Alpha-Zero castling queenside with
white, and I present two new games:
Game: ‘No pawn is better than the g-pawn’
This game is a variation on the previously analysed game ‘When a
plan comes together’ in which White sacrificed a pawn on g2 and
castled queenside to obtain attacking chances against the black king
on g8. Once again, AlphaZero demonstrates great ingenuity in attack
but Stockfish matches it blow for blow. On move 36, AlphaZero takes
an interesting decision, offering Stockfish a choice (between a solid
and a risky continuation) instead of forcing the solid continuation.
Game themes:
Sacrificing material to open lines against the enemy king
[11.♘d2]
Attacking the opponent’s kingside structure with pawns as well as
pieces [22.h4]
Long knight manoeuvre [25.♘g5]
Opening a diagonal to support an attack along a file [26.e4]
Giving the opponent a chance to go wrong [36.cxb6]
AlphaZero
Stockfish 8
London 2018
1.♘f3 e6 2.c4 ♘f6 3.♘c3 ♗b4 4.♕c2 0-0 5.a3 ♗xc3 6.♕xc3 a5 7.d4 b6
8.♗g5 ♗b7 9.e3 d6 10.♗d3 ♘bd7 11.♘d2 ♗xg2
The first new move: only Stockfish is brave enough to take this
pawn!

12.♖g1 ♗b7
In addition to the advantage of the two bishops gained early in the
opening phase, AlphaZero has, at the cost of a pawn, opened the g-
file towards the black king and placed its rook there with tempo.
White also enjoys a central space advantage and superior central
control: the move 11.♘d2 increases White’s protection of e4 and
prevents Black from establishing a knight there.
It’s easy to envisage ways for White to improve its position, either by
doubling rooks on the g-file or by advancing the central pawns with
e3-e4, f2-f4 and e4-e5. Black’s resources require more ingenuity to
discover, but they are there and there is no better guide than
Stockfish.
13.0-0-0
13.♗c2 would follow the plan executed in ‘When a plan comes
together’. The fact that Black has not inserted …h7-h6, ♗h4 before
capturing on g2 prompts AlphaZero to try a more ambitious
approach aimed at preventing Black from ever achieving …h7-h6.
Why is …h7-h6 desirable? The essence of Black’s counterplay after
13.0-0-0 lies in the awkward white knight, combined with tactical
features involving the queen on c3 and the bishop on g5. On d2, the

knight obstructs the queen and has curiously few prospects as its
two most desirable squares to move closer to the kingside (e4 and
f3) are well covered by Black’s light-squared bishop.
Annoyingly, the queen on c3 is also tactically vulnerable to a typical
Nimzo-Indian manoeuvre. If you imagine the game continuation 13…
♔h8 14.♖g3 h6 and now the natural 15.♖h3, then Black replies
15…♘d5 when the exposed position of the white queen on c3
combined with the loose bishop on g5 (caused by the natural
attacking move 15.♖h3) allows Black to liquidate the situation:
16.♗xh6 ♘xc3 17. ♗g5+ ♔g8 18.♗h7+ ♔h8 19.♗g6+ is a draw
by repetition. The same idea of …♘d5 would have worked against
15.♗h4.
This leads to a paradoxical conclusion: the advice is normally never
to move pawns in an area where you are weakest or where you are
being attacked. However, as the chapter on ‘Defence’ shows, a key
defensive technique is to sow confusion among attacking pieces by
disrupting them. Here, the bishop on b7, which prevents the white
knight from activating itself effectively, and the h6-pawn, which will
chase the dark-squared bishop to an unprotected square, give Black
a tactical way to break free.
13…♔h8

1.
2.
Avoiding the threat of 14.♗h6 and preparing Black’s defensive
resource of …h7-h6.
14.♖g3
The start of a deep attacking plan that I understood once I saw it
but would not have thought of.
As we discussed, White must deal with Black’s threat of …h7-h6
followed by …♘d5. White has two options:
To leave the bishop on g5, and ‘dare’ Black to expose its king by
taking it.
To move the white queen out of the firing line of …♘d5, which
would allow the bishop to retreat safely to h4 after …h7-h6.
Taking the second option first, my natural instinct was to play
14.♕c2 (threatening 15.♗xh7 due to the pin on the knight on f6)
14…h6 15.♗h4. This is certainly worth considering, but one
drawback is apparent: the dark-squared bishop is on the wrong
diagonal to assist fully in the attack on Black’s king. The bishop
would like to be on the c1-h6 diagonal, attacking the exposed black
kingside pawn on h6. However, 15.♗f4 is met by 15…e5, driving the
bishop away.
The optimal scenario would be to meet …h7-h6 by leaving the
bishop on g5. If Black is unable to take on g5, then the bishop will
exert pressure on h6. The normal way to do this is to meet …h7-h6
with h2-h4, trusting that after …hxg5, hxg5 the open h-file against
Black’s king would be too dangerous. Here, this would not be 100%
clear as the bishop on b7 is covering the h1-square: White would
need to take extra measures to ensure access to this square. For this
reason, White comes up with a fantastic idea that aims to leave the
bishop on g5 after …h7-h6 and ensures access to the h-file if Black
decides to eliminate the bishop with …hxg5.
14…h6 15.f4

15.♖h3 ♘d5 16.♗xh6 ♘xc3 17.♗g5+ ♔g8 18.♗h7+ ♔h8
19.♗g6+ is the draw by repetition we mentioned earlier.
15…hxg5 16.♖h3+
The point. The rook accesses the h-file via the h3-square! If 16.fxg5
♘h5.
16…♔g8 17.fxg5

The threats along the h-file ensure that Black cannot move its knight
away to a safe square like e8. White will thus regain the sacrificed
piece (remaining a sacrificed pawn down) and after gxf6, the g-file
will be opened towards the black king.
17…e5
17…♘h5 18.♖xh5 g6 is another ingenious defence.
18.♖g1 ♕e7 19.gxf6 ♘xf6 20.♖hg3 g6

White has managed to concentrate its forces against the black king
along the g-file, but the battle is not yet won. When defending such
positions, the defender attempts to make the attacker give up pieces
rather than pawns to break open the king’s position: there is a
greater likelihood that the attacker will run out of pieces to give
mate!
21.d5
21.♗xg6 fxg6 22.♖xg6+ ♔h8 looks dangerous, but there is no way
to finish off the attack: 23.♖h6+ ♘h7. If we think why this doesn’t
work and what is missing from a typical AlphaZero attack, we realise
that the knight on d2 is not anywhere near the black king. In a
typical AlphaZero attack, the knight would be on h4 or g5 with
decisive threats. For that reason, AlphaZero continues strengthening
its position instead of sacrificing.
21…♗c8 22.h4
22.♘e4 looked tempting to me. If Black doesn’t exchange knights,
then White moves the knight on to g5. If Black exchanges, then
White intends h4-h5 to break open the kingside with a pawn, and
leave its remaining four pieces to finish off the black king. However,
Black can meet 22.♘xe4 with 22…♘xe4 23.♗xe4 ♕h4, occupying
the h4-square and holding back White’s h2-h4-h5 advance. This
explains AlphaZero’s move 22.h4.
22…♔h8

A clever defensive move by Stockfish, the point of which we see
after White’s 24th move. White played 22.h4 in order to follow up
with ♘e4, but Black has a tactical way to meet 23.♘e4 in an
effective manner.
23.♕c2
23.♘e4 ♘g4 24.♖xg4 ♗xg4 25.♖xg4 f5 is now possible, as
26.♖xg6 is no longer check, due to 22…♔h8. 26…fxe4 27.♖h6+
(27.♗xe4 ♕xh4) 27…♔g7 is nothing for White. After …♘g4, Black
intends to follow up with …f7-f5.
23…♗d7 24.♘e4 ♘g4 25.♘g5 f5

At this point, I wondered whether things had gone wrong for White.
It seems as if Black has constructed a solid barrier on the kingside.
White’s rooks are balked by the black knight on g4, and it isn’t clear
how to open up the position before Black moves on to the attack
with …♔g7 and …♖h8. Interestingly however, my engines (apart
from Stockfish, which gives 0.00) give White a slight edge (0.19).
They don’t believe that Black is out of danger yet, and this is indeed
what happens. White executes a plan that gradually loosens the
black kingside, starting with 26.e4 and 27.♕d2. This puts pressure
on the f5-pawn (which supports the black knight on g4) and it
supports White’s knight on g5 (which makes h4-h5 possible,
followed by jumping on the h-file with both rooks).
26.e4 ♖f6
As we will see with the analysis of 26…♔g7, Black is unable to get
its king out of the corner and White has a simple plan of ♕d2 and
h4-h5, opening up the kingside. Stockfish thus comes up with a new
defensive structure: the rook defends the g6-pawn from f6 and Black
is going to retreat the knight from g4 and play …f5-f4. Black will no
longer have a blockade on the g-file, but the b1-h7 diagonal will be
closed and White’s kingside pressure will be reduced in breadth to
two files: the g- and h-files.

I couldn’t understand why Black would play 26…♖f6: why not
simply play 26…♔g7 and get the rook to h8? The reason is that
after 26.e4, there are problems along the b1-h7 diagonal. 27.♗e2
with a deadly threat:
If Black were to pass, then [27…--] 28.exf5 gxf5 (28…♗xf5 loses
Black’s barrier on the g-file: 29.♕d2 ♘f6 30.h5) 29.♗xg4 fxg4
30.♕h7+.
27…♖h8 28.exf5 gxf5 29.♘e6+ ♗xe6 30.♗xg4 fxg4 31.dxe6
followed by 32.♖xg4+ is deadly.
After 27.♗e2, Black is forced to return its king to h8 to cover the h7-
square. Looking through this variation, I suddenly realised that I
should not have been too surprised by White’s play. This play fits
into the pattern that we saw many times in the ‘Colour complexes’
chapter. White opens a file (the g-file in this case) and then attempts
to open a diagonal towards the opponent’s king (the b1-h7 diagonal
in this case) with the opponent’s king pinned down in the corner.
These characteristics are less obvious in this game as Black has
managed to interpose its knight on g4 and there are still pawns on
the b1-h7 diagonal, but the goals are the same. And finally, we see

AlphaZero bringing a knight into the attack, to an outpost as close as
possible to the opponent’s king.
27.♕d2 ♘h6
A typically well-calculated engine move. It looks risky to leave an
unprotected knight on the same diagonal as the white queen, but
there is no way to exploit it.
28.♗e2
My intuition was suggesting a different approach: I thought that
White should attempt to keep the b1-h7 diagonal open with 28.exf5
gxf5. However my engine’s evaluation drops substantially (from
slightly positive to -0.63) and indeed there does seem to be
something wrong with White’s attacking structure. White only has
the open g-file for its rooks and the knight on g5 blocks them! Black
has the entry squares on the g-file well-covered so there is nothing
decisive: 29.♘e6 ♗xe6 30.♖g6 (30.dxe6 ♕xe6 31.♖g7 ♖g8
32.♕g5 ♖ff8 shows typical engine nonchalance: Black intends …e5-
e4 and then …♘g4, neutralising White’s attack) 30…♘g8 31.dxe6
e4 32.♗f1 ♕xe6 33.♖g7 ♘h6 34.♕g5 ♘g4 35.♗e2 ♖af8 36.♔b1
a4 when it isn’t easy for White to progress as taking on g4 opens up
entry lines for Black’s pieces against White’s king: 37.♗xg4 fxg4

38.♖xg4 ♖f1+. AlphaZero’s approach is to abandon ideas of
opening the b1-h7 diagonal and instead to focus on opening the h-
file for its rooks. With the h-file open, and the rooks doubled there,
the knight on g5 will no longer inhibit the rooks but instead support
their attack against the black king.
28…f4 29.♖3g2 ♘f7
30.h5
Here it is: back on move 22 we said that White’s idea was to
exchange off knights and play h4-h5 to open up the black king and
then finish it off with White’s four remaining pieces. 30.h5 is the
realisation of this plan.
However, Black has secured some achievements in the meantime:
the b1-h7 diagonals and c1-h6 diagonals towards the black king
have been blocked, which reduces White’s attacking potential and
denies AlphaZero its favourite combined attack from diagonals and
files. My impression was that this attack from AlphaZero should be
manageable as Black has enough major pieces in the immediate
vicinity of the g- and h-files to organise exchanges of the major
pieces. I think that might not be so far from the truth, but the
situation was more complicated than I had realised.

30…♘xg5 31.♖xg5 ♔g7
A shocking move for a human: Black moves its king on to the file
where White is attacking and gives White a capture with check at
the same time. However, Black needs to force White to commit itself
to a certain type of capture on g6. If Black waited then White would
play the bishop to d1 or f3, and then threatens to capture on g6 and
to double on the h-file with ♕h2 and ♖h5/h1.
After 31…♔g7, Black is ready to meet 32.hxg6 with …♖h8 covering
the h-file, while after 32.♖xg6+ ♖xg6 33.♖xg6+ ♔h7, Black is
ready to neutralise White’s pressure with an exchange of rooks via …
♖g8. Moreover, Black introduces the defensive idea of …♖a8-h8-h6
to shore up its kingside. I’m painting a picture of a critical moment in
the game – a moment at which you would expect decisive action
from AlphaZero… so you can imagine my confusion when I saw the
next move.
32.♔b1
With the kingside attack at its highest point… AlphaZero tucks its
king away! Garry Kasparov was famous for playing such
consolidating moves at crucial moments of the attack, nipping

possible counterplay in the bud before continuing the assault on the
opponent’s king.
However, you might feel perplexed: surely there wasn’t any hint of
danger to AlphaZero’s king in this position? Isn’t this just a wasted
move?
As the variations in the previous note show, White’s kingside attack
has come as far as it can. Stockfish’s great defensive play has
narrowed White’s pressure to a single point – the pawn on g6 – and
that isn’t enough for a decisive breakthrough. Black needs to be
stretched more, and so AlphaZero plans to open a second attacking
front with a queenside break. Once that happens, its king will not be
safe on the c-file. In other words, 32.♔b1 is the preparation for a
second phase of attack on the opposite side of the board.
32…♖h8
Black continues with its main plan: to threaten 33…♖h6 and thus
force White to capture on g6. In view of what happens in the
coming moves, 32…a4 seemed like a useful strengthening move for
Black, tying down the white queenside and also restricting the white
king’s freedom a little. However, there is probably nothing wrong
with the text.
33.♖xg6+ ♖xg6 34.♖xg6+ ♔f8
34…♔h7 is another reasonable possibility. White will find it difficult
to achieve any more on the kingside but there is the possibility of a
queenside break! 35.c5
A) 35…dxc5 36.d6 cxd6 37.♖xd6 feels suddenly very fraught for
Black: its queenside pawns are under fire and its king is exposed;
B) 35…♗e8 36.cxd6 cxd6 37.♖e6 ♕d8 38.♗g4 looks much more
scary with the king on h7 than on f8: 38…♗f7 39.♗f5+ ♔g8
40.♕g2+ ♔f8 41.h6 ♖g8 42.h7 ♖xg2 43.h8♕+ ♖g8 44.♕h6+
♖g7 45.♖xd6 is a forced win. Note how useful it has been for White
to move the king off the c-file with 32.♔b1 (to avoid any
intermediate checks by the black queen);

C) 35…bxc5 36.♕xa5 (you can understand why 32…a4 appealed to
me: the a5-pawn would not be hanging in such situations) 36…♗e8
37.♖g1 ♖g8 38.♖xg8 ♔xg8. My engines assess the position as
equal. I am a little worried as Black about the a-pawn running, but I
imagine there should be enough counterplay somehow through
pushing the f-pawn. I prefer White though. 39.♕a8 ♔g7 40.a4 ♕f7
and now:
A)41.♗f3 ♕d7 42.a5 ♕b5 43.h6+ (43.a6 ♕d3+ 44.♔a1 (44.♔a2
♗b5) 44…♕xf3 45.♕xe8 ♕f1+ does not work out well for White)
43…♔xh6 44.a6 ♕d3+ 45.♔a2 ♗b5 46.♕f8+ is a draw by
repetition;
B) 41.a5 f3 42.♗xf3 ♕xf3 43.♕xe8 ♕xe4+ is a draw by repetition.
35.c5 ♗e8
35…dxc5 36.d6.
36.cxb6 ♗xg6
36…cxb6 37.♖g1 (37.♖e6 ♕d8 is bad for White as Black follows up
with …♗f7, winning the exchange; 37.♖g2 ♖g8 38.♖h2 ♖g1+
39.♔a2 ♕c7 40.h6 ♔g8 is good for Black: its pieces have become
too active) 37…♖g8 38.♖xg8+ ♔xg8 39.♕c1 ♕d8 (39…♕h7
40.♗f3) 40.♕g1+ ♔h8 41.♕g4 ♕e7 is just balanced. After

1.
2.
Stockfish’s choice in the game, the battle flares up anew, even
though the engine assessment stays at 0.00 for many moves.
The rest of the game is less relevant to our theme. After many
adventures, AlphaZero manages to get a promising ♕+b♙ + ♕
ending but does not manage to convert its advantage.
37.b7 ♕d8 38.hxg6 ♕b8 39.♗a6 ♔g7 40.♕c3 ♔xg6 41.♕f3 a4 42.♕g4+
♔h6 43.♔a1 ♕a7 44.♕c8 ♕b8 45.♕f5 ♔g7 46.♕g4+ ♔f6 47.♔a2 ♔f7
48.♕e6+ ♔g7 49.♕d7+ ♔g6 50.♕f5+ ♔g7 51.♕g5+ ♔f7 52.♕f5+ ♔g7
53.♕d7+ ♔f6 54.♕e6+ ♔g7 55.♕e7+ ♔g6 56.♔a1 ♕f8 57.♕xc7 f3
58.♔a2 f2 59.♕d7 ♕f6 60.♕g4+ ♔f7 61.♕c8 ♔g6 62.b8♕♖xc8
63.♕xc8 f1♕ 64.♗xf1 ♕xf1 65.♕g4+ ♔f6 66.♕h4+ ♔g6 67.♕g4+ ♔f6
68.♕c8 ♔g6 69.♕g8+ ♔h6 70.♕e6+ ♔g5 71.♕e7+ ♔g4 72.♕d7+ ♔g3
73.♕xa4 ♕e2 74.♕b4 ♔f3 75.a4 ♕xe4 76.♕xd6 ♕xa4+ 77.♕a3+
♕xa3+ 78.♔xa3 e4 79.d6 e3 80.d7 e2 81.d8♕ e1♕ … ½-½ (236)
Game: ‘Everything bar the kitchen sink!’
In this super-sharp game in a topical line of the Queen’s Gambit
Declined, AlphaZero builds up its schematic attack against the
kingside and achieves very dangerous play. A recent DVD by the
English grandmaster Simon Williams (himself a keen pusher of
‘Harry’, his h-pawn) describes White’s plan in this line as ‘castle
queenside, h4, ♘g5 and mate on h7’. That’s the sort of plan that
gets AlphaZero buzzing!
Game themes:
Sacrificing material to open lines against the opponent’s king
[13.g4]
Provoking a crisis as a defensive technique [18…e5]
AlphaZero
Stockfish 8
London 2018
1.d4 d5 2.c4 e6 3.♘c3 ♘f6 4.♘f3 ♗e7 5.♗f4 0-0 6.e3 c5 7.dxc5 ♗xc5
8.a3 ♘c6 9.♕c2 ♕a5 10.0-0-0 ♗e7

This was the end position specified by the TCEC opening book.
Admittedly AlphaZero had no choice about castling queenside in this
particular game but seeing its eagerness to do so in other White
games, I’m sure that it wasn’t too disappointed!
11.h4
11.g4 was the original concept but this has been more or less
neutralised after 30 years of tournament play, and 11.h4 is now the
most popular move.
11…a6
Stockfish also continues with the most popular move in this position.
12.♔b1
This is an unusual choice however and has been played in just three
over-the-board games.
12…♖d8

1.
2.
3.
4.
After this move of Stockfish’s, we have left established theory. I
found the next six moves striking as they reinforce my impression of
a standard, schematic AlphaZero approach to attacking the
opponent’s king:
First, a line is opened in front of the opponent’s king, in this case
– as so often – via a sharp pawn sacrifice.
Secondly the file is occupied with a major piece (the rook).
Then a knight is brought into play, close to the opponent’s
kingside.
A bishop is placed on an open diagonal pointing towards the
opponent’s kingside.
Note that 3 and 4 are also sometimes played in the reverse order.
Finally, don’t forget that attacking unit on h4, lurking in the
background, ready to join in the attack with h4-h5-h6. Once all
those factors are achieved, danger looms!
13.g4

Forcing Black to take the g-pawn and thus open the g-file in front of
its own king.
13…dxc4 14.♖xd8+ ♗xd8 15.♗xc4 ♘xg4 16.♖g1
As we would expect, AlphaZero’s rook occupies the open file,
pointing towards the black king. However, I spent some time
investigating alternative schemes as I was keen to get my knight on
c3 – currently inactive – involved in the attack as soon as possible:

A) 16.♘g5 ♘f6 17.♘ce4 (if 17.♗d3 h6 is an annoying response –
AlphaZero’s move order avoids this defensive idea – when it is hard
to maintain the attacking momentum: 18.♗h7+ ♔f8 19.♗d6+ ♗e7
leads nowhere) 17…♘xe4 18.♕xe4 g6 is fairly solid for Black: the
queen on a5 and bishop on d8 attack the knight on g5 and prevent
the natural h4-h5. Moreover, the queen on e4 is exposed to queen
exchanges (…♕f5) and freeing attempts (…e6-e5 and …♗f5);
I decided that I was keen to force a weakening on Black’s kingside
with …g7-g6 (which creates a target for h4-h5) but that I would
prefer my knight to be on e4 rather than my queen (from e4 the
knight attacks d6 and f6 while h4-h5 is also possible). My attention
switched therefore to 16.♘e4:
B) 16.♘e4 ♘ce5 (16…♘f6 17.♘xf6+ ♗xf6 18.♘g5 g6 19.♘e4
♗g7 20.h5 was the main idea aiming to continue with ♗g5 or even
f3 and ♕h2, which looked very dangerous to me even though my
engine maintains a cool 0.00! In this scenario, the rook is better-
placed on h1 than on g1) is the standard engine response,
interfering with White’s attacking structure and intending to
complete queenside development with tempo via a quick …♗d7 and
…♖c8. However, it allows White to exchange off Black’s developed
pieces and gain time for further kingside play. 17.♘xe5 ♘xe5
18.♗xe5 ♕xe5 19.f4 ♕c7 20.♘g5 g6 21.h5 looked promising to me
so my engine’s reaction was rather disappointing: 21…♗xg5 22.fxg5
b5 23.hxg6 hxg6 24.♕c3 e5 is fine for Black!
16…♘f6 17.♘g5

The knight is brought into play on the kingside, eyeing the f7- and
h7-pawns close to the black king. AlphaZero’s pressure builds so
quickly that Stockfish has no time to complete the development of
its queenside pieces (♗c8, ♖a8). It must undertake concrete
defensive measures at once to shore up the kingside, but in so doing
the gap in activity between White’s and Black’s pieces grows still
further. Black’s hopes rest on the solidity of its kingside structure. To
bring its queen and rook close to the black king, AlphaZero will have
to sacrifice heavily, which increases the riskiness of White’s attack.
17…g6
17…♗d7 (17…h6 18.♘xf7) 18.♗d3 h6 (18…g6 transposes to 17…
g6 18.♗d3 ♗d7) 19.♗h7+ ♔f8 20.♘xf7 wins.
18.♗d3

AlphaZero is not holding back in this game: AlphaZero is committing
itself to sacrificing two pieces to break up the black kingside (a
knight on f7 or h7 and a bishop on g6).
18.♗d3 surprised me as it redeploys a piece already in a good
attacking position. However 18.♗d3 introduces a concrete threat
and focuses White’s forces – queen, light-squared bishop, knight and
rook – against Black’s kingside pawn cover.
18…e5
Great defensive play from Stockfish. Sometimes good defence is
about provoking a crisis. Here, White is threatening to sacrifice
material to tear away the defences in front of Black’s king; Stockfish
attempts to take another piece along the way, reasoning that if
White sacrifices two pieces to get rid of Black’s kingside pawns on f7,
g6 and h7 and Stockfish nabs another one on f4, then AlphaZero
may not have enough pieces left to deliver mate!
The move 18…e5 also has a concrete point: it frees an escape path
for the black king to the queenside via e7 and d6, which was
previously controlled by the bishop on f4.
The one big drawback is that the pawn on f7 is weakened as the
block on the a2-g8 diagonal has been removed. However, White’s
last move moved the bishop away from that diagonal, so returning

there will cost time, which should give Black additional defensive
possibilities.
A) The quiet developing move 18…♗d7 is met by a sacrificial
refutation:
19.♘xh7 ♔xh7 (19…♘xh7 20.♗xg6 ♘f8 21.♗h7+ ♔h8 22.♖g8
mate) 20.♗xg6+ ♔h8 (20…♔g8 21.♗h6 with the threat of
22.♗h7+ and 23.♗g7 mate!) 21.♖g5 (the key idea, preventing any

…♕f5 defences) 21…♕b6 22.♗xf7 and White wins;
B) 18…♘e5 is also natural, shoring up f7 and g6 and aiming to
remove a white attacker with …♘xd3. However, there is a tactical
problem: 19.b4 ♕c7 20.♘f3 ♘fd7 21.h5 and the attack continues
while Black is caught in a horrific pin.
19.h5
Again typical AlphaZero: it involves pawns in the storming of the
black kingside. An exchange of the h-pawns (hxg6 hxg6) leaves
Black with just two pawns in its defensive shield and means that
White needs to sacrifice one piece fewer to break through on the
kingside!
19…exf4
19…♘xh5 was my favourite move: Black gains the possibility of …
♗xg5, removing a key white attacker:

20.♗xg6 hxg6 (20…fxg6 21.♕b3+ ♔h8 22.♘f7+ (22.♕f7 ♗f5+
23.♕xf5 ♗xg5 just fails to do the trick!) 22…♔g7 23.♗h6+ ♔f6
24.♘g5 leads to mate) 21.♘xf7 and now:
A) 21…♘xf4 22.exf4
A1) 22…e4 23.♘h6+ ♔h7 24.♕b3 is mate in 8 according to my
engine! (24.♕xe4 ♗f5 is Black’s idea);
A2) 22…♔xf7 23.♕xg6+ ♔e7 24.b4 was my engine’s solution:
24…♕xa3 (24…♘xb4 25.♘e4 improves the idea of ♘e4 still
further: 25…♗e6 26.♕f6+ ♔d7 27.♖g7+ and with the knight on c6
distracted, …♗e7 is no longer possible as a block in response to
seventh rank checks) 25.♕h7+ ♔d6 26.♕d3+ ♘d4 27.♘e4+ is the
amazing idea! The queen has been lured to a3 by 24.b4, which
creates the conditions for this winning discovered check.
B) 21…♘e7 is my engine’s top choice and also AlphaZero’s. Note
how useful the knight on h5 is, providing an ‘umbrella’ on the h-file
which enables the king to shelter there: 22.♕b3 exf4
B1) 23.♘d6+

23…♔h8 24.♕f7 leads to a draw by repetition: 24…♕e5 25.♕f8+
♔h7 26.♘f7 ♗f5+ 27.♔a1 ♕g7 28.♘g5+ ♔h6 29.♘f7+;
B2) 23.♘xd8+ is AlphaZero’s main line. At this stage it gives itself a
52.6% expected score with white:
B21) 23…♔h8 24.♘f7+ ♔g7
B211) 25.e4 ♗d7 26.♘g5 ♖f8 27.♘e6+ ♗xe6 28.♕xe6 ♖f7
29.♘d5 ♔f8 30.♘xe7 ♖xe7 31.♕xg6 ♘g7 is the preferred engine
defence, with an edge for Black;
B212) 25.♘d6 ♕e5 26.♕f7+ ♔h6 (26…♔h8 27.♕f8+ ♔h7 leads
to the same thing) 27.♕f8+ ♔h7 28.♔a1 (a very clever move; if
28.♘ce4 ♗f5) 28…♗f5 (28…♕xd6 29.♘e4, threatening the queen
and 30.♘g5 mate, wins) 29.♕xa8 ♕xd6 30.♕xb7 fxe3 31.fxe3
looks pretty balanced. AlphaZero’s analysis continues for some time,
but the end evaluation is still around a 52.5% expected score.
B22) 23…♘d5 is also considered seriously by AlphaZero: I hadn’t
spotted it was legal! 24.♖g5 (24.♘xd5 ♗f5+ 25.♔a1 ♖xd8 is
AlphaZero’s idea, when there is no decisive discovered check!) 24…
♗f5+ 25.♖xf5 gxf5 26.♘xb7. Worth a diagram!

26…♖b8 27.♘xa5 ♖xb3 28.♘xb3 fxe3 29.fxe3 ♘xe3 30.♘c5 is
just a small edge for White according to AlphaZero (a 52.7%
expected score).
Back to the game! Stockfish preferred to start by capturing a higher-
value piece with 19…exf4.
20.♕b3
20.hxg6 hxg6 (20…fxg6 21.♕b3+ ♔h8 22.♗xg6 wins for White
according to my engine – not 22.♕f7 ♘e5 23.♕f8+ ♘g8 which
wins for Black according to my engine!) 21.♕b3 transposes back to
the game (21.♗xg6 ♔f8 is fairly dangerous for Black, but I couldn’t
see any clear path for White; 21.♗c4 ♔f8).
20…♕c7
20…♘e5 21.hxg6 hxg6 and now:
A) 22.exf4 ♗e6 23.♘xe6 (23.♕xb7 ♘xd3 24.♕xa8 ♗f5 looks very
good for Black) 23…♘xd3 24.♕xb7. Now:
A1) I got so excited by the refutation of 24…♕b6:

25.♖xg6+ ♔h8 (or 25…fxg6 26.♕g7#)
26.♖g8+ ♘xg8 (26…♔xg8 27.♕g2+ followed by mate on g7)
27.♕h1+.

Wow! Wins!
A2) 24…♕f5 is an important defensive move: 25.♔a1 (25.♕xa8
♘xf4+ 26.♔a1 ♘xe6 covers d8) 25…♕xe6 26.♕xa8 ♕b6 27.♘a4
♕d4 28.f5 is about balanced according to my engines.
B) 22.♗xg6 ♕b6 23.♗xf7+ ♔f8. I was ready to stop looking here,
but both my engine and AlphaZero found an amazing way to keep
the attack going, which cost me another few hours of sleep
analysing the position! 24.♘h7+ ♔e7 (if 24…♘xh7 25.♖g8+ ♔e7
26.♘d5+ picks up the queen) 25.♕c2.

Balanced according to my engine! So many pieces are hanging. The
key tactic in the position hinges on the positions of the black king
and black queen. The knight on f6 is preventing a deadly fork on d5
and is thus pinned to this square, while White is threatening to
exchange the knight with 26.♘xf6 (that useful 24.♘h7+ move!).
This tactical motif reduces Black’s options considerably, particularly
as Black has no opportunity for the moment to distract White by
launching counterplay against White’s king:
25…♔xf7 (25…♘xf7 26.♘xf6 and any black recapture allows a fork
on d5) 26.♘xf6 and now:
B1) 26…♗xf6 27.♕h7+ ♔e6 and now:
B11) 28.♕g8+ was my attempt:
B111) 28…♔d6 29.♕f8+ ♔e6 (29…♗e7 30.♖d1+ ♔e6 31.♕g8+
♘f7 32.♕g4+ ♔f6 33.♘d5+ wins!) 30.♕e8+ ♗e7 and now
instead of the perpetual I thought might happen, my engine points
out 31.♖h1 when everything falls apart: 31…♘g4 32.♕g8+ ♔d7
33.♖d1+ ♔c6 34.♕e8+ ♔c7 35.♘d5+;
B112) 28…♔d7 29.♕h7+ ♔c6 30.♕e4+ ♔d7 31.♕h7+ is a
perpetual.
B12) 28.♖d1 is my engine’s move. 28…♘f7 29.♕e4+ ♘e5 30.exf4
♔f7 31.fxe5 ♕e6 32.exf6 ♕xe4+ 33.♘xe4 ♗f5 should end up
holding for Black after a little discomfort.
B2) 26…♕xf6 27.♕h7+ ♔e6 28.♕g8+ ♔d7 (28…♕f7 29.♕xd8
♘c6 might hold too according to my engines. That looks impossible!
30.♕b6 ♔e7 31.e4 ♔f8 32.♕c5+ is AlphaZero’s line, which it
assesses as a 69.0% expected score. With such an open king, Black
will be under continued pressure!)

29.♘e4 (29.♖d1+ ♔c6 30.♕d5+ ♔c7; 29.♖g7+ ♗e7 30.♘d5
♔c6 (the great move that I had missed in my analysis!) 31.♘xf6
♗f5+ 32.♔a1 ♖xg8 33.♘xg8 ♗c5 34.exf4 ♘d3 leads to an even
game) 29…♕e7 30.♖g7.
I’m not sure what to think of this position. My engines consider it
equal, but I think that Black would have more anxious moments to
endure in a practical game. AlphaZero gives itself a 60.0% expected
score and continues the analysis a little further. Its main line is: 30…

♔c7 31.♘c3 ♔b8 32.♖xe7 ♗xe7 33.♕d5 ♘d7 34.e4 a5 35.e5
♘c5 36.♕f7 ♗d8 37.♕xf4 a4 38.♕f8 ♘e6 39.♕g8 with ♘d5
followed by f2-f4 and f4-f5 to come. Black is still under great
pressure, and AlphaZero’s evaluation ends up at a 59.0% expected
score for White.
As you can see, it’s a crazily complicated position!
Stockfish chose another – probably better – method of defence.
21.hxg6 hxg6 22.♗xg6 ♔f8 23.♗xf7 ♗f5+ 24.♔a2 ♕b6 25.♕a4 ♗c7
It seems that Black has done very well: the white queen has been
knocked away to a4, while the bishop on f7 and knight on g5 –
although dangerously placed – don’t seem to have any squares they
can progress to.
However, once again the safety of White’s king is an important
factor. Since there is no immediate danger to White’s position from
the black forces, White has a little more time than you would think
to unearth a weakness in Black’s position. This turns out to be the
piece that White needs to exchange: Black’s light-squared bishop on
f5. If you remove the f5- and f7-bishops from the board you see
gaping holes appearing in Black’s position: e6 is a very tempting
spot for a white knight while the absence of the bishop from f7 gives

White’s queen a tempting square to aim for via ♕c4. In the next few
moves, you will see AlphaZero trying to exchange this light-squared
bishop and Stockfish trying to make it as difficult as possible!
26.♗e6 ♗d3
If 26…♘d4 27.♗xf5 ♘xf5 28.♕c4 wins.
27.♗b3
27.♗c4 is tempting but fails to 27…♘b4+ 28.♕xb4+ ♕xb4
29.♘e6+ ♔e7 30.♖g7+ ♔d6. AlphaZero has to look for another
way to exchange off the bishops.
27…♖e8 28.♗c2
28.♘e6+ ♖xe6 29.♗xe6 fxe3 30.fxe3 ♕xe3 wins for Black.
28…♘e5 29.♗b3
29.♗xd3 ♘xd3 would put the white king in too much danger, but
after the return of the bishop to b3, White is threatening to take the
pawn on f4 with its queen.
A draw by repetition after 29…♘c6 would not be unreasonable, but
Stockfish bravely keeps the game going.
29…fxe3
29…♘c6 would lead to a draw by repetition.
30.fxe3 ♖e7
30…♕xe3 31.♕b4+ is extremely unpleasant for Black: 31…♖e7
32.♘e6+ ♔e8 33.♖g7

33…♖xe6 (33…♖xg7 34.♕f8+ ♔d7 35.♕xg7+) 34.♗xe6 is
difficult for Black.
31.♕h4 ♘g6
During the next sequence of moves, my engines never sway in their
conviction that the position is pretty much equal, although I’m sure
I’d drop a piece somewhere as Black in a practical game.
After a few more skirmishes, the game exchanges off to an equal
endgame.
32.♕h1 ♕xe3 33.♘d5 ♘xd5 34.♕xd5 ♔e8 35.♖d1 ♘f4 36.♕xb7 ♔f8
37.♕c8+ ♔g7 38.♖h1 ♔f6 39.♘f7 ♖xf7 40.♗xf7 ♘e6 41.♗xe6 ♕xe6+
42.♕xe6+ ♔xe6
The dust has settled, leaving an equal endgame which was drawn in
139 moves.

CHAPTER 13
Attacking the king: defence
In this chapter we compare, and marvel at, the very different
defensive skills of both Stockfish and AlphaZero. Stockfish is the
master of holding on to a precipice with its fingernails, AlphaZero is
the master of confusion!

Chapter 13 – Attacking the king: defence – key points
Theme
The defensive techniques applied by both
AlphaZero and Stockfish.
Purpose
Save points against the odds by putting up the
maximum resistance in difficult situations.
What are the prerequisites?
For humans, the biggest obstacle is mental: we
need to program ourselves to search for saving
resources even in the most unpromising
circumstances.
What are the risks?
Stockfish’s defensive approach is difficult to
emulate fully as it requires astonishingly precise
calculation; AlphaZero’s active defensive
approach is more intuitive and may lead to some
shorter games (for better or worse!).
Unique implementation by
AlphaZero
AlphaZero’s main approach is to avoid being
attacked in the first place. When trouble arises,
AlphaZero seems willing to sacrifice material for
general activity. Intuitively, some of these
sacrifices look wrong to me, but even Stockfish
finds it hard to keep AlphaZero under control
once its pieces find room to play around in!
Complexity of resulting positions High complexity: there is no more difficult skill in
chess than good defending.
Any tips
Focus on the general defensive approaches of
both engines. It’s too ambitious to seek to
emulate Stockfish’s calculation: you can’t!
Who does it remind us of?
There is only one Stockfish and only one
AlphaZero!
Now that we know how to attack like AlphaZero, it’s time to turn our
attention to the superb defensive efforts displayed in the match.
Stockfish’s outstanding defensive technique saved half points in
many desperate situations, while AlphaZero’s talent for sowing
confusion was called upon in some of the games starting from TCEC
opening positions. In this chapter we look at the defensive

techniques of both protagonists and comment on the steps
AlphaZero takes in order to avoid too much trouble in the first place.

1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
 
Section A – Stockfish’s defensive skill
Game: ‘Defence and attack of the gods’
This game is fascinating for several reasons. Firstly, it’s a game
where AlphaZero goes ‘wild’ from the very opening, sacrificing the
exchange and a pawn with 7.e5 with a further pawn sacrifice with
12.♗c2. The sacrifices feel dangerous, but also a little speculative,
which makes for a tense struggle: if anything can take material and
emerge from a dangerous situation, it’s Stockfish. Secondly, on move
12, Stockfish takes a peculiar decision, exchanging its dark-squared
bishop – the piece best placed to defend the weakened dark-squares
on the kingside – for a white knight on the queenside (12…♗xc3).
Even stranger, AlphaZero ignores the gift, going to some trouble to
pick off Black’s light-squared bishop (13.♘e2). At first sight it makes
little sense, and it took me some considerable amounts of analysis to
provide explanations. I give a summary here and distil what we can
learn for our own games.
Game themes:
Sacrificing material to damage the opponent’s king’s position
[7.e5]
Establishing a defensive foothold in the centre [9…d5]
Deflecting the opponent’s attacking pieces [11…dxc4]
Weakening the opponent’s position for defensive counterplay
[12…♗xc3]
Exchanging off the opponent’s active pieces to leave passive ones
[13.♘e2, 14.♖xh1]
AlphaZero
Stockfish 8

London 2018
1.d4 ♘f6 2.c4 e6 3.♘c3 ♗b4 4.e3 0-0 5.♗d3 b6
An unusual move order which has been tried by quite a few strong
players, including Alexander Morozevich and Hou Yifan. 6.♘ge2
♗b7 7.0-0 is a very sensible option, giving White the perfect
development scheme in the Rubinstein Nimzo-Indian, while 7.a3
♗xc3+ 8.♘xc3 ♗xg2 9.♖g1 seems like a pawn sacrifice that
AlphaZero would like.
However, AlphaZero ups the ante further with an ultra-sharp plan.
6.e4 ♗b7 7.e5

Rated good for Black at between -1.12 and -1.47 by my engines
while AlphaZero gives White the nod with a 63.3% expected score. A
big difference in insight, which means an exciting clash of styles will
arise.
7…♗xg2 8.exf6 g6
If 8…♕xf6 9.♕g4 ♗xh1 10.♗g5 traps the queen.
9.♗g5

1.
2.
3.
4.
A good moment to examine what White has achieved with its
sacrifice of the exchange and a pawn.
We can recognise themes from earlier chapters, albeit in a slightly
different guise:
The white pawn on f6 performs a similar function to the rook’s
pawn’s march to h6, forcing a weakening of Black’s kingside dark
squares, restricting the movement of the black king and giving
the white queen a mating outpost on g7. Forcing …g7-g6 from
Black has also given White a target on that wing which can be
attacked with both pawns (h4-h5) and pieces (♗d3, ♘e2-f4,
♕g4).
By giving up the pawn on g2, White has opened the g-file
towards the black king. White’s rook on h1 is lost, but its a1-rook
can come to the g-file to assist in the attack on g6.
The move 7.e5 opened the b1-h7 diagonal for White’s light-
squared bishop pointing towards the black king.
White has a large space advantage which gives it plenty of room
to transfer its pieces to the kingside. For example, White will be
able to transfer the a1-rook to h3 via the third rank.
White’s attack is not winning immediately but give White a few free
moves and the situation can become critical.
How should Black defend? One of the secrets of good defence is that
the opponent should never be given a free hand. Whatever the
position, the more weaknesses an opponent has – preferably around
its king – the more able a defender is to place obstacles in the path
of the attacker. Black’s next move is a first important step: 9…d5
establishes contact with the white position and prepares to open
central lines (with …dxc4) to create some targets such as the pawn
on d4.
9…d5 10.♕g4 ♗xh1 11.0-0-0 dxc4

Another important idea. Black opens lines but also tries to deflect
White’s light-squared bishop from the b1-h7 diagonal.
12.♗c2
AlphaZero is going all-out on the attacking path. This move is as
double-edged as it looks. Although it keeps the light-squared bishop
pointing at Black’s g6-pawn, the pawn on c4 prevents White from
transferring the rook to h3 via d3 so there is a sense in which
White’s attacking mobility is decreasing as well as increasing.
Leaving the pawn untouched on c4 also brings a black attacking unit
(with tempo!) to the vicinity of the white king.
12…♗xc3

13.♘e2
The moment I mentioned in the introduction: given the chance to
deprive Black of a key defender of its weak kingside dark squares
(g7), AlphaZero ignores it and runs after the light-squared bishop
instead!
13…♗b4 14.♖xh1 c3
Another mysterious move: it isn’t immediately obvious why Black
needs to play such a thrust.
15.♕h4 ♖e8

Another decision that had me scratching my head in confusion: why
would White allow Black to take on b2 with check first, and why
should Black refuse to?
16.♘xc3 ♘c6 17.♖d1
A big drawback of Black’s move 14…c3 is that White gains an easy
path for its rook to h3 via d3. d3 is a useful square as White also
defends the d4-pawn with its rook, preventing rapid black
counterplay along that channel.
17…♕d7
17…♗f8 immediately allows White to demonstrate the drawback of
allowing the rook free passage to the third rank: 18.♗xg6 hxg6
(18…fxg6 19.f7+) 19.♖d3 when ♖h3 and mate on the h-file
follows.
18.a3 ♗f8 19.♗h6
To remove Black’s dark-squared bishop defender. Why didn’t White
take the chance to do this when Black played 12…♗xc3 is the
obvious thought that pops into the human mind!
19…♕d6
19…♗d6 20.♘e4 is very strong for White. Black’s counterplay in the
centre also creates more weaknesses in its position: 20…e5 21.♘g5

exd4 (21…e4 22.♘xh7 ♕f5 23.♗g5 is the lovely idea, when the
knight on h7 makes White’s next move 24.♕h6 a deadly threat as
24…♗f8 is neutralised by 25.♘xf8; 23…♘d8 24.d5) 22.♗g7 with
the beautiful idea of 22…h5 23.♕xh5 gxh5 24.♗h7#.
20.♗e4
The panic moment for my engines when the generally positive
assessment for Black turns into a big plus for White.

Stockfish returns material and hangs on for grim death:
20…♘xd4
20…♘a5 21.♗f4 ♕d7 22.♖d3 ♘b3+ 23.♔b1 ♖ad8 24.♖h3 h5
25.♕g3 followed by sacrificing on g6 is just winning for White.
21.♗xf8 ♕xf8 22.♖xd4 ♖ad8 23.♖b4 c5 24.♖a4 a5 25.♗c6 ♖d4
26.♖xd4 cxd4 27.♗xe8 dxc3 28.♗a4 cxb2+ 29.♔xb2 ♕c5
And Stockfish managed to hold this much worse position to a draw
in 256 moves!
We now look at some critical moments from the game.
FIRST CRITICAL MOMENT:
12…♗b7
Why was Stockfish willing – indeed eager – to swap off the dark-
squared bishop, a piece that seems crucial for the defence of Black’s
weakened dark squares? I first looked at what would happen if Black
played the natural 12…♗b7.
I decided that the easiest way to test this would be to take on my
trusty partner Smallfish, to see what sort of defence it could put up.
It’s a painful story for me, but I think it’s the best way to

demonstrate the type of defensive skill that even a weaker version of
Stockfish (running on more modest hardware) can demonstrate.
This is how I fared:
Matthew Sadler
Smallfish
London 2018
1.d4 ♘f6 2.c4 e6 3.♘c3 ♗b4 4.e3 0-0 5.♗d3 b6 6.e4 ♗b7 7.e5 ♗xg2
8.exf6 g6 9.♕g4 ♗xh1 10.♗g5 d5 11.0-0-0 dxc4 12.♗c2 ♗b7
In the classic work The Middle Game in Chess by Znosko-Borovsky,
the author – discussing the famous game Nimzowitsch-Capablanca,
St Petersburg 1914 – postulates that if you are behind in
development but have a material advantage, you must not in any
circumstances retreat those pieces which exert pressure on the
enemy position. Maybe they are vulnerable and leaving them in
place may entail some risk, but they prevent the opponent
manoeuvring freely. I have always believed this rule, which is why I
feel that 12…♗b7 should not be a good defensive move.
Black is afraid that the bishop on h1 will become trapped with f2-f3.
If White wins the bishop the material balance would swing back in

1.
2.
3.
White’s favour, so it is understandable that Black should wish to
avoid this. However, all White’s pieces are gearing up for an assault
on the black king and intuitively, you don’t feel that Black should
have time to play normal safe moves. Any move Black makes needs
to achieve the maximum, and 12…♗b7 does not do that. That isn’t
to say however that beating Stockfish from this position is remotely
easy!
13.♘h3
Three ideas came to my mind here:
♕h4, looking for ♕h6 and ♕g7 mate.
♕h4 followed by ♖e1-e3-h3, aiming for mate on h7.
Playing the knight to f4 with a sacrifice on g6 to follow.
While I was pondering, I noticed something peculiar: Black’s light-
squared bishop kept interfering with my plans. The diagrams below
are illustrations of this theme: they do not represent actual
positions. Firstly, if I played ♕h4 and ♖e1-e3, aiming for ♖h3, then
…♗g2, covering the h3-square, was a surprisingly annoying
counter:
After ♖g3 …♗f1 White still isn’t closer to playing ♖h3 !

Secondly, if I played ♕h4 and ♘ge2, then …♗f3 was often an
annoying resource, pinning the knight on e2 to the rook on d1:
For that reason, I decided to delay the plan of ♖e1-e3-h3 and play
my knight to f4 via h3 (so that it could not be pinned by …♗f3).
13…♖e8
Allowing the black bishop to drop back to f8 if necessary to protect
g7.
14.♘f4 ♕d7

1.
2.
A remarkable move that did not figure in my list of candidate moves.
Of course, there is a sense in which this move is natural: the typical
trick of ♘xg6 hxg6, ♗xg6 fxg6, f7+, winning the black queen, is in
the air (although at this stage it may cost White too much material)
so it is reasonable to defend against it. However, there is more to it
than that. Just as with the earlier …♗g2 and …♗f3, Stockfish is
fighting to knock White’s attacking pieces off their perches, and in so
doing to exact extra ingenuity and calculation from White. Stockfish
does not intend to allow White to build up without interference. This
move threatens …e6-e5, attacking the knight on f4 and a trade of
queens. It seemed natural therefore to play the next move in my
plan.
15.♕h4 ♗f3
This disruptive bishop move has two points:
It attacks the rook on d1. If Black captures the rook on d1, then
White’s d4-pawn will be hanging, which will give Black
counterplay against d4.
The bishop covers kingside squares like h5 and thus gives Black’s
kingside a little extra support with gain of tempo.
16.a3

Clearly I needed to deal with Black’s disruptive tactics in a vigorous
manner.
16…♗d6
A) 16…♗xd1 17.axb4 is good for White: White picks up a third
piece due to the threat of 18.♕h6 and mate, and 17…♗h5 18.♘xh5
gxh5 19.♕e4 loses for Black;
B) 16…♗xc3 17.♕h6.
17.♘e4
Creating counterthreats against Black’s king to deal with the attack
on d1.
17…♗xe4
17…♗xd1 18.♘xd6 is very strong for White: 18…♕xd6 19.♘xg6
hxg6 20.♗xg6 fxg6 21.f7+ ♔xf7 22.♕h7+ ♔f8 23.♗h6# is the
surprising mate I was aiming for!
18.♗xe4 ♘c6 19.♔b1
19.♗h6 was my attempt in my first game against Smallfish, aiming
to play ♗g7 and then later sacrifice on g6: 19…♘xd4 (very sharp,
hitting back at the most obvious weakness in White’s position)
20.♘xg6 (20.♖xd4 ♗xf4+ 21.♗xf4 ♕xd4 22.♕h6 ♕xf6 cleans up
White’s attacking force!) 20…♘b3+ 21.♔b1 fxg6 22.♗g7 ♖ad8
23.♕h6 ♖f8 24.♗xg6 hxg6 25.♕xg6 ♖f7 looked impressive to me,

but is actually rated as -8.26 by my engine! 26.♗h6+ ♔h8 27.♖g1
♗e5 28.♕h5 ♕d3+ 29.♔a2 ♕h7 and it was time for another
attempt.
19…♘a5 20.♖g1
I worked this line out to a draw, and for once my analysis proved to
be correct!
20…c3 21.♘xg6 fxg6 22.♗xg6 hxg6 23.♕h6 c2+ 24.♔xc2 ♕h7
It looks as if Black is winning, but White has a trick up his sleeve.
24…♕c6+ 25.♔d1 ♕f3+ 26.♔e1 ♕e4+ 27.♗e3 ♕b1+ 28.♔e2
♕c2+ 29.♗d2 ♕e4+ is a different draw by repetition.
25.f7+ ♕xf7 26.♗f6 ♕xf6 27.♖xg6+ ♕xg6+ 28.♕xg6+ ♔h8 29.♕h6+
♔g8 30.♕g6+ ♔h8 31.♕h6+ ♔g8 32.♕g6+ ♔h8 ½-½
Well, perhaps that’s enough of me struggling to overcome the
mighty Smallfish! What was AlphaZero intending?
AlphaZero analysis
London 2018
1.d4 ♘f6 2.c4 e6 3.♘c3 ♗b4 4.e3 0-0 5.♗d3 b6 6.e4 ♗b7 7.e5 ♗xg2
8.exf6 g6 9.♕g4 ♗xh1 10.♗g5 d5 11.0-0-0 dxc4 12.♗c2 ♗b7 13.♘h3
♘d7
AlphaZero’s first choice. AlphaZero does not consider 13…♖e8 to be
the best defence, dedicating relatively little time to its analysis:
14.♕h4.

AlphaZero’s move is more flexible than my 14.♘f4. White has a
serious threat of 15.♗e3 and 16.♘g5 as well as 15.♘f4. After 14…
♗f8 15.♘f4 AlphaZero gives itself a 77.3% expected score.
14.♕h4 ♗d6 15.♗e4
Not a move that the engines suggest off the bat! AlphaZero
exchanges off the disruptive light-squared bishop and brings its
queen’s knight into the kingside fray.
15…♗d5

After 15…♗xe4 16.♘xe4 AlphaZero gives itself an 88.3% expected
score.
16.♘xd5 exd5 17.♗xd5 c6 18.♗xc4 b5 19.♗b3 a5 20.f4 a4 21.♗c2
… was AlphaZero’s main line, with a whopping 84.5% expected
score!
SECOND CRITICAL MOMENT:
12…♗xc3
I felt at least that I understood now why Stockfish had played 12…
♗xc3: it was desperately looking to weaken the white king to
generate counterplay. However, I still didn’t understand why White
should not simply take the bishop. Time to put the idea to the test!
Matthew Sadler
Smallfish
London 2018
1.d4 ♘f6 2.c4 e6 3.♘c3 ♗b4 4.e3 0-0 5.♗d3 b6 6.e4 ♗b7 7.e5 ♗xg2
8.exf6 g6 9.♕g4 ♗xh1 10.♗g5 d5 11.0-0-0 dxc4 12.♗c2 ♗xc3 13.♕h4
13.bxc3 ♕d6 14.♕h4 ♕a3+ 15.♔b1 ♖d8 worried me quite a bit.
16.♕h6 is met by 16…♕f8 while Black threatens …♖d8-d5-b5 as

well as taking on c3. For that reason, I decided that inserting
13.♕h4 first – forcing 13…♘d7 due to the threat of 14.♕h6 and
15.♕g7 mate – was the best way to capture the dark-squared
bishop. AlphaZero seems to think this is a pretty good move too,
giving Black only a 21.2% expected score.
13.♕h3 was another idea I had, to follow up with f2-f3, trapping the
bishop on h1 when the f3-pawn is defended by the queen (in
contrast to 14.♕h4): 13…♔h8 (possible as the bishop on g5 is not
defended) 14.bxc3 (14.♗xg6 fxg6 15.f7 ♕xg5+ loses now) 14…
♕d5 15.♗h6 ♖g8 16.f3 ♘d7 17.♗e4 ♕a5 18.♗g7+ ♖xg7
19.fxg7+ ♔xg7 20.♗xa8 ♕xc3+ 21.♔b1 ♕b4+ 22.♔c2 ♕a3.
This proved very unpleasant to meet, despite the rook advantage
and the trapped bishop on h1! The black king is completely safe
while White’s king is exposed and bereft of piece support; 23.♔b1
c3.
13…♗xb2+
Black takes the opportunity to inflict extra damage on White’s king’s
position. 13…♔h8 is the main defence that AlphaZero considers:
14.bxc3 ♕d6 15.♔b2 ♗g2 16.♘e2 ♖g8 17.♘f4 ♗f3 18.♖e1 ♘c6
19.♖xe6

19…♕d7 20.d5, which seems to win! 20…♗xd5 21.♖e3 moves the
rook over to the h-file with decisive effect!
14.♔xb2 ♘d7
14…♔h8 15.♗xg6 fxg6 16.f7 is White’s typical trick when Black
must give up its queen. This is a very good version for White: 16…
♕d7 17.♗f6# is the key mating idea.
15.f3

A critical position. Black has given up its dark-squared bishop to
weaken White’s king’s position and White has lined up on Black’s
dark squares and shut in the light-squared bishop on h1. Note also
that White always has at least a draw by repetition with the
sequence ♕h6 ♘xf6, ♕h4 ♔g7, ♕h6+. These are the types of
positions in which human players struggle to find an adequate
continuation, but in which engines like Stockfish find an
inexhaustible supply of defensive possibilities! Black needs to find a
way to create counterplay against the white king. My attempts as
Black were unsuccessful, but Stockfish managed just fine!
15…c3+ 16.♔a1 ♔h8 17.♗xg6 fxg6 18.f7 ♕xg5 19.♕xg5 ♖xf7
White has won back a lot of material and would have a winning
position if only the bishop on h1 could be trapped. However, this
seems to be impossible. White does keep an advantage but I didn’t
manage to convert in my practice games:
20.♕e3 c2 21.♖c1 ♖f6 22.♖xc2 c5 23.h4 ♖af8 24.h5 gxh5 25.dxc5
bxc5 26.♖d2 ♖8f7 27.♘h3 ♖xf3 28.♕xe6
… was as far as I got, concluding that at least a human would find
this difficult to defend!

I felt White could get an advantage after 12…♗xc3 by taking the
dark-squared bishop after the preliminary move 13.♕h4. However,
seeing the power of Black’s counterplay against the weakened white
king and the disruptive effect of Black’s light-squared bishop in many
of these games and variations, it started to dawn on me why
AlphaZero had preferred 13.♘e2. It wasn’t looking to get rid of
Black’s best defensive piece (the dark-squared bishop): it was
looking to get rid of the black piece that could most inhibit its own
activity: Black’s light-squared bishop with its annoying …♗g2 and …
♗f3 disruptions.
There is another point to 13.♘e2 if Black continues as against
13.♕h4 and tries to damage White’s king’s position:
Smallfish
Matthew Sadler
London 2018
1.d4 ♘f6 2.c4 e6 3.♘c3 ♗b4 4.e3 0-0 5.♗d3 b6 6.e4 ♗b7 7.e5 ♗xg2
8.exf6 g6 9.♕g4 ♗xh1 10.♗g5 d5 11.0-0-0 dxc4 12.♗c2 ♗xc3 13.♘e2
♗xb2+ 14.♔xb2

The difference here is that Black’s light-squared bishop is under
wraps: the queen on g4 covers g2 and – most importantly – f3,
which means no …♗f3 ideas. White’s kingside attack proceeds at
maximum pace!
14…♗d5 15.♕h4 ♘d7 16.♘f4
♖g1 is coming.
16…♗f3
16…c3+ 17.♔a1 and ♖d3-h3 will follow.
17.♘xe6
A very big blow!
17…fxe6 18.f7+ 1-0
Now a few more things from the main game began to make sense.
14…c3 was another attempt to weaken White’s king’s position and
create a basis for future counterplay. White’s 15.♕h4 was only
played once Black’s light-squared bishop was gone (and thus the
chance for counterplay with …♗f3 was gone).
There was one more thing I wasn’t able to explain: why did
Stockfish not play 15…cxb2+ after 15.♕h4?

THIRD CRITICAL MOMENT:
15…cxb2+
The game continuation left White’s king completely safe, which
allowed White much greater freedom to focus its forces against the
black king.
I spent many hours trying to make 15…cxb2 work against Stockfish,
which led to some amazing games. However, there’s not much point
showing those since AlphaZero found much a better solution!
AlphaZero analysis
London 2018
1.d4 ♘f6 2.c4 e6 3.♘c3 ♗b4 4.e3 0-0 5.♗d3 b6 6.e4 ♗b7 7.e5 ♗xg2
8.exf6 g6 9.♕g4 ♗xh1 10.♗g5 d5 11.0-0-0 dxc4 12.♗c2 ♗xc3 13.♘e2
♗b4 14.♖xh1 c3 15.♕h4 cxb2+ 16.♔b1
A typical defensive idea, using the opponent’s pawns as cover for
your own king. This position is assessed by AlphaZero as an 83.4%
expected score.
16…♖e8 17.♖d1

This is AlphaZero’s choice, bringing the rook into play, defending d4
against any counterplay and preparing ♖d1-d3-h3. I’d looked at this
move but was put off by 17…♕d5.
17…♕d5
I’d thought this was annoying for White as the queen seemed to be
able to invade the white position and cause enough trouble for a
draw by repetition. However, AlphaZero has seen further:
A) 17…♕d7 (AlphaZero analyses many alternatives here) 18.♘f4
♘c6 (18…♕b5 19.♖d3 and ♖h3 follows) 19.♖d3 e5 is the end of
AlphaZero’s line, which looks winning for White: 20.dxe5 ♕c8
21.♖h3;
B) 17…♘c6 18.♗xg6

… is the trick we have seen already. Stockfish 9 takes about 12
seconds to see it, which is an eternity for that tactical monster! 18…
hxg6 (18…fxg6 19.f7+) 19.♖d3 ♕d5 20.♖h3 ♕f5+ 21.♔xb2 ♕xh3
22.♕xh3 and the threat of ♗g5-h6-g7 is impossible to parry without
further material loss.
18.♘f4
18.♗e4 ♕c4 19.♘f4 ♗f8 20.♘xg6 (20.♗xa8 ♘a6 is shockingly
strong for Black with the double threat of 21…♖xa8 and 21…♘b4)
20…hxg6 21.♖d3 ♘d7 22.♗xg6 ♘xf6 is Stockfish’s amazing
defence against the line I wanted to play.
18…♕f3 19.♖d3 ♕h1+ 20.♔xb2
I’d assumed 20.♖d1 was necessary: 20…♕f3 is a draw by
repetition.
20…♕e4 21.♔b3

AlphaZero’s move, escaping the check on d4 and preparing 22.♖h3.
21.♖h3 ♕xd4+ 22.♔b1 h5 is the typical last-gasp Stockfish
defence! 23.♕g3 ♗d6 keeps White’s pieces at bay.
21…a5
21…♘c6 22.♕xh7+ ♔xh7 23.♖h3+ ♔g8 24.♗xe4 wins material as
24…♘xd4+ 25.♔xb4 ♖ad8 26.♗h6 mates.
22.♖h3 a4+ 23.♔xb4 ♕e1+
23…♕xd4+ 24.♔a3 ♕c5+ 25.♔b2 ♕d4+ 26.♔c1 ♕a1+ 27.♗b1
covers all the checks, and now it’s AlphaZero’s turn on the kingside:
27…h5 28.♘xg6 fxg6 29.♕e4.
24.♔c4 h5

1.
2.
3.
25.♘xg6 ♘c6 26.♘e7+ ♖xe7 27.♗e3 ♔f8 28.♕xh5 ♔e8 29.fxe7 ♔xe7
30.♕g5+ ♔d7 31.♖h7 ♔c8 32.♖h8+ ♔b7 33.♖xa8 ♔xa8 34.a3
This is AlphaZero’s long main line, ending in a winning position for
White.
What can we conclude from this game? Firstly, I think that
AlphaZero’s evaluation was closer to the truth than the engines’
initial assessment: the position is exceptionally dangerous for Black.
Secondly, a successful defence of such a position demands
extraordinary calculation and ingenuity from the black side. However,
some basic defensive rules emerged from Stockfish’s play to help
you reach a position in which tactical possibilities are present:
Open the centre (9…d5): counterplay against the opponent’s
position is the only way that you will be able to defend such a
position in the long run. An attacker who is not under pressure
will always prevail.
Deflect pieces away from the attack if you can (11…dxc4). If you
can drag a piece away from a dangerous attacking diagonal, do
so!
Use active pieces to discomfit and annoy the opponent’s attacking
pieces (…♗f3 and …♕d7 in many of my games against

4.
1.
2.
3.
1.
2.
Stockfish). This is an important way of slowing down the
opponent’s attack.
Weaken the opponent’s king (12…♗xc3, 14…c3). In the long run,
counterplay is the only thing that can save you. All the strange
and ‘undeserved’ tactics that the engines found in this position
stemmed from counterplay based on an open white king.
I would now like to present a second example of Stockfish’s
defensive ability in a game that impressed me enormously from both
sides.
As seen in the previous game, Stockfish’s defence generally
encompasses three techniques:
Stockfish’s defensive techniques:
Distracting/nudging the opponent’s attacking pieces from their
best positions.
Using its active pieces to create confusion in the opponent’s
position.
Creating a weakness in the opponent’s king’s position to gain
counterplay.
Game: ‘Using a queenside file to defend the kingside’
A wonderful game by both protagonists. AlphaZero takes an
unexpected decision on move 23 to fix the centre (23.♗xd5), give
up its advantage of the two bishops and open the c-file for a hitherto
passive black rook on c8. In return, White gets the chance to assault
the black kingside structure with g2-g4. This assault is unexpectedly
venomous, but Stockfish demonstrates an astonishing level of
defensive technique to keep its head above water.
Game themes:
Fixing the centre [23.♗xd5]
Avoiding the automatic occupation of an open file

AlphaZero
Stockfish 8
London 2018
1.d4 ♘f6 2.c4 e6 3.♘f3 b6 4.g3 ♗e7 5.♗g2 0-0 6.♘e5 c6 7.♘c3 ♗a6
8.0-0 d5 9.♖e1
An opening used frequently in games between AlphaZero and
Stockfish. Stockfish sets up a solid central structure with …c7-c6 and
…d7-d5 to blunt the light-squared bishop on g2 and then places its
own light-squared bishop on the active but more loosening a6-
square (it attacks the c4-pawn but reduces the defence of c6).
AlphaZero this time does not rush to fix the centre with cxd5.
9…♗xc4 10.♘xc4 dxc4 11.e3
This restrained move is a novelty. 11.e4 was played once before in
Lalith-Valsecchi, Chennai 2011: 11…♘bd7 12.a4 e5 13.♗e3 ♗b4
14.♕e2 was pleasant for White.
11…♘d5 12.a4 ♘a6 13.♗f1 ♘ab4 14.♗xc4 ♘f6 15.e4 ♕d7 16.e5 ♘fd5
17.♘xd5 ♘xd5 18.♕g4 g6 19.♗h6 ♖fc8 20.h4 ♗f8 21.♗g5 h5 22.♕f3
♗e7 23.♗xd5 cxd5 24.g4
A good moment to pause and assess the scale of the defensive
challenge.

I was not amazingly impressed with White’s concept when I started
analysing: 23.♗xd5 opens the c-file for Black’s rook and gives up
White’s advantage of the two bishops. White’s rooks need a couple
of moves to get involved on the kingside (♖a1-a3-f3/h3 or ♔g2 and
♖h1), which wins Black some time to organise a defence. However,
Black’s key dilemma is that there isn’t time to launch a counterattack
against the white king in just a couple of moves, and it isn’t clear
whether a couple of moves is enough to rally sufficient defensive
troops on the kingside.
The more I looked at lines together with my engines, the less happy
I was with Black’s position. Stockfish’s defensive idea in this game is
pure genius. In the previous game, we mentioned that Stockfish
likes to use its active pieces to distract and confuse its opponent’s
attacking pieces, and that is exactly what Stockfish envisages. By so
doing, Stockfish gains time to organise a defensive structure on the
kingside and accelerate its counterplay along the open c-file by a
crucial tempo. It is a masterclass in defensive economy!
24…♗xg5 25.hxg5 ♕e7
Black does not want to open the h-file as it will then be virtually
impossible to prevent White’s rooks from invading there. However,
the alternative of allowing White to take on h5 seems just as bad.
White will simply capture the weakling on h5 and mate Black’s king
on the h-file.
Stockfish starts off by trying to lessen the attack on the h5-pawn by
drawing the white queen away from f3, which buys it a little time
(the h5-pawn will now only fall after additional preparation):
A) 25…hxg4 26.♕xg4 (26.♕f6 is very tempting, intending to play
♔g2 and bring White’s rooks to the h-file as soon as possible.
However, it isn’t as easy as you might think to double rooks there:
26…♕d8 27.♔g2 ♕xf6 28.gxf6 ♖c2 29.♖h1 ♖ac8 30.♖h6 ♖c1
(stops the rook getting to h1!) 31.♖a3 ♖d1 32.♖g3 (looking for
♖g3xg4-h4) 32…♖xd4 wins for Black. We see here the defensive
power of the c-file that White has conceded to Black) 26…♔g7

27.♔g2 (looking for ♖h1) 27…♖h8 (Black attempts to fight for the
h-file but its king is too constricted to allow Black to do this
effectively) 28.♕f4 ♖h5 (28…♕e7 29.♕f6+ ♕xf6 30.exf6+ ♔f8
31.♖ac1 – Black’s attempt to prevent invasion on the h-file has
failed: White now invades on the c-file with decisive effect) 29.♕f6+
♔g8 30.♖h1 is unpleasant for Black. White’s threat is to take on h5
and follow up with ♖h1;
B) 25…h4 26.♔g2 ♕e7 27.♕f4 ♔g7 28.♖h1 ♖h8 29.♕f6+ ♕xf6
30.exf6+ ♔g8 31.♖ac1. By fighting to contain the threat on the h-
file, Black has lost the grip on the c-file. The exchange of queens
under these circumstances further constricts the black king, which
allows White to gain control of the c-file with decisive effect.
26.♕f4
26.♕f6 ♕xf6 27.exf6 ♖c2 should be alright for Black: it makes a big
difference that the h-file is not open! 28.♔g2 (28.gxh5 gxh5
29.♔g2 ♔h7 followed by …♔g6 ! Remember this idea: g6 becomes
a strong square for a black piece after White takes on h5) 28…♖ac8
29.♖h1 (29.gxh5 gxh5 30.♖h1 ♔h7 31.♖xh5+ ♔g6 32.♖ah1
♖d2 33.♖h7 ♖cc2 34.♖g7+ ♔f5 35.♖xf7 ♔xg5 will be fine for
Black) 29…hxg4 30.♖h4 ♖c1 is the same idea we saw earlier:
White never makes it to double on the h-file!
Once again, the kingside defensive power of a file on the queenside
is demonstrated!

26…♕b4
An amazing defensive manoeuvre, that didn’t make any sense to me
at first! Black has spotted that after a future gxh5, gxh5, its queen
would be excellently placed on g6, defending the h5-pawn, attacking
White’s g5-pawn, covering Black’s kingside in general, and ready to
jump into a square on the h7-b1 diagonal (for example e4, c2 or b1)
to join forces with Black’s doubled rooks on the c-file and create
counterplay.
(see diagram)

1.
2.
1.
2.
This diagram shows the target set-up of the black pieces after White
captures on h5. Already not an easy concept to spot, but it gets
more complicated. Which path do you want to take to the g6-
square? The most obvious path is via f8-g7-g6. However, there turn
out to be two tricky points:
White can delay taking on h5 (Black cannot place its queen on g6
until the g6-pawn has moved).
This means that Black is far too slow creating any counterplay
combining its queen and rooks on the c-file.
The analysis of the variations 26…♕f8 and 26…♖c4 gives some
clues as to what might work:
A) 26…♕f8 27.♔g2 ♕g7 28.♖h1 ♖c2 29.gxh5 gxh5 30.♖xh5
♕g6 31.♖ah1, threatening 32.♖h8+. Black is lost;
B) 26…♖c4 is also an obvious attempt, tying White down to the
d4-pawn before transferring the queen and hinting at some
combined counterplay against the d4-pawn with …♕b4. However,
Black is a move slower getting its queen to g6, and the attack on d4
doesn’t slow White down very much! 27.gxh5 gxh5 28.♖e3 is my
engine’s choice and the strongest idea. White is simply intending to
double on the h-file with ♖h3, ♔g2 and ♖ah1 followed by taking
on h5. 28…♕b4 (this is why White played 28.♖e3: if White had
played 28.♖a3, then 28…♕b4 would hit a loose rook on e1) 29.g6
fxg6 30.♖g3 and White is winning.
We need to think creatively about the path of the queen to the g6-
square. f8-g7-g6 is obvious, but there is also the possibility of …
♕b4xb2-c2-g6! There are several interesting things about the path
b4xb2-c2 to g6:
Black takes a pawn on the way.
The pawn on b2 defends the c3-square: this gives Black access to
an extra square on the open c-file (which then allows the
exchange of any white rooks on the third rank with …♖c3)

3. While the black queen is on b2 or c2, it harasses the white rooks,
even tethering them a little so that White is unable to transfer its
rooks easily to the kingside for a short while.
In other words, by reaching the g6-square via b4xb2-c2, Black gets
the chance to interrupt the coordination of White’s pieces whilst
supporting the invasion of its rooks on the c-file.
27.gxh5
27.♔g2 ♕xb2 28.gxh5 gxh5 29.♖h1 ♕e2 (29…♖c4 30.♖xh5
♕xd4 31.♕xd4 ♖xd4 32.♖ah1 ♔g7 33.♖h7+ ♔g6 34.♔g3 ♔xg5
35.♖1h5+ ♔g6 36.♖7h6+ ♔g7 37.♖h7+ is a draw by repetition)
30.♖h4 ♕e4+.
27…gxh5
28.♖e2
Since pawn sacrifices on b2 allow Black’s queen to find a path to the
g6-square through White’s position, AlphaZero spends a couple of
tempi consolidating its position. The rook on d2 protects b2 and d4
and prepares ♔g2 and ♖h1, bringing the queen’s rook into play to
attack the black kingside weakness on h5.
A) 28.♖a3 ♕xe1+ is the first point of 26…♕b4. By attacking the
rook on e1, Black stops White from transferring the queen’s rook to

the kingside along the third rank (specifically f3, attacking f7; or h3,
attacking h5);
B) 28.♖e3 (attempting to transfer the king’s rook to f3 or h3) 28…
♕xb2 (gaining a tempo by hitting the rook on a1) 29.♖ae1 ♖c1
(Black has been quick to neutralise White’s rooks: since the queen is
on b2, Black hasn’t needed to play …♖ac8 to achieve …♖c1) 30.g6
fxg6 31.♕f6 ♖xe1+ 32.♖xe1 ♔h7 is fine for Black;
C) 28.♔h2 ♕xb2 29.g6 was my final hope, but… 29…fxg6 30.♖g1
♕c2 is the amazing point of Stockfish’s defence in all its glory!
31.♖xg6+ (31.♕f6 ♔h7; 31.♕h6 ♕xf2+ 32.♖g2 ♕h4+ 33.♔g1
♕xd4+ 34.♔h2 ♕xe5+ 35.♔h3 ♖c3+ and Black wins) 31…♕xg6
32.♖g1 ♕xg1+ 33.♔xg1 ♖c7 34.♕h6 ♖e8 looks equal. Black’s
king is open, which will give White perpetual opportunities but not
much more.
28…♖c4
Combining with the queen on b4 to attack the pawn on d4 and thus
gaining a tempo to double on the c-file, activating the c8-rook and
making maximum use of the c-file that White opened with 23.♗xd5.
29.♖d2 ♕f8

Phenomenal! Now that Stockfish has stacked matters just a little
more in its favour, Stockfish goes back to the other path to the g6-
square: b4-f8-g7-g6.
It’s one of those bizarre conundrums: the immediate 26…♕e7-f8-
g7-g6 was too slow to cover the black kingside adequately, but 26…
♕e7-b4-f8-g7-g6 is just fast enough! How can that be?
Firstly, White has not been able to meet 26….♕b4 by bringing the
rook to the third rank. 26…♕b4 has forced White to play two
defensive moves – 28.♖e2 and 29.♖d2 – which have not advanced
the cause of White’s kingside attack in any way. In fact, Black has
gained time with the move 28….♖c4 – preparing to double rooks on
the c-file – because it combined with the queen on b4. That means
that Black’s counterplay is coming one move faster in comparison to
26…♕f8.
Secondly, White has played gxh5 already, which means that g6 is
already free for the black queen, so Black’s queen is going there
directly.
Thirdly, although the rook on d2 now covers entry points on the
second rank (c2 in particular for the black rooks or queen), it has
weakened White’s cover of entry points on the first rank. The first
rank is a key black source of counterplay against the white king. In
the coming moves, you’ll see how valuable that extra tempo 28…
♖c4 is.
29…♖ac8 30.♖a3 ♖c2 31.g6 is an example of what can go wrong
if Black neglects his kingside: 31…fxg6 32.♖g3.
30.♖d3
White maintains the queen’s rook on the first rank to cover Black’s
counterplay with …♖c1+ (together with the queen on f4) and
prepares to transfer the king’s rook to the kingside now that Black is
no longer threatening the d4-pawn with queen and rook. However,
Black’s stunning defensive idea 26…♕b4 has clearly knocked a bit of
momentum out of White’s position. The transfer of White’s rook to

the kingside has taken the route ♖e1-e2-d2-d3-f3/h3 instead of
simply ♖e1-e3-h3 !
30.♖a3 ♕g7 31.♖h3 ♖c1+ 32.♔g2 ♕g6 33.♕f3 ♕b1 34.♖xh5
♖g1+ 35.♔h2 ♖c8 36.♖d3 ♖cc1
is a graphic demonstration from my engine of the value of access to
the first rank for Black. White must force a perpetual with 37.♖h8+
♔xh8 38.♕f6+ ♔g8 39.♕d8+ ♔g7 40.♕f6+.
30…♕g7 31.♖f3
Attacking f7 and thus trying to keep the black queen cooped up
while AlphaZero organises bringing the queen’s rook into play.
31…♕g6
Eyeing the e4-square for counterplay.
32.♖e1
This feels slow to me: Black is not threatening 32…♕e4 as f7 hangs.
I think that 32.♔h2 would implement the plan in the game with an
extra tempo, but it doesn’t make any material difference: the
defensive ideas are the same in both cases and Black seems to hold.
32…♖ac8 33.♔h2 ♖8c7
Economically defending f7 while maintaining Black’s grip on the open
c-file. Black’s queen is free to move along the h7-b1 diagonal.

34.♖g1 ♖xa4
35.♕h4
35.♕e3 is the move I was keen on, ensuring that …♕e4 does not
come with tempo as it does in the game: 35…♕e4 36.g6 ♕h4+
37.♖h3 ♕xd4
is the engine defence. With this manoeuvre, Black diverts the white
rook from the f-file (which reduces the power of gxf7+) while still

maintaining the option of exchanging queens. Crucially, the rook on
a4 and queen combine to offer the possibility of …♕f4+, exchanging
queens if White’s queen becomes too active:
A) 38.♕h6 ♕f4+;
B) 38.gxf7+ ♔xf7 39.♖f3+ ♔e8 40.♖f8+ ♔d7 (40…♔xf8
41.♕h6+ ♔e8 42.♕xe6+ leads to mate) wins for Black: 41.♖g7+
♔c6 42.♕c1+ ♖c4;
C) 38.♖xh5 is the engine’s best line: 38…♕xe3 39.gxf7+ ♔xf7
40.♖h7+ ♔f8 41.♖h8+ ♔f7 42.♖h7+ with a draw by perpetual
check.
35…♖ac4 36.♖f6 ♕e4 37.♖f4 ♕g6 38.♖f6 ♕e4 39.♕xh5 ♕xd4 40.g6
40…♕h4+
Again this saving resource, exchanging off the queens at the peak of
White’s attack! The resulting position is more comfortable for White,
but Stockfish holds positions like this against anyone!
41.♕xh4 ♖xh4+ 42.♔g3 ♖b4 43.♔h3 fxg6 44.♖gxg6+ ♖g7 45.♖xe6
b5 46.♖a6 ♖xg6 47.♖xg6+ ♔f7 48.♖a6 ♖xb2 49.f4 d4 50.♔g4 d3
51.♖xa7+ ♔e6 52.♔f3 d2 53.♖a6+ ♔e7 54.♖d6 b4 55.♔e3 ♖b3+
56.♔e4 ♖c3 57.♖xd2 b3 58.f5 ♖c6 59.♔d5 ♖b6 60.f6+ ♔f7 61.♖b2
♖b4 62.♔c5 ♖b8 63.♔c4 ♖e8 64.♔d4 ♖b8 65.♔c4 ♖e8 66.♔d4 ♖b8
67.♔d5 ♖b4 68.♔c5 ♖b8 69.♔d4 ♖b4+ 70.♔d5 ♖b8 71.♖b1 b2

72.♔c5 ♔e6 73.♔d4 ♖b3 74.♔c4 ♖b8 75.♔d4 ♖b3 76.♔c4 ♖b7
77.♔d4 ♖b3 ½-½
Marvellous defence from Stockfish against an AlphaZero concept
whose venom caught me by surprise!

Section B – AlphaZero’s defensive skills
‘Attack is the best form of defence’ fits AlphaZero: its first approach
to defence is to avoid being attacked in the first place.
A player that loses as few games as AlphaZero against a monster
like Stockfish must have some serious defensive skills, but we don’t
see them directly in the games from the initial starting position. This
is partly due to AlphaZero’s skill and choices in the opening phase.
It’s not that AlphaZero has discovered refutations of common
opening systems, but rather that AlphaZero has a good
understanding of the types of positions it plays well: positions with a
firm central presence, sufficient space for its pieces to move and the
possibility of wing attacks. With this understanding, AlphaZero
normally manages to achieve a small pull as White and avoid
excessive danger as Black. Then AlphaZero’s skill in mobilising and
activating its pieces tends to push Stockfish onto the back foot. It
reflects the old human wisdom that building up experience and
knowledge in your opening repertory enables you to win typical
middlegame positions arising from your favourite openings because
you understand them better than the opponent. In the next chapter
we look in more depth at AlphaZero’s favourite openings.
In the TCEC games however, AlphaZero is confronted with
openings that it does not choose itself, and these include openings
that do not fit its preferred style of play. For example, openings in
which it has no central presence as Black (as it likes to have in 1.e4
e5 openings) or openings in which its chances for active counterplay
are minimal. In such situations, AlphaZero’s evaluation drops
significantly, and it feels it has to take immediate concrete action to
rectify the situation as quickly as possible.

1.
2.
Whereas Stockfish is a master at absorbing the opponent’s pressure,
AlphaZero likes to complicate and confuse, and material investment
is not an issue so long as it helps tip the play towards the type of
play that AlphaZero excels in. In general, I would expect this to be a
weakness in AlphaZero’s play – not every worse position should be
defended in this way – but AlphaZero usually gets away with it. It
also leads to some great tactical episodes!
Game: ‘Not your average Grünfeld’
Confronted with a well-known theoretical position, AlphaZero takes a
radical decision to sacrifice a pawn (10…f4) and then follows up with
a two-move knight manoeuvre (11…♘b4 and 12…♘c6) designed to
weaken White’s queenside light squares. After that, it’s all in as
AlphaZero moves heaven and earth to clear the barriers of pawns in
front of the white king. The game becomes exceedingly complex,
eventually ending in a draw by repetition on the 46th move.
Game themes:
Sacrificing material to free space for attacking pieces [10…f4]
Sacrificing material to open lines against the opponent’s king
[14…b5]
Stockfish 8
AlphaZero
London 2017
1.d4 ♘f6 2.c4 g6 3.f3 d5 4.cxd5 ♘xd5 5.e4 ♘b6 6.♘c3 ♗g7 7.♗e3 0-0
8.♕d2 ♘c6 9.0-0-0 f5

The TCEC book ended here, and Stockfish chose the best move
which is played almost exclusively at top level nowadays:
10.e5
White has scored well in recent years from this position. Black’s
ability to secure the d5-square for a knight and Black’s mobility on
the light squares around White’s dark-square d4/e5 pawn centre
don’t seem to compensate for White’s space advantage, the
entombed dark-squared bishop and White’s potential for launching

kingside attacks with h4-h5. That said, White’s task is hardly easy
and fantastic games such as Carlsen-Li Chao show how much
danger Black can generate!
10…f4
A totally new idea, and one that I’m sure will be attempted in human
games.
It feels an overreaction to sacrifice a pawn so early in a situation
where Black has many counterattacking chances. However – as so
often with AlphaZero’s activity concepts – it proves very difficult to
handle. I imagine the move appeals to AlphaZero as it frees the f5-
square for the light-squared bishop and thus gives Black extra
possibilities to attack White’s king along the light squares. The fact
that Black’s rook is attacking White’s dark-squared bishop after
11.♗xf4 also introduces certain random tactical elements in the
position.
10…♘b4 has been the automatic choice and leads to very
complicated positions particularly favoured by the Chinese players
Wang Yue and Li Chao. AlphaZero also considered this move:
11.♘h3 ♕e8 (11…a5 12.♔b1 c6 13.♖c1 ♔h8 was the line
AlphaZero briefly considered, assessing this as a 37.3% expected
score for itself) 12.♔b1 a5 13.♗e2 c6 14.♖c1 ♔h8 15.♔a1 ♗e6
16.♘f4 ♕f7 17.h4.

We are following the fantastic game Carlsen-Li, Doha 2015. Magnus
Carlsen is renowned as a refined technical player, but he is a
stunning tactical player too! 17…♗xa2 18.h5 ♔g8 19.hxg6 hxg6
20.g4 ♗b3 21.♗d1 a4 22.♕h2 ♖fd8 23.♕h7+ ♔f8 24.d5 ♘c4
25.♘xg6+ ♔e8 26.e6 a3.
This looks more like a helpmate problem than a practical game!
27.exf7+ ♔d7 28.♘e5+ ♗xe5 29.♕xf5+ ♔c7 30.♕xe5+ (killing
Black’s counterplay on the queenside) 30…♘xe5 31.♗xb3 axb2+

32.♔xb2 ♘bd3+ 33.♔b1 ♘xc1 34.♖xc1 ♔c8 35.dxc6 bxc6 36.f4
1-0 Carlsen-Li Chao, Doha 2015.
11.♗xf4 ♘b4 12.a3
12.h4. Who thought this was the best response to its plan? Of
course, AlphaZero! This was its main line: 12…♗e6 13.h5 c5
14.hxg6 ♕c7 15.gxh7+ ♔h8 16.♗h6 cxd4.
It’s as if AlphaZero wanted to rival Carlsen and Li! 17.♗xg7+ ♔xg7
18.♕h6+ ♔h8 19.♖xd4 ♘xa2+ 20.♔d2 ♕xe5 21.♕e3 ♕xe3+
22.♔xe3 ♘xc3 23.bxc3 a5 24.♘h3 ♗xh3 25.♖xh3 a4 26.♖h1
♖fd8, which it assessed as a 39.3% expected score!
12…♘c6

I find this follow-up even more astounding than the pawn sacrifice.
Black often plays …♘b4 in this line, but the follow-up is always
either …♘4d5 or …a7-a5 (trying to keep the knight on b4, and
daring White to win a piece and open the a-file). AlphaZero sacrifices
a pawn and then calmly spends two tempi to induce a small
weakening of White’s queenside light squares (the b3-square)!
13.♘ge2 ♘a5 14.♔b1 ♘bc4 15.♕c1 b5

By now, we’re not surprised to see this move from AlphaZero. Black
offers a pawn to clear an open file pointing towards White’s king.
AlphaZero is now up to a 48.7% expected score for Black and is
clearly starting to enjoy itself.
16.♘e4 ♖b8 17.b4 ♘c6 18.♘2c3 ♘xa3+ 19.♕xa3 ♖xf4
Making use of the ‘coincidental’ pressure on the bishop on f4 caused
by 10…f4. Stockfish’s evaluation in the coming phase was 0.00 with
AlphaZero’s hovering around the 49.0% expected score for Black, so
both players felt the position was balanced.
20.♗xb5

20…♘xb4
This isn’t a choice of any of my engines, but I’m not surprised
AlphaZero is looking to clear the material in front of the white king!
21.♕xb4 ♔h8 22.♔c2 a6 23.♖a1 axb5 24.♘e2 ♖f7
The position is an almighty mess: two knights and a solid centre
against two bishops struggling to get free. In any case, AlphaZero
can be happy with the result of its pawn sacrifice. The game stays
roughly balanced until the final repetition at move 46.

25.♔b2 ♗h6 26.♕b3 e6 27.h4 ♗b7 28.♘c5 ♗d5 29.♘xe6 ♕d7 30.♘c5
♕d8 31.♘e6 ♕d7 32.♘c5 ♕d8 33.♕c2 ♗c4 34.h5 g5 35.♖hd1 ♕f8
36.♖a6 g4 37.f4 ♗xf4 38.e6 ♖f6 39.♕e4 ♖e8 40.♘xf4 ♖xf4 41.♕e5+
♔g8 42.♔c3 ♖f5 43.♕e4 ♖f4 44.♕e5 ♖f5 45.♕e4 ♖f4 46.♕e5 ½-½
Both engines are happy (unusually) with the repetition.
AlphaZero’s wonderful ability to defend actively was shown when we
gave it a position that had arisen in the 2018 Berlin Candidates. It
was perhaps the crucial game of the tournament, in which the young
American Fabiano Caruana bounced back from a tough loss the
round before to down the mercurial Levon Aronian and reclaim the
lead with one round to play. He won that game brilliantly too, thus
securing his spot as the next challenger for Magnus Carlsen’s World
Championship crown.
In the game against Aronian, Caruana had been much better all the
way through but chose a complicated way to realise his advantage,
after which the position became completely irrational. The tension
was extreme, and this position was reached:
Fabiano Caruana
2784
Levon Aronian
2794
Berlin Candidates 2018 (13)

29.♘1e3
White is a piece up and Black’s knight on f2 looks doomed. However,
…gxf5 will regain one piece for Black and open the g-file, after which
both kings are in danger.
29…gxf5 30.exf5 ♕f6 31.♕xf2 e4
The powerful sacrifice 31…♘xb4 was also pointed out by other
engines. What I found astonishing was that this was essentially the
only line that AlphaZero spent time on: 96% of its time was
dedicated to analysing this move!

32.cxb4 ♖d4 (AlphaZero gives Black a 49.3% expected score) 33.a5
(33.♘d5 ♖xd5 34.♕f3 ♖d4 35.♗e4 ♕h4 36.f6+ ♔h8 37.♗xh6
37…♕xh6 38.♖h1 ♖d2+ 39.♔f1 ♖h2 40.♖xh2 ♕xh2 41.♖a2
♕h6 42.♖a3 was another line AlphaZero looked at, with balanced
chances) 33…♖g8+ 34.♔f1 ♖f4 35.axb6 ♖xf2+ 36.♔xf2 ♕h4+
37.♔e2 (White has plenty of material but an open king and it is
Black to move!) 37…♕h2+ 38.♔d3 e4+ 39.♔d4 (39.♔c3 ♕e5+
40.♔b3 ♕xa1 41.♗d2 ♕f6 42.b7

What a position! 42…a5 43.♗c3 ♕c6 44.♖g1 is assessed by
AlphaZero as slightly better for Black – a 51.4% expected score)
39…♖d8+ 40.♔xe4
40…♕h4+ 41.♔f3 ♕xe1 42.♗b2 ♕h4 43.♖g1 ♕h3+ 44.♖g3
♕h1+ 45.♔f4
45…♖g8 46.f6+ ♔h8 47.♖g7

47…♕h2+ 48.♔f3 ♖e8, which AlphaZero again assesses as about
equal! Thankfully for Caruana, this hair-raising ride was spared him!
32.♖h1 ♖d6 33.♗xe4 ♖g8+ 34.♔f1 ♘e5 35.♕f4 c6 36.axb5 ♖g5
37.bxa6 ♕d8 38.f6+ ♘g6 39.♖xh6+ 1-0
In the examples we’ve seen so far, active defence has been
successful for AlphaZero, however AlphaZero did have one disaster
in the TCEC series when it had to defend the Black side of an
Alekhine-Chatard attack. Stockfish also struggled horrifically with
black but managed to crawl out as only it can. AlphaZero was less
fortunate!
Game: ‘This position? No thank you!’
AlphaZero’s biggest defeat of the series of games against Stockfish.
The prescribed opening is fairly unsatisfactory and interestingly
seems to highlight a limitation in AlphaZero’s defensive technique, at
least compared to Stockfish. When AlphaZero is placed directly in a
situation where active counterplay is hard to come by, it struggles
enormously to absorb pressure in the way Stockfish does.
As we have seen in the two previous examples, AlphaZero is
normally alert to this scenario and prefers to sacrifice material to

avoid it. Here however it’s too late already, and Stockfish gets to
demonstrate its own tactical brand of extreme attacking!
Stockfish 8
AlphaZero
London 2017
1.e4 e6 2.d4 d5 3.♘c3 ♘f6 4.♗g5 ♗e7 5.e5 ♘fd7 6.h4 ♗xg5 7.hxg5
♕xg5 8.♘h3 ♕e7 9.♕g4
9.♘f4 was played in a famous historical game which has some
interest for us as you will see: 9…a6 10.♕g4 g6 11.0-0-0 c5 12.♕g3
♘b6 13.dxc5 ♕xc5 14.♗d3 ♕f8
15.♗e4. Remember this theme! Stockfish does something similar
later! 15…dxe4 16.♘xe4 ♘8d7 17.♕h4 ♕e7 18.♘d6+ ♔f8
19.♕h6+ ♔g8 20.♘h5 ♕f8 21.♕f4 ♘d5 22.♖xd5 exd5 23.♘f5 h6
24.♕g3 ♔h7 25.♘hg7 ♘c5 26.♕g5 ♔g8 27.♘xh6+ ♖xh6
28.♖xh6 ♘e6 29.♘xe6 ♗xe6 30.♖xg6+ fxg6 31.♕xg6+ ♔h8
32.♕xe6 ♖e8 33.♕h3+ ♔g8 34.♕e3 ♕g7 35.f4 ♕xg2 0-1
Bogoljubow-Spielmann, Stockholm 1919.
9…g6

This is quite a nasty position for Black in general: weak dark
squares, cramped position, an h-file for White to attack the black
kingside and – most importantly – precious little hope for Black of
launching any counterplay quickly (…c7-c5 will be met by ♘b5).
AlphaZero is assessing its chances as 31.3% and the suddenness of
Stockfish’s attack seems to take it by surprise.
Just as a theoretical note, French experts prefer nowadays not to
accept the sacrifice with 6…♗xg5 but rather to push the white
bishop back with 6…h6. In her game against Maxime Vachier-
Lagrave at Wijk aan Zee 2015, Hou Yifan – the world’s best female
player and a top-100 player – achieved a comfortable game after
7.♗xe7 (7.♗e3 c5) 7…♕xe7 8.♘b5 ♘b6 9.c3 a6 10. ♘a3 c5
followed by …♘c6.
10.♘g5 h6 11.0-0-0
A new but natural move from Stockfish.
11…♘c6 12.♘b5 ♘b6 13.♖d3

An idea that AlphaZero had missed or underestimated: the rook is
coming to f3 to help attack f7! After its next move, AlphaZero’s
evaluation falls to 19.3% and it continues to worsen.
13…h5 14.♖f3 a6 15.♕g3 ♘d8
The world’s best female player, Hou Yifan, wisely refuted the pawn in the Alekhine-
Chatard.
15…axb5 16.♖xf7 ♕xf7 17.♘xf7 ♔xf7 18.♕g5 ♘d7 19.♗d3 ♘e7
20.g4 and the second rook lift ♖h1-h3-f3 will end the game.

16.♘c3 ♘d7 17.♗d3 ♘f8 18.♖h4 ♖g8
19.♗c4
Playing to the gallery, and an echo of Bogoljubow’s famous 15.♗e4
in his game against Spielmann in Stockholm 1919. The move aims to
get a knight to e4, either by allowing Black to take the bishop or by
following up with ♗xd5.
19…♕d7 20.♘ce4 dxe4 21.♘xe4 ♘h7 22.♖xh5
And AlphaZero had seen enough.

PART IV
AlphaZero’s opening choices

CHAPTER 14
AlphaZero’s opening repertoire
AlphaZero’s openings are well designed (by itself) to steer it towards
the types of positions it likes and understands well. We compare the
approach top human players take to building their opening repertoire
with AlphaZero’s approach. We then look at AlphaZero’s opening
choices.

Section A – The modern approach to designing
an opening repertory
The standard approach of the current top players is to maintain a
narrow, well-worked out repertory with black and to vary extensively
with white. With the help of superhuman strength engines, it has
become considerably easier to neutralise White openings than to
defeat Black openings (in other words, easier to ‘destroy’ than to
create). At top level tournaments, where a draw with black is seen
as a positive result, an effective approach as Black is to specialise in
a small set of lines analysed to great depth in which all possible
pitfalls have been anticipated.
White players have tended to counter this with two weapons: 1.
Variety and 2. Move orders.
1. Variety
In contrast to 20 years ago, when most top players specialised in
one opening move, all top players now have the four main opening
moves – 1.d4, 1.e4, 1.♘f3 and 1.c4 – in their repertory. This sets a
practical problem for the black player from the point of view of
memory, as to remember four sets of deeply analysed openings
perfectly for each game is a huge strain. Moreover, white players
tend to try many different systems against the main openings. For
example, Magnus Carlsen is an expert at securing small persistent
edges from innocuous-looking white systems which he then converts
with his phenomenal technique. White players use engines to delve
deeply into such quiet systems and unearth hidden tactics that can
trap the unwary black player.
2. Move orders

The peculiar property of white Queen’s Pawn Openings is that they
can often be reached by starting with 1.♘f3 or even 1.c4 on the first
move. This gives White many possibilities to confuse Black merely by
varying the order of the first three moves.
In so doing, White may eventually reach a main line while
sidestepping a specific defence that Black intended. Even if a
standard theoretical position is reached in the end, Black will have
burnt time on the clock working out White’s intentions and trying to
navigate back to the intended line. Such move order tricks expand
the scope of the openings that Black must master, and thus increase
the potential for memory lapses, early time consumption and
mistakes later in the game.
The drawback to this flexible approach is that White has to be
prepared to play only 1.d4 systems in which the king’s knight is
developed to f3. This cuts out openings in which White delays
committing the knight to f3 to set up a sharp attacking structure.
The Sämisch Variation of the King’s Indian featured in the next
chapter and Botvinnik’s attacking central set-up against the Queen’s
Gambit Declined featured in the Carlsbad chapter are two examples.
However, from a long-term career point of view, the flexibility
gained in the first three moves is worth more than the opportunity to
play the very sharpest systems against certain openings. In your
career you will encounter periods in which a certain main-line
opening – such as the Nimzo-Indian or the Grünfeld – is played
continually at the top level and you are unable to find any advantage
for White. In such cases, rather than simply repeat main-line theory
and head off to a sterile position, a player with flexibility in their
opening repertoire can vary opening moves and force the opponent
into an unfamiliar structure. Such a move order can tide you over
until the time that inspiration strikes (either you, or another player!)
and your main lines become playable again.

Section B – How AlphaZero has designed its
opening repertory
It’s interesting to compare AlphaZero’s opening choices. As Black,
AlphaZero restricts its opening repertoire severely, meeting 1.e4
invariably with 1…e5 – the most popular choice at the top level –
and 1.d4 with 1…♘f6 2.c4 e6, aiming for the Nimzo-Indian after
3.♘c3 ♗b4 and the Ragozin Defence after 3.♘f3 d5 4.♘c3 ♗b4.
As White, it favours 1.d4 openings heavily and plays almost
exclusively systems where the king’s knight is placed on f3. It also
opens 1.♘f3 fairly frequently, and though these games often
transpose to standard 1.d4 openings, it also plays the anti-Nimzo-
Indian move order 1.♘f3 ♘f6 2.c4 e6 3.♘c3 ♗b4 4.♕c2 with some
regularity.
Anti-Nimzo-Indian move order

In this line, White gains the bishop pair after a subsequent …♗xc3,
♕xc3 – typical for the Nimzo-Indian – but without occupying the
centre with the d-pawn. AlphaZero has had great success keeping its
pawns on d3 and e3 and placing the dark-squared bishop on the
long diagonal with b2-b4 and ♗b2: there are some fantastic
examples of this structure in this book.
AlphaZero seems to have emerged at an opening choice that
matches the current best practice of the top players, although its
notable reluctance to venture 1.e4 does stop it from being the
complete modern opening player!

Section C – AlphaZero’s openings
AlphaZero’s opening play can best be described as classical and
restrained. AlphaZero likes to spend the first opening moves securing
space and a central foothold while developing naturally. However, its
middlegame desire to open lines and diagonals and to attack the
opponent’s game adds a substantial measure of sharpness to its
opening play. With the white pieces especially, AlphaZero is more
than willing to abandon its solid shell and sharpen the game by
weakening the opponent’s king’s position at the cost of a pawn.
I. AlphaZero as Black
In our selection of 30 Black games, AlphaZero faced 1.e4 26 times
and consistently answered it with the solid 1…e5.
1.e4 e5
It met the Ruy Lopez with the Berlin Defence (2.♘f3 ♘c6 3.♗b5
♘f6).

4.0-0 led to the (in)famous Berlin Wall endgame after 4…♘xe4 5.d4
♘d6 6.♗xc6 dxc6 7.dxe5 ♘f5 8.♕xd8+ ♔xd8 which AlphaZero
plays extremely well:
Berlin Endgame
In fact, both of its losses were more a result of overpressing than of
being outplayed, whereas it won one stunning strategical game
(‘Endgame class’).
Stockfish’s frequent choice of 4.d3 followed by 5.♗xc6 led to some
very interesting games. I felt that these positions suited AlphaZero

well.
Slow Berlin
1.e4 e5 2.♘f3 ♘c6 3.♗b5 ♘f6 4.d3 ♗c5 5.♗xc6 dxc6 6.c3 ♗d6 7.0-0
♗e6 8.b3 h6 9.♘bd2 ♘d7
A solid centre around which AlphaZero can manoeuvre its knight,
open lines for its pieces and the ever-present possibility of castling
queenside and throwing the kingside pawns forward: AlphaZero
must be licking its lips! Stockfish defended excellently to hold five
draws from this position.
Stockfish’s other choice was 1.e4 e5 2.♘f3 ♘c6 3.♗c4, which led to
some wild games in both of AlphaZero’s choices:

Once again, AlphaZero was the one setting the pace in these games.
One noteworthy aspect was that after 3…♗c5 4.d3, AlphaZero chose
between two strange moves – 4…a6 and 4…d6 – choosing to defend
the f7-pawn after 5.♘g5 in two creative ways: 5…♘h6 and 5…♕f6
(counterattacking f2) followed by …♘d8. It felt a little odd, but
AlphaZero’s 5…♘h6 was the prelude to some amazing attacking
games!
Stockfish tried 1.d4 and 1.♘f3 just four times in this game selection
and AlphaZero’s choices were a little confusing. In one game,
AlphaZero played the QGD Ragozin (1.♘f3 d5 2.d4 ♘f6 3.c4 e6
4.♘c3 ♗b4), which seemed about right to me: a solid central
opening with just a little spice thrown in (4…♗b4 is more active
than the classical 4…♗e7).

Ragozin
1.d4 ♘f6 2.c4 e6 3.♘f3 d5 4.♘c3 ♗b4
Indeed, when I requested a series of games with Stockfish forced to
play 1.d4, this was the most common opening choice. However, the
choice was not 100% consistent. AlphaZero also tried a Slav (1.d4
d5 2.c4 c6) and even hinted at a King’s Indian with 1.d4 ♘f6 2.♘f3
g6, which feels all wrong for its style: a space disadvantage and a
kingside assault are ever-present risks for a King’s Indian player! In
fact, as I saw later when I tried a few more opening moves,
AlphaZero – just like Stockfish – prefers Grünfeld-type positions
(playing a later …d7-d5 after 1…♘f6 and 2…g6), which secures
more open lines and activity and seems more appropriate for its
style.
When I forced Stockfish to play 1.c4, AlphaZero invariably replied
with 1…e5, which felt logical to me: AlphaZero grabs as much
central space as possible.
II. AlphaZero as White
AlphaZero’s White repertoire is based around 1.d4 main lines,
though it does venture the occasional 1.♘f3.

Without being churlish, the one loss here was due to AlphaZero
overpressing in a drawn position.
1.♘f3 normally transposes back into 1.d4 lines but a few games led
into an English-type position:
English via 1.♘f3
1.♘f3 ♘f6 2.c4 e6 3.♘c3 ♗b4 4.♕c2

The types of position in which White ends up with the advantage of
the bishop pair without conceding a structural weakness suit
AlphaZero very well. This desire to avoid any early structural
concessions is also reflected in AlphaZero’s main response to
Stockfish’s opening of choice against 1.d4: 1…♘f6 followed by 2…
e6.
1.d4 ♘f6 2.c4 e6
1.d4 ♘f6 2.c4 e6
For ease of presentation, I will count games that started 1.d4 ♘f6
2.c4 e6 3.♘f3 to be the same as 1.d4 ♘f6 2.♘f3 e6 3.c4.

The point about 3.♘f3 (and 3.g3) is that Black does not get the
chance to pin the knight on c3 with …♗b4 (as Black does after
3.♘c3) and thus does not get any chance to inflict doubled pawns
on White with …♗xc3+.
I am actually amazed at the number of games in which AlphaZero
allowed 3.♘c3 ♗b4.
Nimzo-Indian
1.d4 ♘f6 2.c4 e6 3.♘c3 ♗b4

I have never seen AlphaZero willingly allow weaknesses on the
queenside in middlegames (only on the kingside to open lines
against Stockfish’s king). I might also have expected it to play 4.♕c2
to prevent the possibility of doubled pawns, but this was not the
case:
In the main Queen’s Indian lines after 3.♘f3 b6, AlphaZero
invariably plays 4.g3:
Queen’s Indian
1.d4 ♘f6 2.♘f3 e6 3.c4 b6 4.g3

This solid line avoids any early queenside structural weaknesses,
neutralises a black light-squared bishop on the a8-h1 diagonal,
bolsters up White’s king’s position and also prepares to get the white
king castled to safety reasonably quickly. Of course, as we have
seen, AlphaZero manages to spice up this solid line very successfully
with early d4-d5 pawn sacrifices and rook pawn advances (h4-h5-
h6). This is one of the lines which AlphaZero plays most
impressively:
AlphaZero’s repertoire against Stockfish’s other main line – the Semi-
Slav – is a good illustration of AlphaZero not being afraid to abandon
its solid shell if it feels there are middlegame advantages to be
gained. Nothing solid here: AlphaZero offers consistently the
sharpest and most unfathomable lines: the Botvinnik system and the
Moscow Gambit.

Semi-Slav
1.d4 d5 2.c4 c6 3.♘f3 ♘f6 4.♘c3 e6 5.♗g5
As you can see, Stockfish mostly prefers the ‘boring’ 5…♗e7, but
against 5…dxc4, both sides followed razor-sharp Botvinnik theory
until move 19:
Game: ‘Taking on the Botvinnik’
AlphaZero

Stockfish 8
London 2018
1.d4 d5 2.c4 e6 3.♘c3 c6 4.♘f3 ♘f6 5.♗g5 dxc4 6.e4 b5 7.e5 h6 8.♗h4
g5 9.♘xg5 hxg5 10.♗xg5 ♘bd7 11.g3 ♖g8 12.h4 ♖xg5 13.hxg5 ♘d5
14.g6 fxg6 15.♕g4 ♕e7 16.♗g2 ♘7b6 17.♕xg6+ ♕f7 18.♕xf7+ ♔xf7
19.♘e4
19…♗g7
This seems to be a new move from Stockfish, but it doesn’t change
the assessment that White is more comfortable in such positions.
20.f4 ♔f8 21.♔f2 a5 22.g4 ♖a7 23.♘d6 ♖d7 24.♘xc8 ♘xc8 25.♗xd5
♖xd5 26.f5 ♘b6 27.f6

27…♖xd4 28.g5 ♖d2+ 29.♔e3 ♖d5 30.♔f4 ♖d4+ 31.♔e3 ♖d5 32.♔f4
♖d4+ 33.♔f3 ♘d7 34.♖h7 ♘xe5+ 35.♔e3 ♖d3+ 36.♔f4 ♖d7 37.♖xg7
♘d3+ 38.♔e4 ♘c5+ 39.♔e5 ♘d3+ 40.♔e4 ♘c5+ 41.♔f3 ♖xg7
42.fxg7+ ♔xg7 43.♖e1 b4 44.♖e2 ♔f7 45.♖c2 ♘d7 46.♔e4 c5
47.♖xc4 ♔g6 48.♔f4 1-0
The other opening that I tested AlphaZero against was the Grünfeld.
AlphaZero gravitated to the solid 7.♗e3 line:

Grünfeld ♗e3
1.d4 ♘f6 2.c4 g6 3.♘c3 d5 4.cxd5 ♘xd5 5.e4 ♘xc3 6.bxc3 ♗g7 7.♘f3
c5 8.♗e3
This has been favoured by players such as Kramnik, and as we see
throughout the book, AlphaZero played some wonderful games in
that line.
HISTORICAL PARALLEL
The iron logician Mikhail Botvinnik
Mikhail Botvinnik became World Champion in 1948 and continued
to fight for the World Championship until 1963, losing and
regaining his title twice in this period. AlphaZero’s play reminds me
very strongly of Botvinnik’s approach with the white pieces.
Botvinnik enjoyed fixing the centre early in the game, stopping
Black from developing central counterplay and moving the play
towards the wings. Botvinnik felt that White held the edge in such
a struggle, not least due to White’s extra tempo in starting first.
We see his favourite set-up against the Queen’s Gambit Declined
in the ‘Carlsbad’ chapter, and I will also mention two other fixed
centre openings with which Botvinnik enjoyed great success.
Firstly, the Exchange Slav:

Botvinnik’s Exchange Slav
1.d4 d5 2.c4 c6 3.cxd5 cxd5
Like AlphaZero, former World Champion Mikhail Botvinnik liked to fix the centre
early in the game and play on the wings.
Secondly, Botvinnik’s patented structure in the English Opening:
the Botvinnik System.

The Botvinnik System
1.c4 e5 2.♘c3 ♘c6 3.g3 g6 4.♗g2 ♗g7 5.e4
The following game of Botvinnik’s, played when he was still young,
describes Botvinnik’s style and philosophy better than any words
can: space advantage, a fixed centre denying the opponent any
counterplay, relentless expansion on the wings and exchange of
the opponent’s active pieces. I could see AlphaZero playing it! It
should also remind you of the game Aronian-Vorobiov (played
much later) from the ‘march of the rook’s pawn’ chapter.
Mikhail Botvinnik
Khrisogon Kholodkevich
Moscow ch-USSR 1927
1.d4 ♘f6 2.c4 g6 3.♘c3 ♗g7 4.e4 d6 5.g3 0-0 6.♗g2 ♘bd7 7.♘ge2 c5
8.0-0 cxd4 9.♘xd4
Botvinnik sought to achieve this structure in many openings. The
pawns on c4 and e4 clamp down on Black’s central expansion with
…d6-d5.
9…♘e5 10.b3 ♗d7 11.♗b2 ♘c6

And now Botvinnik executes a plan that he considered to be the
archetypal way to win in such structures.
12.♘d5 ♘xd5 13.exd5 ♘xd4 14.♗xd4 b5 15.♗xg7 ♔xg7 16.♕d4+
♔g8 17.cxb5
The key point of Botvinnik’s plan and a far from obvious idea.
White’s d5-pawn does not require the support of the c4-pawn to
perform its function of tying down the e7-pawn.
17.cxb5 secures a queenside majority and gives White the
enviable option of finishing the game on either the queenside (as
in this game) or the kingside (with a push of the rook’s pawn as
Aronian did).
17…♗xb5 18.♖fe1 ♕d7 19.♖e3 f5 20.a4 ♗a6 21.♖ae1
Tying Black’s pieces to the weak e7-pawn.
White’s superiority is clear in all areas of the board.
21…♖f7 22.b4 ♗b7 23.b5 a6 24.b6 ♖c8 25.a5 ♖c5 26.♖c3

Excellent play, exchanging off the opponent’s only active piece and
leaving him with only passive ones.
26…♖xc3 27.♕xc3 ♖f8 28.♕e3 ♖e8 29.♖c1 ♖c8 30.♖xc8+ ♗xc8
31.♕e6+ ♕xe6 32.dxe6 ♔g7 33.b7 ♗xb7 34.♗xb7 ♔f6 35.♗xa6
♔xe6 36.♗c8+ 1-0
Conclusion
I once remarked to the English grandmaster Mark Hebden – known
for his offbeat and annoyingly well-worked out opening schemes –
that I was afraid of the day that computers would solve chess and
prove that his openings were the best all along! ‘How do you know
I’m not that computer?’ was his reply! We aren’t there yet however,
and AlphaZero’s self-developed 1.d4 repertory is refreshingly
classical and mainstream. Speaking as a lifelong 1.d4 player, I think
that AlphaZero’s 1.d4 repertory looks pretty much like the ideal
repertory, incorporating solidity, flexibility and sound development
with the potential for sharpness when required.

CHAPTER 15
The King’s Indian Sämisch
One fascinating part of the matches between AlphaZero and
Stockfish was the games played not from the initial starting position,
but from a variety of opening positions. In this series, AlphaZero and
Stockfish played 50 different opening positions against each other,
once with white and once with black. Stockfish has played many
such matches at the TCEC computer championships, but AlphaZero
of course had not. Intriguingly, many of these openings led to
positions that AlphaZero – during its millions of games of self-play –
had either rejected or not discovered. As an example, when left to
itself to find the best moves from the initial starting position,
AlphaZero invariably chooses 1.d4 or 1.♘f3 as White: it never starts
a game with 1.e4. As Black, AlphaZero would always choose to meet
1.d4 with 1…♘f6 2.c4 e6 or 1…d5. It does not venture the King’s
Indian by choice… and yet here it had to!
One of the contests I most enjoyed were the two games played in
a variation of the King’s Indian Sämisch which has been a favourite
of mine from the white side for almost my whole playing career.
Surprisingly to me, the middlegame positions emerging from the
opening suited AlphaZero to a tee. As White, it found a method of
playing that had never occurred to me in my many hours of study.
As Black, it attacked like Kasparov (the greatest King’s Indian player
of all).
Game: ‘The typical Benoni break’
The most common black attempt against the King’s Indian Sämisch
(6…c5) often takes the game back into the channels and structures
of the Modern Benoni. These structures are unbalanced: Black has

1.
2.
3.
severe weak points (the d6-pawn in particular) but many active
possibilities due to the wonderful dark-squared bishop on g7.
AlphaZero plays to drain activity from the black position, starting off
by exchanging Black’s powerful dark-squared bishop. In the
subsequent manoeuvring, AlphaZero stabilises the pieces supporting
its centre and then transfers its queen’s knight to a strong outpost
close to the black kingside. With Black’s pieces poorly coordinated
and passive (both the bishop on b5 and the queen on h6 are taking
little active part in the game) AlphaZero strikes with a typical central
break, finally infiltrating Black’s position and winning a long
endgame.
Game themes:
Exchanging off defenders of a colour complex [14.♗h6]
Long knight manoeuvre [16.♘d1, 19.♘f2, 24.♘h3, 25.♘g5]
Opponent’s passive pieces
AlphaZero
Stockfish 8
London 2017
1.d4 ♘f6 2.c4 g6 3.♘c3 ♗g7 4.e4 d6 5.f3 0-0 6.♗e3 c5 7.♘ge2 ♘c6
8.d5 ♘e5 9.♘g3 e6 10.♗e2 exd5 11.cxd5

The last move stipulated by the TCEC opening book. The opening
has evolved from a King’s Indian into a Modern Benoni structure.
These structures are extremely complicated. White enjoys a strong,
reinforced centre with pawns on e4 and d5 and will look to push
forward and gain space with f3-f4 and e4-e5; Black will look to slow
White down by chipping away at White’s central support (the knights
on c3 and g3) from the wings (…h5-h4 and …b5-b4). Black hopes to
sow so much confusion in White’s position that new tactical
possibilities arise. Black’s position is fraught and requires a great
deal of energy to play well; White needs to understand which parts
of Black’s wing counterplay it can fight, and which parts it needs to
absorb.
11…a6 12.♕d2
AlphaZero decides not to prevent Black’s queenside expansion with
…b7-b5 in order to complete its development and castle to safety.
12…b5 13.0-0 ♖e8 14.♗h6
The dark-squared bishop is a potentially strong attacking piece along
the open h8-a1 diagonal and it defends the kingside dark squares
which have been weakened by the move 2…g6, so AlphaZero’s

decision to exchange this piece is logical. We discuss the possible
downsides in the note to Black’s 17th move.
14…♗xh6
A new move from Stockfish. 14… ♗h8 was played in Haba-Krakops,
Werfen 1995, when I would play 15.h3 to prepare f3-f4 as soon as
possible. Note that the inclusion of ♗h6 and …♗h8 restricts the
movement of the black king, which would undoubtedly make
AlphaZero happy!
15.♕xh6 ♕e7 16.♘d1 ♕f8 17.♕d2 h5
This typical Sämisch KID/Modern Benoni position has some
interesting features. Firstly, White has exchanged off the dark-
squared bishops. This was not a clear-cut decision as White’s dark-
squared bishop is its ‘good’ bishop, covering the dark squares
around its central and kingside pawn structure (g2/f3/e4/d5) which
is all on light squares. After this exchange, White leaves itself with a
‘bad’ bishop whose free movement is hampered by its own pawns.
However, the dark-squared bishop was Black’s pride and joy,
enjoying free sight along the h8-a1 diagonal, while its light-squared
bishop on c8 is also severely hampered by White’s solid central
structure.

1.
2.
In other words, through this exchange, White damages the activity
of both sides and hopes that Black is suffering more than White. The
consequence of the exchange for White is that it has less control
over central dark squares such as d4, e3 and f4 as well as the g1-a7
diagonal. Black has weakened the defence of its dark squares
around its king (f6 and h6 in particular), which feels intuitively more
worrying than White’s predicament.
Another interesting factor is that on the 12th move, White allowed
Black to expand on the queenside with …b7-b5 instead of restraining
this with 12.a4 (the most popular and natural move in the position).
By avoiding 12.a4, White avoids early conflict on the queenside (if
Black would achieve …b7-b5 anyway) and makes it harder for Black
to open lines there and generate immediate counterplay. However,
the space that Black gains with …b7-b5 gives long-term chances for
an active and dangerous queenside majority and also offers two
short-term ways to disrupt White’s position:
…♘c4 (normally in reply to f3-f4)
…b5-b4, driving the white knight away from c3, sowing a little
confusion in White’s ranks while weakening White’s support of e4.
Why is White’s support of the e4-pawn important? This is because
White’s long-term aim is to mobilise its central pawn majority and
space advantage (pawns e4 and d5 against Black’s single pawn on
d6) and it will do this with f3-f4 and e4-e5. This is especially
attractive in the current situation, where Black has deployed its
knight aggressively (and provocatively) to e5. f3-f4 if properly timed
will allow White to expand in the centre with gain of tempo.
White’s fifth move consolidated the pawn on e4 to prevent Black
from launching rapid counterplay that might destabilise White’s
centre. However, White’s pawn on f3 doesn’t have to remain there
forever! Once Black’s initiative has been absorbed, White is looking
to implement a more aggressive structure with f3-f4. It is thus clear
why the threat of …b5-b4 might be annoying for White: if White
can’t defend e4 properly, then it will never achieve f3-f4 safely.

1.
2.
We begin to understand why Black is launching the h-pawn forwards
with 17…h5. The knight on g3 is White’s other support of the e4-
pawn. If Black gets in …h5-h4, then White’s knight will be forced to
retreat when another defender of e4 has been pushed away.
This play is typical in such structures, but starting with 16.♘d1,
AlphaZero looks to implement the f3-f4 plan while making a very
unusual choice. Although I have played these structures all my life, I
had never seen this choice before, and I have only found one other
game with a similar approach. AlphaZero redeploys its knight on c3
by bringing it to f2 (from where it supports e4) and then takes the
unusual step of stopping the h5-pawn with h2-h4 (thus securing the
position of the knight on g3). This is rarely played: White normally
allows …h5-h4 and leaves the f2-square for the knight on g3 free to
reach via h1. However, since AlphaZero plays h4-h5-h6 (or …h5-h4-
h3) so often itself, it isn’t surprising that it wishes to keep its
opponent’s h-pawn at bay!
This plan is excellent for keeping e4 defended (and thus making f3-
f4 possible). There are however two drawbacks:
The weakness of g4: after f3-f4, Black now has the extra option
of …♘g4 when the knight is resplendent on an invulnerable
square (no white pawn can drive it away) close to the white king.
The weakness of the h4-pawn: Black can target the h-pawn with
a combination of …♕e7 and …♘h7, which can be embarrassing
for White.
18.h4

1.
2.
3.
18…♗d7
18…♕e7 (18…♘h7 19.f4) 19.♕g5 ♘h7 (considered by AlphaZero,
but only as Black’s fourth best possibility. It evaluates the resulting
queen exchange as a 62.5% expected score for White. To me this
feels like Black’s most logical idea. 19…c4 20.b3 ♕a7+ 21.♕e3 is
AlphaZero’s main line, which it assesses as a 60.0% expected score
for White) 20.♕xe7 ♖xe7. Intuitively these types of endings should
be fairly reasonable for Black. With the exchange of queens, any
danger against the black king has disappeared, while many of the
lines with f3-f4 and e4-e5, in which a pawn was sacrificed, were
justified by the weakness of the black king. Moreover, Black has
expanded on the queenside without interference from the white
pieces: Black seems healthy on this wing too.
However, the strong move 21.a4 extracts a concession from Black:
21…bxa4 or 21…b4 concede control of the c4-square. This makes
Black’s d6-pawn vulnerable to attack if White gets a knight to c4
(to which the knight on d1 has a natural path via e3).
21…♖b8 concedes the a-file.
21…♖ea7 gives up a pawn for counterplay.

To my mind, the active 21…bxa4 is the most natural first course of
investigation, followed by 21…♖b8. 21…b4 feels very risky
positionally: Black abandons substantive hopes of achieving
queenside counterplay and expects/hopes that White will be unable
to achieve anything with f3-f4.
21.a4 (21.♘e3 threatens 22.f4, and keeps the idea of a2-a4 in
reserve: 21…♖b8 22.f4 ♘d7 23.♗xh5 gxh5 24.♘ef5 was an
amazing idea suggested by my engine! White wins some pawns back
for the piece and leaves itself with a strong centre. Worth a try!) and
now:
A) 21…♖ea7 gives up the b-pawn in return for some open lines on
the a and b-files: 22.axb5 axb5 23.♖xa7 ♖xa7 24.♗xb5 ♗a6 (24…
♘f6 25.♘c3 ♗d7 26.♗e2) 25.♗xa6 ♖xa6 26.♘e3. Black has some
play, but White keeps its extra pawn. My engine thinks that Black’s
compensation is minimal;
B) 21…♖b8 22.axb5 axb5 23.♘e3. The more I look at it, the more
pleasant it seems for White. White has a number of ways to increase
the pressure on Black’s position and consolidate its own (doubling
rooks on the a-file, ♔f2) while the threat of f3-f4 is always in the air.
23…♘f6 (23…f5 24.exf5 – White shouldn’t be afraid of ghosts: Black
has no good discovery here) 24.b3 ♘e8 25.♖a5 ♖eb7 26.♖fa1 is
my engine’s main line, which is about what I was thinking. The
knight on g3 can also be redeployed later;
C) 21…bxa4 22.♘e3 (an accurate move, making sure that White
defends the b2-pawn on the half-open b-file as actively as possible.
22.♖xa4 ♖b8 feels weaker, as White will have to struggle a little to
get its knight on d1 active) 22…♗d7 (22…♘f6 23.♖xa4 ♖b8
24.♗xa6 d6 is weak too!; 22…♖b8 23.f4 ♘g4 24.♘c4) 23.f4 ♘g4
24.♘c4 ♗b5 25.♘xd6 ♗xe2 26.♘xe2 ♘e3 27.♖f3 ♘xd5 28.♖xa4
is a small edge for White according to my engine.
19.♘f2

19…b4
I don’t like this move at all: Black places its bishop on the queenside
while AlphaZero is getting ready to advance on the kingside. I also
don’t like the hole on c4 created in this way.
19…♕e7 felt very logical to me, eyeing the weakest point in White’s
position, the h4-pawn, and keeping control of the g4-square (to
meet f3-f4 with …♘eg4). Since the white knight has moved to f2
after Black’s developing move …♗d7, the exchange of queens after
…♕e7, ♕g5 should be more comfortable for Black than the line we
examined previously. However… 20.f4 ♘eg4 21.e5 looked dangerous
to me and, as I found out later, this was AlphaZero’s intention too!
A) 21…dxe5 22.d6 ♕f8 (22…♕e6 23.♘xg4 ♘xg4 24.f5) 23.♘xg4
♘xg4 24.♗xg4 ♗xg4 25.♘e4 is pretty dangerous for Black;
B) 21…♘xf2 22.♖xf2 (22.exf6 ♘e4 – a typical engine resource –
23.fxe7 ♘xd2 24.♖fd1 ♘c4 25.♗xc4 bxc4 26.♘e4 ♖xe7 27.♘xd6
♖d8 28.♘xc4 ♖e4 is balanced) 22…♘h7 is very sharp: White’s
centre is impressive but h4 is falling. 23.e6 (AlphaZero also considers
23.♖af1, but this is its main line) 23…fxe6 24.dxe6 ♗xe6 25.f5
♕xh4 (25…♗xf5 26.♘xf5 gxf5 27.♗xh5 ♖f8 28.♖f4 looks
promising for White as Black is unlikely to be able to hold the

weakness on f5) 26.fxg6 ♕xg3 (26…♘g5 was the line I looked at:
27.♕xd6 ♖ad8 28.♕c7 ♖d7 29.♕f4 looks good for White)
27.gxh7+ ♔h8. I thought this would be fine for Black, hiding the
king behind White’s h7-pawn. AlphaZero gives itself a 59.3%
expected score at this point and continues its analysis a little further:
28.♗xh5 ♖f8 29.♖af1 ♖xf2 30.♖xf2 ♕e5 31.♖e2 ♕xh5 32.♖xe6
♖e8 33.♕c3+ ♔xh7 34.♖xd6. It’s a touch uncomfortable for Black
due to its open king, but Black should be able to hold.
20.♖fe1 ♗b5 21.f4 ♘ed7 22.♗f3 ♕h6 23.♖ad1 ♖ab8 24.♘h3
A typical AlphaZero long knight manoeuvre, bringing the knight in
contact with the black kingside from the strongly reinforced g5-
square.
By contrast, Black, with its bishop stuck over on b5, is unable to
make use of White’s kingside weakness on g4.
24…a5 25.♘g5
Once again Stockfish’s queen has ended up in an extremely passive
position, on the side of the board, staring at a white knight bolstered
by pawns on f4 and h4. The black queen has just five legal moves at
her disposal (two of which leave her en prise).
25…a4

The game is now effectively decided by a typical break in such
structures.
26.e5 dxe5
27.f5
At the cost of a pawn, White frees the d5-pawn to advance and
secures the wonderful e4-square for its knights. The black kingside
comes under pressure from the f5-pawn while Black’s c5-pawn is

vulnerable without support from the d6-pawn. I have played such a
break many times in this variation, and it invariably proves decisive.
27…♗c4 28.d6 ♗xa2 29.♗c6 ♗b3 30.♖a1 ♖f8 31.♗xa4 ♗xa4 32.♖xa4
♖be8 33.♖a7
Black is still fighting, but all of White’s pieces are superior to Black’s
pieces. Stockfish jettisons its extra pawn for some play.
33…e4 34.♖c7 ♖e5 35.♘3xe4 ♘xe4 36.♖xe4 ♖xe4 37.♘xe4 ♕xd2
The queen’s first move in 15 moves!
38.♘xd2 ♖d8 39.fxg6 fxg6 40.♘e4 ♔f8 41.♔f1

1.
The ending is very difficult for Black. AlphaZero makes no mistake in
converting its advantage.
41…b3 42.♔e2 ♖e8 43.♔d3 ♘e5+ 44.♔e3 ♘f7 45.d7 ♖e6 46.♖xc5
♔e7 47.♖d5 ♖a6 48.♘c5 ♖a1 49.♖d2 ♖c1 50.♔d4 ♔d6 51.♘xb3 ♖c6
52.♘a5 ♖c1 53.♖f2 ♘d8 54.♘c4+ ♔xd7 55.♘e5+ ♔e6 56.♘xg6 ♘c6+
57.♔e3 ♖e1+ 58.♔d3 ♖d1+ 59.♔e2 ♖h1 60.g3 ♖g1 61.♘f4+ ♔e7
62.♘xh5 ♘e5 63.♔d2 ♖a1 64.♔c3 ♔d6 65.♘f4 ♖c1+ 66.♖c2 ♖g1
67.♖g2 ♖c1+ 68.♔b3 ♖c8 69.♖d2+ ♔e7 70.♖d5 ♔f6 71.♔a2 ♖g8
72.♘e2 ♔e6 73.♖d4 ♖a8+ 74.♔b1 ♘c6 75.♖c4 ♔d6 76.♖e4 ♖c8
77.h5 ♖g8 78.♖h4 ♔e7 79.h6 ♔f7 80.h7 ♖h8 81.♔c2 ♘e7 82.♔d3 ♘g6
83.♖h6 ♔g7 84.♖h5 ♘f8 85.b4 ♘xh7 86.♘f4 ♖e8 87.♖f5 ♘f8 88.♔d4
♖e1 89.b5 ♘d7 90.♔d5 1-0
Now the return match. Will Stockfish also seek to exchange dark-
squared bishops when colours are reversed? And will AlphaZero try a
queenside plan with …b7-b5?
Game: ‘The Sämisch but different’
In the same opening from the black side, AlphaZero starts kingside
operations with its rook’s pawn at once, reducing White’s activity by
driving the king’s knight back to h1 (12…h4) and then restricting the
white king at once with 13…h3. White’s position remains solid, so
AlphaZero starts play on the other wing, driving back White’s
queen’s knight to b1 (17…b4). At this crucial moment, AlphaZero
sacrifices a piece to knock away the support of White’s e-pawn and
blow open White’s centre. AlphaZero only gains one pawn in return
for the piece but it also gains a plethora of other compensatory
factors, of which the most important is the restricted position of the
white king, vulnerable both along the a8-h1 diagonal and on the
back rank. Despite the exchange of many pieces, this factor
continues to hinder White until Stockfish grabs the opportunity to
force perpetual.
Game themes:
Using a rook’s pawn to weaken the opponent’s king’s position
[12…h4]

2.
3.
4.
5.
Sacrificing material to reduce the opponent’s activity [18…♘eg4]
Sacrificing material to open lines against the opponent’s king
[18…♘eg4]
Opponent’s passive pieces
Safer king
Stockfish 8
AlphaZero
London 2017
1.d4 ♘f6 2.c4 g6 3.♘c3 ♗g7 4.e4 d6 5.f3 0-0 6.♗e3 c5 7.♘ge2 ♘c6
8.d5 ♘e5 9.♘g3 e6 10.♗e2 exd5 11.cxd5
Here we are again, this time with AlphaZero as Black to move.
Whereas Stockfish chose to expand first on the queenside,
AlphaZero – not unexpectedly perhaps – chooses to advance on the
kingside, knocking away the white knight from g3, and thus
undermining White’s support of the f3-f4 push. However, White is
prepared for this.
11…h5 12.0-0 h4 13.♘h1
Stockfish’s knight intends to re-emerge on f2, from where it supports
the e4-pawn. From f2 the white knight covers the g4-square and

prevents …♘eg4 as a reply to f4. Black has weakened its control of
the g4-square anyway by moving its pawn from h5 to h4. In other
words, AlphaZero cannot afford to play passively: its position
requires maximum activity to stay afloat, or White will simply play
♘f2 and f3-f4 and stifle Black behind its pawn centre.
13…h3
A natural push for AlphaZero, comparable to its favoured h4-h5-h6
that we examined in the ‘march of the rook’s pawn’ chapter. The
same considerations apply here: after 13…h3 14.g3, White’s kingside
light squares have been weakened and the movement of White’s
king has been restricted. However, White will bring the knight to f2,
threatening either g3-g4, cutting off the protection of the pawn on
h3 and thus preparing to capture the advanced soldier, or White may
yet threaten f3-f4, driving the knight back from e5.
AlphaZero needs to throw more activity into the fire to deflect White
from pursuing its plan, and Black now turns its attention to the
active possibilities on the queenside.
14.g3 ♗d7
A new move from AlphaZero, aiming for direct counterplay with …
b7-b5.

15.♖c1
15.♘f2 b5 16.f4 (16.♘xb5 ♘xf3+; 16.♗xb5 ♗xb5 17.♘xb5 ♖b8
18.♘xa7 ♖xb2 is pretty reasonable compensation for Black: 19.♘c6
♘xc6 20.dxc6 ♕c7 21.♘xh3 ♕xc6 gives Black plenty of
compensation for the pawn) 16…♘c4 17.♗xc4 bxc4 is a typical
scenario in this variation. White’s position feels loose in the absence
of the light-squared bishop, which makes breaks such as e4-e5 less
frightening for Black.
Stockfish takes a more restrained approach, allowing Black to
advance on the queenside with …b7-b5, just like AlphaZero did in its
White game. The move 15.♖c1 plans to meet a future …b5-b4 with
♘b1, ensuring that the retreat of the knight does not block in a
white rook on a1. White will then aim to exploit the resulting hole on
c4 by playing ♘d2.
15…b5 16.♘f2 ♖e8 17.♔h1

17…b4
The start of an amazing tactical idea.
18.♘b1
18…♘eg4
An astonishing idea, initially assessed at about a pawn plus for White
by my engines whereas AlphaZero gives itself a 52.2% expected
score at this stage – not bad for a Black game!
19.fxg4

1.
2.
There is no convincing way to decline the sacrifice. For example:
19.♗g5 ♘xf2+ 20.♖xf2 ♘xe4.
19…♘xe4 20.♘xe4 ♖xe4
21.♗f4
What has been the result of 18…♘eg4? Black has opened the e-file,
and the h8-a1 diagonal has been cleared for Black’s dark-squared
bishop. Black has created pawn weaknesses in White’s position: the
isolated pawn on d5 and the doubled g-pawns. After …♗xb2 on
move 22, Black has recouped a second pawn for the piece while
isolating the a-pawn and creating a passed c-pawn. However, a key
part of the compensation has not yet been mentioned: the pawn on
h3 combined with the opening of the centre means that White’s king
becomes a target in two ways:
Along the a8-h1 diagonal.
Along the back rank (with invasion via the e-file).
This seems to be enough for Black to maintain the balance despite
the piece deficit. Indeed, White has many pitfalls to avoid!
21…♕e7 22.♗f3
A) 22.♖c2 looks sensible, defending e2 and the loose b2-pawn, but
it loses! 22…♖e8 is simply winning for Black:23.♗d3 ♖e1 24.♕f3

♗xg4 25.♕xg4 ♕e4+ This line graphically demonstrates the two
strands of compensation from the black pawn on h3: the back-rank
weakness and the a8-h1 diagonal!;
B) 22.♗d3 ♗xb2 23.♖c2 ♗a4. Letting my engines run for just a
minute, the evaluations jump all over the place, but after several six
hour stints analysing this and related positions, my engines all come
to the conclusion that Black, with two pawns, a host of weak pawn
targets to attack, plenty of activity and a weak white king to aim at,
is doing absolutely fine. Any attempts I made to sacrifice material
and get at Black’s king ended up as draws! 24.♘d2 ♖d4 25.♕f3
♗c3 26.♖cc1 ♖e8 was one such variation. After 27.♗xd6 ♕xd6
28.♕xf7+ ♔h8 29.♗xg6 Black has 29…♕xd5+ 30.♕xd5 ♖xd5
31.♗xe8 ♗xe8 32.♖f8+ ♔g7 33.♖xe8 ♖xd2 (White’s king is still a
problem!) 34.♖e7+ ♔g6 35.♖xa7 ♗d4 36.♖f1 c4 37.♖a6+ ♔g7
38.♖d6 c3 39.♖d7+ ♔h6 40.♖d6+ is a draw by repetition.
22…♗xb2
23.♗xd6
A) 23.♘d2 was my favourite idea:
A1) If 23…♗xc1 24.♗xd6 wins on the spot: 24…♕xd6 25.♘xe4
♕e5 26.♕xc1;

A2) 23…♖xf4 24.gxf4 ♗xc1 25.♕xc1 ♖e8 and it’s hard for White
to keep Black out of its territory.
B) 23.♕c2 ♗xc1 24.♗xe4 ♗xf4 25.♖xf4 ♖e8 26.♘d2 ♕e5 is
again uncomfortable for White due to the thorn in its side: the pawn
on h3.
23…♕xd6 24.♗xe4 ♗xc1 25.♕xc1 ♗b5
I was amazed that this position could be fine for Black: isn’t Black
just a piece down? However, the problems with White’s king keep
holding Stockfish back as it tries to consolidate.
26.♖e1
26.♕f4 ♕xf4 27.♖xf4 ♖e8 28.♘d2 c4 29.g5 a5 or 29…c3 30.♘b3
a5 looked very scary, as White’s rook on f4 and bishop on e4 are so
awkward.
26…♖e8 27.♘d2
27.♗f3 ♖xe1+ 28.♕xe1 ♗c4 29.♘d2 ♗xd5 30.♘e4 ♕e6 is again
awkward. Black is now starting to pick up a good number of
(passed) pawns for the piece: 31.g5 a5 32.♔g1 (32.♘f6+ ♔g7)
32…a4 and now 33.♘f6+ ♔g7 is winning for Black after 34.♕xe6
♗xe6. There is no way to stop the queenside pawns.
27…c4 28.♘f3
28.♘xc4 ♕c5 29.♘d2 ♕f2.
28…c3
White’s bishop is rooted to e4 to protect the pawn on d5, but this
fixes the white rook on e1 to protect it. And in the meantime, Black’s
queenside pawns are slowly coming closer to their queening
squares. Stockfish decides that it is time to target Black’s king for a
change!
29.♕f4 ♕c5 30.♘e5
30.♘g5 ♕xd5.
30…♖e7
30…♖xe5 31.♕xe5 ♕f2 would be an immediate draw: 32.♕b8+
(32.♖a1 ♗f1 33.♕e8+ ♔h7 (33…♔g7 34.♕e5+ ♔g8) 34.♗xg6+
fxg6 35.♕e7+ is a draw by repetition) 32…♔h7 33.♗xg6+ (33.♖g1

♗d3 34.♕xb4 ♕e2 wins) 33…♔g7 34.♕e5+ ♔xg6 35.♕e4+ ♔g7
and a draw is a fair result! 36.♕e5+ ♔g6 37.♕e4+.
31.♕f6 c2
Both engines have calculated that the draw is a foregone conclusion
but do their best to please the crowd!
32.♘xg6 fxg6 33.♕xg6+ ♔f8 34.♕f6+ ♔g8 35.d6 c1♕
36.♗h7+ ♖xh7 37.♕d8+ ♔f7 38.♕e7+ ♔g6 39.♕e6+ ♔g5 40.♕g8+
♔h6 41.♕e6+ ♔g7 42.♕e7+ ♔g6 43.♕e6+ ♔g5 44.♕g8+ ♔h6

45.♕e6+ ♔g7 46.♕e7+ ♔g8 47.♕d8+
47…♗e8 48.♕xe8+ ♔g7 49.♕e7+ ♔g6 50.♕e6+ ♔g5 51.♕g8+ ♔h6
52.♕e6+ ♔g5 53.♕g8+ ♔h6 54.♕e6+ ♔g7 55.♕d7+ ♔g6 56.♕e6+
♔g7 57.♕e7+ ♔g8 58.♕d8+ ♔g7 59.♕d7+ ♔g6 60.♕e6+ ½-½
HISTORICAL PARALLEL
Kasparov’s King’s Indians
It’s appropriate to finish off with a game by the great King’s Indian
virtuoso, Garry Kasparov. World Champion from 1985-2000,
Kasparov is synonymous with the King’s Indian, having won many
brilliant games and upheld the opening even at the World
Championship level.
I have a personal connection to this game as I seconded the
French grandmaster Joel Lautier during this tournament. Joel was
the top French player for many years, a very fine calculator and a
regular guest at elite events where he scored many fine victories.
I first started working with him in 1993, just before his World
Championship Candidates match against Jan Timman. Although
that result wasn’t quite what we were looking for – Joel lost
narrowly 4½-3½, having needed to convert a complex endgame
in the final game to take the match into overtime – we shared the

same work ethic and collaborated successfully for a number of
years.
Joel took up the Sämisch against the King’s Indian when we
started working together and he had some great fights with
Kasparov in it. Joel had a great record against Kasparov and a
game with Garry was the biggest event of any tournament.
Joel happened to be staying in the hotel room next to Kasparov’s
second Yuri Dokhoian. Joel was a hard taskmaster and we often
worked together until two or three in the morning. When we
stopped in the early hours, we heard voices and the hard sound of
pieces being slammed on to the board. It seemed like even we
weren’t a match for Kasparov’s work ethic during the tournament!
Former top French player Joel Lautier worked very hard on his openings, but
even he was caught out by Garry Kasparov.
Unfortunately, I didn’t see much of this game as I was grabbing
some sleep after having worked all through the night preparing
lines (without a computer in those days, remember!). And of
course, Garry prepared further and caught us out!

Joel Lautier
2630
Garry Kasparov
2775
Amsterdam 1996 (8)
1.d4 ♘f6 2.c4 g6 3.♘c3 ♗g7 4.e4 d6 5.f3 0-0 6.♗g5
My favourite move for many years, and one that Joel took up with
great success.
6…c5 7.d5 a6 8.a4 h6 9.♗e3 e6 10.♕d2 exd5 11.cxd5 ♖e8
We have reached the same structure as in the AlphaZero-Stockfish
games. White’s challenge is how to develop the knight on g1 and
bishop on f1 effectively as both would want to develop to the e2-
square! As we saw in the Stockfish-AlphaZero game, the obvious
♘g1-e2-g3 is vulnerable to the disruptive …h5-h4, so white
players have been creative in finding alternative ways to develop.
The idea in the game seems slow, but it is possible due to the
solid central structure that White established with the pawn on f3
supporting the pawn on e4. Unless Black sacrifices a piece – as
AlphaZero did – that pawn centre can keep Black’s pieces at bay
for quite some time – hopefully until White has developed and is
ready to start advancing the central pawns with f3-f4 and e4-e5.
12.♘ge2 ♘bd7 13.♘d1

Such a nice idea! The c3-knight is played to f2 and c3 is freed for
the king’s knight! The net result will be perfect!
13…♘e5 14.♘ec3
I remember that we had spent a lot of time analysing systems in
which Black plays …g6-g5 (as Kasparov later did against the
Russian grandmaster Dreev) but Kasparov’s idea in the game was
completely unexpected.
14…♘h5 15.♗xh6
Joel takes the most principled decision, asking Kasparov to prove
his compensation for the sacrificed pawn.
15…♕h4+ 16.♘f2 ♗xh6 17.♕xh6 f5
White’s position is still solid, but after Kasparov’s sharp play, he
can’t hang around too long.

White’s queen looks dangerous on h6, but without any support, it
cannot achieve anything. Black’s knight on e5 plays a sterling role,
both defending g6 and eyeing squares f3 and d3 in White’s camp.
Meanwhile, the knight on f2 is pinned by the queen on h4, which
keeps White’s king on e1. This is somewhat worrying as Black’s
17…f5 is the prelude to opening the centre. Joel decides therefore
to withdraw the queen, protect the knight on f2 and then castle
queenside. It’s not very usual in this line, but considering Black’s
dark-squared bishop has been exchanged – which normally cuts
across the h8-a1 diagonal and attacks the b2-pawn – and the
general airiness of Black’s kingside structure, then White’s king
cannot be any weaker than Black’s!
18.♕d2 ♖b8

Kasparov shows his intent to open lines on the queenside with …
b7-b5 if White castles there.
19.♗e2
White hints at castling kingside. This move protects f3 and
prepares g2-g3, driving the queen away from h4. Kasparov
prevents this.
19…f4

It looks as if White’s last move was a mistake: the knight on f2 is
now unprotected as the bishop on e2 interferes with the
protection given to it by White’s queen. However, Joel has an idea
to sharpen the fight further and fight fire with fire: the only way to
play successfully against Kasparov and a style that came very
naturally to Joel!
20.g3 fxg3 21.hxg3 ♕xg3 22.0-0-0
22…♕xf2 23.♕g5

A great piece sacrifice, after which Black must be very careful.
White’s king is now safe and White has the threat of 24.♖xh5,
regaining his piece with a massive attack.
23…♘g7 would be met by 24.f4. Kasparov therefore takes the
decision to cut his losses and head for a line which allows a draw
by repetition.
23…♗g4 24.♖df1
24.fxg4 ♕f4+ is good for Black.
24…♕d4
If 24…♕g3 25.♖xh5 wins.
25.♖d1
25.fxg4 ♘g3 26.♕h6 ♘xh1 27.♖xh1 ♘f7 28.♕xg6+ ♕g7 holds
for Black: that’s why the black queen can’t stray too far to the
queenside.
25…♕f2
On 25…♕b4 26.fxg4 wins: the queen is too far away.
26.♖df1 ♕d4 27.♖d1 ♕f2 ½-½

CHAPTER 16
The Carlsbad
Mark Dvoretsky and the Carlsbad
The most instructive five minutes of my life were from a training
session that I was fortunate enough to have with the great Russian
trainer – unfortunately recently deceased – Mark Dvoretsky.
Reaching the Carlsbad structure in our analysis together, Mark asked
me what I knew about the plans in this position. My answer was
obviously not satisfactory as he offered to give me a quick overview.
In just five minutes, he covered succinctly about 100 years of chess
practice, explaining which plans were used by which players and
what counter-plans were available in each situation, all delivered in
his quiet, slightly apologetic tone of voice. (Those explanations
became the highlight of a book I wrote on the Queen’s Gambit
Declined many years ago!)
Legendary chess coach Mark Dvoretsky had some very instructive things to say
about the Carlsbad structure.

The Carlsbad structure is loved by many at all levels for its nice
calm positional games, which will doubtless be borne out in this
chapter…(!) World Champion exponents include Karpov, Petrosian
and Carlsen. A step-by-step way of playing is found in the Keith
Arkell chapter of our 2016 book, Chess for Life.
The ‘Play like Keith Arkell’ craze
Over the last couple of years the authors have shown hundreds of
players ‘How to play like GM Keith Arkell’. These talks were an
exposition of Carlsbad aficionado Arkell’s handling of the plans
around the Carlsbad pawn structure, in a style that he has honed
over the last thirty years or more. Like AlphaZero’s attacking
schemas in this book, Arkell’s positional plans are relatively simple to
explain and try out. Men, women and children have pushed their b-
pawns, traded queens and the right minor pieces and given their
opponents weak pawns in rook and pawn endgames in an effort to
play like the popular English grandmaster.
Back to AlphaZero
Then along came self-learning AlphaZero. Suddenly we have new
possibilities. Will a self-learning machine come up with those same
well-established plans in the Carlsbad? Will there be completely new
plans for us to learn? Will the machine hang it all and instead teach
itself to play like Keith Arkell? (This last one is not as crazy as it
sounds – early chess computers used to be marketed with settings
to play like particular players. If we could choose to train our self-
learning machine based on Arkell games with the aim of playing just
like him, there is the potential to really do it! Or could we train a
self-learning machine to play just like our next opponent and
practise against it?)

English grandmaster Keith Arkell is a specialist in handling Carlsbad structures.
The rest of this chapter we will devote to learning from
AlphaZero’s games with Stockfish in the Carlsbad. It was fascinating
to see the radically different approaches taken by both engines.
Carlsbad Structure

This structure is typically reached via the Queen’s Gambit Declined
(though it can also occur in other openings) with a move order such
as 1.d4 d5 2.c4 e6 3.♘c3 ♘f6 4.cxd5 exd5 5.♗g5 c6.
Carlsbad move order
1.d4 d5 2.c4 e6 3.♘c3 ♘f6 4.cxd5 exd5 5.♗g5 c6
I was interested in how AlphaZero would handle the structure in the
Queen’s Gambit Declined games, where one of the major plans for
White is to play on the queenside (in other words, not targeting the
opponent’s king). The archetypal plan for White in such structures is
the Minority Attack:

Minority Attack (1)
Minority Attack (2)
The Minority Attack is so called as White’s pawn minority on the
queenside attacks Black’s pawn majority there. White’s goal is to
exchange the b-pawns and leave Black with a backward and weak c-
pawn which White can attack along the half-open c-file. The sting in

the tail is that if the c6-pawn falls, the d5-pawn is weak and often
falls as well.
That is of course the ideal scenario for White as we have seen it
hundreds of times in Arkell’s games. However, Dvoretsky pointed out
the richness of these structures: for example, he explained that
Black could try to organise …c6-c5 in response to b4-b5, for example
by playing a rook to c8…
Minority Attack Dvoretsky (1)
… which then leads to

Minority Attack Dvoretsky (2)
The beauty of this plan is that Black gains something in return for
the pawn weaknesses White extracts with the Minority Attack. Here
Black accepts an isolated pawn on d5, but in return gets active play
on the c-file. A nice feature is that the knight on c3 is unstable – it is
not protected by a pawn – and needs to defend the advanced pawn
on b5. In this specific structure, White would like to put the b-pawn
back on b2!
Has AlphaZero discovered the Minority Attack during its millions of
games of self-play? Does AlphaZero like this plan, or would it try
something else? Thrilling questions, but first let’s look at a game in
which Stockfish was White and AlphaZero was Black. I imagine that
such a strategy is handcrafted in Stockfish’s programming; in any
case the Minority Attack figured heavily in its games when it was
White.
Game: ‘The rook’s pawn symphony’
From an innocuous-looking position, with White’s kingside untouched
and the white king seemingly insured against any danger, AlphaZero
pushes its rook’s pawn to initiate a kingside offensive. Stockfish
reacts a little sluggishly and allows AlphaZero to build its forces

1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
further on the kingside. When Stockfish finally pursues its own break
on the queenside, AlphaZero pushes its queen’s rook’s pawn all the
way to a3, tying down White’s queen. By alternating threats on the
kingside and queenside, AlphaZero stretches White’s position beyond
breaking point. An unexpected exchange sacrifice ends the game. A
masterly game!
Game themes:
Using a rook’s pawn to weaken the opponent’s king’s position
[24…h4]
Opening a second front [32…g4]
Taking over the original front of attack [35…♖gc8]
Immediate piece redeployment once that goal is achieved [35…
♖gc8]
Breaking the fortress with a sacrifice [44…♖xf4]
Safer king
Stockfish 8
AlphaZero
London 2018
1.d4 d5 2.c4
The last forced opening move. Both engines are now on their own.
2…e6
AlphaZero’s expected score after this move is 43.2%, so it obviously
feels that White has started well. AlphaZero keeps estimating a sub
50% expected score for Black until the moment it pushes its g-pawn
with 25…g5, preparing to open the kingside. Then the only way is
up!
3.♘c3 ♘f6 4.cxd5 exd5 5.♗g5 ♗e7 6.e3 0-0 7.♗d3 h6

For as long as I remember, the advice in books has been to avoid
weakening the black kingside with …h7-h6 due to the difficulty that
Black can experience in evicting a white knight from the e5-outpost:
Weakness of g6
With …h7-h6 already played, then …f7-f6 is no longer effective as
the knight can hop from its outpost on e5 to the unprotected g6-
square. However, as we shall see in the game, removing the pawn

from the future combined attack of the queen on c2 and bishop on
d3 has a definite strategic point and is a way of avoiding a major
white plan in this position.
8.♗h4 c6 9.♕c2
9.♘f3 ♘e4 10.♗g3 ♗f5 11.♕c2 ♗b4 12.0-0 ♘xg3 13.hxg3 ♗xd3
14.♕xd3 ♘d7 and the world’s best women’s player – studying at
Oxford University in 2018-2019 – achieved a comfortable game in Li
Chao-Hou Yifan, Sharjah 2017.
9…♖e8 10.♘ge2
Stockfish plays my favourite plan, developing the knight to e2
instead of f3, preparing to castle kingside and then expand in the
centre with a later f2-f3 and e3-e4, following the example of
Botvinnik in his classic game against Keres (see later in this chapter).
The downside to this move is that it does not attempt to exploit the
specific weakening caused by 7…h6 which requires the knight to go
to f3 and later to e5.
10…♘bd7 11.0-0 ♘h5 12.♗xe7 ♕xe7

This is the point of playing …h7-h6 early! Removing the h7-pawn
from the attack of the queen on c2 and the bishop on d3 frees the
knight on f6 from defensive duties and allows Black to play 11…
♘h5, exchanging bishops and exerting pressure on White’s e3-pawn
before White gets the chance to play f2-f3. If White is unable to
achieve f2-f3 and e3-e4, then the knight is less well-placed on e2
than on f3.
In a blitz game against Kramnik in 2017, Nepomniachtchi tried the
creative manoeuvre 13.♖ae1 ♘f8 14.♘c1 followed by ♘b3 and f2-
f3, trying to achieve his plan of central expansion nonetheless, which
gave him a small edge. In this game, Stockfish feints at a central
plan first of all but then falls back to queenside expansion and the
Minority Attack.
13.♖ae1 ♘f8 14.a3 ♗d7 15.b4 ♘f6 16.♖b1 ♘e6 17.a4 a6 18.♖fe1

The position is quiet and you would expect White to have a small,
safe plus. White is ready to proceed with b4-b5 while its own king
looks perfectly out of harm’s way. However in the next 10 moves we
will experience a complete transformation, and a perfect illustration
of the purpose and focus with which AlphaZero mobilises its pieces.
Its innovative use of the rook’s pawn as a lever to create targets on
an untouched and seemingly secure kingside engineers opportunities
to open a file on that wing. And we all know the danger when
AlphaZero has an open file pointing at your king!
18…h5
The first step: AlphaZero envisages …h5-h4 and …h4-h3, forcing g2-
g3, and then …♘g5, targeting the weakened f3-square. Black is
then ready to follow up with …♗g4, establishing further control over
the light squares. For that reason, Stockfish prefers to play h2-h3 at
once, halting the h-pawn at h4. Playing 19.h3 now stops AlphaZero
from carrying out another of its favourite manoeuvres: …♘g4,
supported by a pawn on h5, attacking f2 and h2.
19.h3 g6
A useful multi-purpose move. The typical manoeuvre …♘g7 and …
♗f5, exchanging light-squared bishops, is now available whilst Black
removes any back-rank threats by blocking the b1-h7 diagonal.

20.♖a1
A typical engine move. None of the engines are particularly wowed
by the immediate 20.b5 due to 20…axb5 21.axb5 c5. Black’s knight
is excellently placed on e6 to support this counter-break and after
22.dxc5 ♘xc5, Black has few problems. As we explained in the
introduction to this chapter, White’s pawn on b5 is now an
inconvenience as it occupies the square that White would like for the
knight on c3 while White’s queenside dark squares lack some
solidity. This gives Black ample opportunities for counterplay using
the knight outposts on e4 and c4 that the isolated pawn on d5
provides. This is precisely the plan Dvoretsky told me about all those
years ago!
So Stockfish shuffles its rooks around, waiting for a better
opportunity to break. I recognise this style from my practice games
against Stockfish. In these games I feel I am making progress as I
slowly build up my forces while Stockfish fiddles around. I normally
get reasonably far but it’s a mistake to think that Stockfish’s
manoeuvring is without a plan. There is always a great deal of
concrete calculation behind it. After one incautious move from me,
Stockfish plays its desired break and my pieces turn out to be on
precisely the wrong squares at that specific moment.
AlphaZero manages to blend the human sense of purpose and
direction with a tactical skill on a par with Stockfish’s. That makes it
deadly in such positions: we referred to this scenario as ‘slow-
burning attacks’ in earlier chapters.
20…♘g5 21.♘f4 ♘ge4

Occupying the e4-outpost and freeing the path for the g-pawn to
advance against the kingside with …g6-g5-g4.
22.♘xe4 dxe4 23.♗c4 ♔g7 24.♖ec1
Stockfish places its rooks on b1 and c1, which are good squares
when preparing the b4-b5 break, but which are far away from the
gathering storm on the kingside!
24…h4

Another typical AlphaZero move, fixing the h-pawn on h3 with …h5-
h4 and preparing …g5-g4.
25.♖ab1 g5 26.♘e2 ♔h6 27.♔f1 ♖g8
AlphaZero’s evaluation jumps from 51.1% after 26…♔h6 to a 65.5%
expected score for Black after 27…♖g8. A similar big jump to 75.5%
occurs after 32…g4. AlphaZero is ready to launch its attack, and so
is Stockfish… who will be faster? Well… to be honest, there’s no
doubt in my mind, because Stockfish’s king is in the line of
AlphaZero’s fire!
28.b5 cxb5 29.axb5 a5
A very nice idea, turning White’s b4-b5 break – intended to provide
White with an advantage on the queenside and tie down some of
Black’s forces there – into a distraction for White instead! AlphaZero
will use pawn activity on the queenside to disrupt the coordination of
White’s pieces, which are then unable to oppose Black effectively on
the kingside.
30.b6 a4 31.♕a2 a3

AlphaZero has raced its other rook’s pawn as far as possible into
White’s territory (it’s got even further than the h-pawn!). The pawn
is doomed in principle – White can surround it via ♖a1 and ♖c3,
but while White is organising that, some big events will take place
on the kingside!
32.♖c3
32.♗xf7 simply opens more lines for AlphaZero on the kingside:
32…♖g7 33.♗b3 g4 34.hxg4 ♘xg4 and the a8-rook will come to
the f-file.
32…g4 33.hxg4 ♘xg4 34.♘f4 h3
A beautiful idea: the rook’s pawns are heroes in this game!
35.g3
Trying to keep the kingside as closed as possible.
A) 35.♘xh3 ♘h2+ 36.♔e2 ♖xg2 37.♘f4 ♗g4+ 38.♔e1 ♘f3+ is
awful for White;
B) 35.gxh3 ♘h2+ 36.♔e2 ♖gc8 is the amazing point. It took me
quite some time to appreciate what White’s problems are in this
position. Black intends to follow up with …♘f3 and …♕g5.
(see diagram)
Position after extra moves …♘f3 and …♕g5

When that happens, White’s bishop on c4 will have nowhere to go as
…♗b5+ will follow if the bishop moves from the a6-f1 diagonal:
Position after extra moves – W♗ leaves the a6-f1 diagonal
When you see this, you realise how constricted White is: moving the
bishop from c4 is full of peril, but then that means that White’s rook
and queen must keep defending the bishop on c4.
That means the a3-pawn is going to stay alive as White cannot
capture this pawn and protect the bishop on c4. And if that pawn is

going to stay alive, then White probably needs to leave the queen –
always a terrible defender – on the a2-square to stop the pawn from
moving forwards.
Like in the AlphaZero-Stockfish game in the ‘King’s Indian Sämisch’
chapter, Stockfish has ended up with its most powerful piece in an
absolutely rotten position, both objectively and compared to Black’s
queen, which has unfettered mobility. Essentially, AlphaZero has
managed to push Stockfish into a position where it can do nothing
active and must simply wait for AlphaZero to find the finishing blow.
And look at that king on h6: open, and yet completely safe. Much
safer in fact than White’s king which is surrounded by pawns.
Wonderful judgement!
35…♖gc8
Restricting the bishop on c4 by pinning it to the rook on c3. The rook
is no longer needed on the g-file after 35.g3 so AlphaZero redeploys
it to a more active square. The file that Stockfish thought it opened
for itself now becomes the source of its greatest problems!
AlphaZero is assessing its chances now as a 75.5% expected score.
36.♔g1
36.♘xh3 ♔g7 37.♘f4 ♖h8 is the stunning idea, aiming for …♖h2.
My engines give this -2.56 (completely winning for Black); 38.♔g1
♖h2 39.♗f1 ♖xf2 40.♕d5 a2 41.♖a1 ♖b2 42.♘h5+ ♔h6 43.♘f4
♘f6 44.♕xb7 ♖g8 is one sample line. Look at that rook mobility:
AlphaZero moved its rook first to the c-file, then prepared …♖h8
with …♔g7 and then prepared …♖g8 with …♔h6! Fantastic play!
36…h2+

Look at those rooks’ pawns! It’s as if they are racing each other!
37.♔g2 ♔g7 38.♖cc1
I wasn’t sure how Black was going to proceed after this, but
AlphaZero finds an incredible way to weaken the white kingside
decisively. I hadn’t realised how dangerous such a structure with a
knight on g4 and a pawn h2 can be. I had assumed that the pawn
on h2 would shield White from danger (by taking away invasion
squares from Black’s major pieces on the h-file) rather than create
danger.
38…♖a5
An 82.0% expected score after this.
39.♗e2 ♖xc1 40.♖xc1 ♕b4

Emphasising the strength of the a-pawn: 41…♕b2 is a threat.
41.♖b1 ♕d6 42.♗c4 ♕h6 43.♔h1 ♖f5
The engines are already sunk in gloom but it took me some time to
understand the strength of 44…♖xf4.
44.♗d5 ♖xf4 45.exf4
If 45.gxf4 ♕h4 46.♖f1 ♕h3 47.♕e2 ♗b5 wins!
45…♗f5
Threatening 46…e3.
46.♖c1

46.♗xb7 e3 47.fxe3 ♗xb1 48.♕xb1 ♕h3 49.♕e1 a2 50.f5 ♘f2+
51.♕xf2 a1♕+ 52.♕g1 hxg1♕#.
This line gives proper credit to the efforts of the rooks’ pawns!
46…♕xb6
Threatening 47…♕b2.
47.♕xa3
47.♕d2 ♕b2 48.♕xb2 axb2 49.♖b1 e3 50.♖xb2 exf2 51.♗g2 ♗e4
is one win, and there are plenty more!
47…♘xf2+ 48.♔xh2 ♘g4+ 49.♔g2 ♕xd4 0-1
There is no defence to all of Black’s threats, starting with 50…♕f2+
and 50…♕xd5. 50.♕a2 is simply met by 50…♘e3+ and 51…♘xd5.
A masterly game by AlphaZero, one of its very best.
Seeing Stockfish’s miserable queen on a2 made me think of a
classic game between the great José Raul Capablanca (World
Champion from 1914 to 1927) and twice-British Champion Sir
George Thomas at Hastings 1934/5. Astonishingly, Capablanca
was given a positional lesson from the English amateur, who was
on his way to the greatest tournament triumph of his career,

sharing first with Euwe and Flohr, having defeated Botvinnik and
Capablanca in successive days!
José Raul Capablanca
George Alan Thomas
Hastings 1934/35
This position also arose from a Queen’s Gambit Declined, though
Capablanca chose not to fix the centre with cxd5. White is in
complete control and a sequence such as 17.b4 ♕c7 18.♕b3
would maintain White’s space advantage. A freeing attempt such
as 18…c5 would be met by 19.bxc5 bxc5 20.d5 with powerful play
for White. Capablanca aims for something similar but executes it
carelessly, misplacing his queen on a2 – just like Stockfish. The
passivity of White’s most powerful piece has a profound effect on
the assessment of the position.
18.♕b3 ♕c7 19.♕a2

Strong English amateur Sir George Thomas gave former World Champion José
Raul Capablanca a positional lesson in this game.
Preparing the restraining b2-b4, but too late: he should have
played it on move 18!
19…c5
Necessary, but also very awkward for White.
20.d5

20…b5
This thrust turns the position in Black’s favour. In the subsequent
variations, the offside queen on a2 is responsible for all White’s
tactical problems!
21.♗xb5 exd5 22.e5
22.exd5 ♗xd5 hits the queen on a2! 23.♗c4 ♗xf3 24.gxf3 ♘g6
followed by …♘h4 is pleasant for Black due to White’s kingside
weaknesses.
22…♘e4 23.♘xe4 dxe4 24.♘d2
Loses material, but the alternatives are just as bad:
A) 24.♖xd8 ♕xd8 traps the knight on f3! If the white queen
were still on c2, the knight could just retreat to d2;
B) 24.♘g5 ♖xd1 25.♖xd1 c4 shuts out the queen on a2 and
prepares to continue with 26…♕xe5, winning a pawn and forking
the bishop on b5 and the knight on e4. Since the white queen has
just four legal moves (and only one sensible one!) White’s other
pieces are on their own… and at the mercy of Black’s active
queen!
24…♖xd2
24…♕a5 was even stronger, but Sir George’s choice wins too.
25.♖xd2 ♕a5
Winning two pieces for the rook, with a decisive advantage which
Black converted on move 53. This tactic would not have worked if
the white queen had been on c2!
A few months ago, Natasha and I were following the fascinating
Chess960 match between Magnus Carlsen and Hikaru Nakamura.
Chess960 is a chess variant invented by former World Champion
Bobby Fischer. It is played with the same board and pieces, but the
starting position of the pieces is randomized (hence the original
name Fischerandom).

This was the starting position of the first blitz game of the match
(see diagram):
Magnus Carlsen
Hikaru Nakamura
Chess 960 blitz 2018
Listening to the commentary, we were both struck by a remark by
the English grandmaster Daniel King. He said that ‘Carlsen was
really attuned to the position of his queen, particularly in relation
to the opponent’s king, more so than Nakamura’.
Whilst admittedly not a Carlsbad, this game was a superb
demonstration of queen activity. With both queens starting in the
corner, Carlsen tries at once to secure a range of activity for his
queen while Nakamura is content to leave the queen Stockfish-like
in the corner. Though Carlsen is pressing, the game remains
poised until a tactical inaccuracy allows Carlsen to open the game.
Suddenly, the passivity of Nakamura’s queen relative to Carlsen’s
is the decisive factor as the game is finished with a lightning
mating attack.

1.a4
That’s the joy of Chess960 – when has the world’s top player ever
played 1.a4 before?
1…e6 2.a5 a6
The first two moves set the contours of the ensuing struggle.
Pushing the pawn to a5 has freed space for the queen on a1 while
Black is unlikely to play …b7-b6 to free his queen as this would
weaken the pawn structure around the black king.
3.e4 ♘f6 4.e5 ♘d5 5.♘f3 f6 6.exf6 gxf6 7.♘e3 ♘xe3 8.fxe3 ♗g6 9.b4
Opening the line of the queen on a1 to attack the pawn on f6.
9…♗e7 10.♗h4 ♖f8 11.♗e2 ♘c6 12.♕c3 b5
Black takes a tactical opportunity to open the a8-h1 diagonal for
the queen as 13.axb6 ♖xb6 would expose the weakness of the
b4-pawn.
13.0-0

The amazing Chess960 castling for which Daniel King loves to
provide action replays!
13…0-0-0
14.d4 ♗h5 15.♕d2 d5

Preventing d4-d5 but blocking the diagonal that had been opened
for the black queen with 12…b5. We are back to a situation in
which White’s queen looks much more active than Black’s.
However, since the position is fairly blocked, Black is fine for now.
16.c3 ♗xf3 17.♖xf3 f5 18.♖h3 ♖d7 19.♗g3 ♗g5 20.♗f4 h6 21.♗xg5
hxg5 22.♖h6 ♖e7
22…♖d6 is given as superior by King, followed by 23…♔b7 and
24…♕a8 and the queen will finally emerge! Nakamura’s move
looks sensible but allows a sharp tactic, activating the white queen
with gain of time. In that situation, the passivity of Nakamura’s
queen on a8 begins to tell.
23.e4 dxe4 24.♕xg5

24…♔b7
Desperately trying to activate the black queen before it’s too late…
but it is already too late!
25.d5 exd5 26.♖xc6
Winning a piece. Carlsen finishes off with a nicely-played mating
attack.
26…♖ef7 27.♖c5 ♖d7 28.♕g6 ♕d8 29.♕c6+ ♔a7 30.♗xb5 axb5
31.♖xb5 ♕c8 32.a6 1-0
32…♖e6 33.♖b7+ ♔a8 34.♖b8+ ♔xb8 35.a7+ ♔xa7 36.♖a1+
♔b8 37.♖a8#.
Two wonderful examples of the crippling effect that a passive queen
can have on your whole position – a theme I hadn’t consciously
understood until I saw AlphaZero’s games!
Back to the Carlsbad…
HISTORICAL PARALLEL
Botvinnik’s classic anti-QGD plan
The plan of f2-f3 and e3-e4 featured in the notes to the
AlphaZero-Stockfish game above, so let’s examine a game that
demonstrates this idea.

Mikhail Botvinnik became World Champion in 1948 and remained
World Champion for most of the period until 1963. AlphaZero’s
play as White reminds me strongly of Botvinnik’s schematic
opening approach which he applied to many opening systems: fix
the centre at an early stage to reduce the opponent’s counterplay,
then act powerfully on one or both wings. If the opponent is
incautious, strike in the centre – just like in this game!
Mikhail Botvinnik
Paul Keres
Moscow ch-USSR 1952 (8)
1.d4 ♘f6 2.c4 e6 3.♘c3 d5 4.cxd5 exd5 5.♗g5 ♗e7 6.e3 0-0 7.♗d3
♘bd7 8.♕c2 ♖e8 9.♘ge2 ♘f8 10.0-0 c6 11.♖ab1
Botvinnik prepares the Minority Attack, but after Keres’ next (risky
and ambitious) move, he switches to a more powerful plan that
was to become a classic strategy in these structures.
11…♗d6
Threatening 12…♗xh2+ followed by 13…♘g4+, picking up the
loose bishop on g5, and intending …♘g6 followed by …h7-h6 to
force White to give up his dark-squared bishop for the f6-knight.

Forced to take action against this plan, Botvinnik comes up with
something dangerous!
12.♔h1 ♘g6 13.f3
That’s our plan: e3-e4 is coming.
13…♗e7
13…h6 14.♗xf6 ♕xf6 15.e4. The position of the bishop on d6 is
unfortunate as it is in the path of White’s pawn advance with e4-
e5. Even worse, the knight on g6 is in the path of White’s
subsequent pawn advance with f4-f5. Keres therefore decides to
take his 11th move back and retreat the bishop back to e7, but
that’s not something you want with Botvinnik on the warpath
sitting opposite you!
14.♖be1 ♘d7 15.♗xe7 ♖xe7 16.♘g3 ♘f6 17.♕f2
Protecting d4 with the queen and preparing e3-e4.
17…♗e6 18.♘f5
A clean thematic move, bringing the bishop to f5. From f5, the
bishop prepares e3-e4 by taking away the ideas …♖d7 and …♘g4
after …dxe4, fxe4.
My engine also points out 18.f4 ♘f8 19.f5 ♗d7 20.e4 dxe4
21.♘gxe4 with a huge initiative for White due to Black’s cramped

position and prospectless pieces.
18…♗xf5 19.♗xf5 ♕b6 20.e4 dxe4 21.fxe4 ♖d8 22.e5
22…♘d5 23.♘e4
Classic play from Botvinnik, creating an advanced outpost on d6
for his knight.
23…♘f8 24.♘d6 ♕c7 25.♗e4 ♘e6 26.♕h4 g6 27.♗xd5
A far from obvious exchange, exploiting the power and influence
of the knight on d6 on the queenside. Since the knight on d6

covers the c8-square, Black is unable to challenge White’s control
of the c-file. That’s one more positional advantage for White.
27…cxd5 28.♖c1 ♕d7 29.♖c3
Classic play – via his control of the open c-file, White gains the
opportunity to swing his rook over towards the kingside along the
third rank.
29…♖f8 30.♘f5 ♖fe8 31.♘h6+
The position is too good to take the exchange!
31…♔f8 32.♕f6 ♘g7 33.♖cf3
f7 will fall: the game is over.
33…♖c8 34.♘xf7 ♖e6 35.♕g5 ♘f5 36.♘h6 ♕g7 37.g4 1-0
A glorious game from Botvinnik. Seeing this game as a junior in
Raymond Keene’s excellent book An Opening Repertoire for White
inspired me to take up this strategy against the Queen’s Gambit
Declined, and I’ve been playing it ever since!
It’s time for a game with AlphaZero on the white side of the
Carlsbad. As we shall see, Stockfish also has its own unusual
interpretation of the black side of this line, and AlphaZero’s reaction
is as you might expect… the queenside does not figure greatly in its

1.
2.
3.
plans! We’ve seen one game along these lines – ‘No Minority
Attack for AlphaZero’ in the chapter ‘Outposts’ and we see
another great example here:
Game: ‘AlphaZero’s new approach in the Carlsbad’
AlphaZero offers Black the opportunity to weaken the white kingside
structure in exchange for an open g-file against the black king. Once
opened, AlphaZero mobilises its forces in a familiar manner: a bishop
along the b1-h7 diagonal and two rooks on the g-file assisted by a
queen on the h-file. As we have often seen, the addition of the
knight to the attack is the final straw that breaks Black’s position.
AlphaZero wins a pawn and eventually the game.
Game themes:
Sacrificing structure to open lines against the opponent’s king
[12.gxf3]
Long knight manoeuvre [27.♘e2, 28.♘g3, 40.♘h5]
Opponent’s passive pieces
AlphaZero
Stockfish 8
London 2018
1.d4 ♘f6 2.c4 e6 3.♘c3 d5 4.cxd5 exd5 5.♗g5 c6 6.e3 ♗d6 7.♗d3 0-0
8.♘f3 ♖e8 9.0-0 ♗g4

Both sides have developed quite logically in this Queen’s Gambit
Declined Carlsbad structure, although Black’s 6…♗d6 is more
ambitious than normal (6…♗e7 is usually played to break the pin on
the knight on f6).
Black’s last move intends to complete development with …♘bd7
when Black’s position would be harmonious. White has a one-move
window of opportunity to unbalance the situation… which AlphaZero
takes (of course).
10.♕b3

1.
2.
3.
White hits the b7-pawn and Black has to work a little to defend it.
The normal reaction 10…♕b6 would allow White to saddle Black
with an unpleasant kingside structure with 11.♗xf6 gxf6. Black
sometimes takes on this structure, but normally at an earlier stage
when Black still has the opportunity to place his pieces on
appropriate squares. In particular, the black knight on b8 is normally
rushed to d6 to cover Black’s weakened kingside light squares.
AlphaZero is tempting Black to capture the knight on f3 with 10…
♗xf3. This gives White doubled pawns and a weakened kingside
structure, but it also confers a number of advantages onto White:
White gains the two bishops.
The pawn on f3 covers e4, which takes away an outpost from the
black knight on f6.
The g-file is opened towards the black king.
10…♘a6
An ingenious tactical way of defending b7.
11.♖fe1
11.♗xa6 (11.♕xb7 ♘b4) 11…bxa6 is definitely possible. Black’s
queenside structure is horrible, but Black’s pieces are active and
White’s dark-squared pawn structure looks porous without the light-
squared bishop to fill in the gaps. AlphaZero prefers to offer a
structure in which its pieces are more active.
Black’s position is active but lacks coordination. The bishop is active
on d6, but doesn’t deal with the awkward pin on the f6-knight. 10…
♘a6 countered the threat of 11.♕xb7 by developing a piece, but a6
is a poor square for the knight. The bishop on g4 attacks the f3-
knight but it isn’t clear if Black wants to take it. In other words, all
Black’s pieces are doing something but it isn’t clear what they are
doing together. In contrast, with the exception of the rook on a1, all
of White’s pieces are focused on the central squares d4, e4, d5 and
e5, which makes the e3-e4 break a definite possibility. Stockfish’s
early development has been creative but not completely satisfactory
in my opinion.

11…♗xf3 12.gxf3
12…♖b8
Black has dealt with the threat against the b7-pawn, and is ready to
play …♘a6-c7-e6, redeploying its knight to a good central square.
White also begins a general redeployment to exploit the newly-
opened g-file.
Just as we saw in the ‘Colour complexes’ chapter, White has a bishop
on a diagonal pointing towards the black king (the bishop on d3 on
the b1-h7 diagonal), an open file against the king (the g-file) and
the opponent’s king is in the danger area. It’s time for AlphaZero to
start building up some strength on the kingside. AlphaZero starts by
transferring the queen there.
13.♕d1 ♘c7 14.f4 ♗e7 15.♕f3 ♘d7 16.♗xe7 ♖xe7 17.♕h3

Combining with the bishop on d3 against the h7-pawn.
17…♘f6 18.♔h1
Now it’s time for the rooks to come into play on the g-file.
18…♕d7 19.♗f5 ♕d6 20.♖g1
Here they are. Once again note how Stockfish fails to find a sensible
way to achieve anything on the queenside while AlphaZero builds up
an enormous position on the kingside.
20…♔h8 21.♗d3 ♖g8 22.♕h4 ♘ce8 23.♖g5 h6 24.♖ag1 ♖c7 25.a3
♕e6 26.♖e5 ♕d6 27.♘e2

A typical AlphaZero long knight manoeuvre, transferring the knight
from c3 to the huge square f5 from where it attacks the kingside
pawns on g7 and h6.
27…♘h7 28.♘g3 ♕f6 29.♕h3 ♘d6 30.f3 a6 31.a4 ♕d8 32.♖h5 ♕f6
33.a5
I like this very much: AlphaZero fixes Black’s queenside pawns on
light squares, where they might be vulnerable to its light-squared

bishop in the endgame, before proceeding with further kingside
pressing.
33…♖e7 34.♖e5 ♖c7 35.b3 ♖cc8 36.♗b1 ♖cf8 37.b4 ♕d8 38.♖h5 ♕f6
39.♖h4 ♖d8 40.♘h5 ♕e6 41.♕xe6 fxe6 42.♖hg4 ♘e8 43.♗xh7 ♔xh7
44.♖g6
As if by magic, White is winning a pawn, after which the result is
never in doubt.
44…♖d7
44…♖d6 holds the e-pawn… but it isn’t easy to see Black’s next
move! In fact, only …♔h7-h8 doesn’t lose a pawn: 45.♖1g2 ♔h8
46.♔g1 ♔h7 47.♔f2 ♔h8 48.♔e2 ♔h7 49.♔d3 ♔h8 50.e4 e5 will
come in, winning the e6-pawn anyway!
45.♖xe6 ♖f8 46.♔g2 ♘c7 47.♖e5 g6 48.♘g3 ♘e8 49.f5 ♖df7 50.fxg6+
♔xg6 51.♘h5 ♔h7 52.f4 ♘d6 53.♔f2 ♘b5 54.♖g4 ♘c7 55.♔f3 ♘e8
56.♔e2 ♖f5 57.♔f2 ♖5f7 58.♖g2 ♘c7 59.h3 ♘e8 60.♖g1 ♘c7 61.♖g4
♖d7 62.♔e1 ♖df7 63.♔f1 ♘b5 64.♔g2 ♘c7 65.♔f3 ♘b5 66.♘g3 ♘c7
67.♘e2 ♘e8 68.♘c1 ♘g7 69.♘d3 ♖f6 70.h4 ♖8f7 71.h5 ♖c7 72.♔f2
♖cf7 73.♘c5 ♔h8 74.♖g6 ♘xh5 75.♖e8+ ♔h7 76.♖xf6 ♘xf6 77.♖b8
♘e4+ 78.♘xe4 dxe4 79.♖e8 ♔g6 80.♖xe4 ♔f6 81.♖e5 ♖h7 82.♖h5
♔g6 83.♖h4 b6 84.♖g4+ ♔f6 85.♖g1 bxa5 86.bxa5 ♖d7 87.♖c1 ♖d6
88.♖c5 ♔e7 89.♔f3 1-0

PART V
Conclusion

CHAPTER 17
Epilogue
We hope that you have enjoyed the sensational games between
AlphaZero and Stockfish and our impressions of the new approaches
to chess that they uncover. We finish with a recap of what we have
learnt about chess, give our thoughts on what it was like to work
with AI, and consider the potential of the technologies used to
produce AlphaZero.
What we have learnt about chess from AlphaZero
AlphaZero taught itself to play chess in a unique manner by playing
millions of lightning-fast games against itself. It was given no human
knowledge about established chess strategy. As a result, AlphaZero
was free to develop its own chess techniques and style.
Of course chess would be an easy game if you could clearly see
the outcome of every decision. We can’t, and the number of
possibilities is so vast that machines can’t either. So computers, like
us, are finding their way through the maze using a combination of
calculation and strategy.
As Demis put it:
‘You can think about AlphaZero in the following way. You have a
massive search space too big to brute force by any computer in
any amount of time. You’ve got limited time and resources and
you’ve got to find the correct path through that forest of
possibilities. Most of the paths are terrible but a few are good. It’s
really an intelligent search process. And it’s the same one you’ll
find in the structure of a lot of scientific problems too.’

Humans have long become used to learning from computers. Club
and tournament chess players regularly use engines to check their
lines and review their games after playing them. Traditional chess
engines like Stockfish or Houdini are tremendously strong in
unravelling complex tactics in a fraction of the time it would take
without their help.
However it is rare to be able to distil general lessons about chess
from their calculation-heavy style of play. In contrast, the sense of
purpose and direction in the way AlphaZero plays is palpable. This
explains why AlphaZero’s games are such a fertile and intuitive
learning ground for human chess players.
As Demis explains:
‘There are limitations to learning from machines because there are
certain things that machines do that you can’t emulate, for
example calculating through millions of moves. What we are
finding with AlphaZero is that some of the improvements and the
advancements are strategic in nature, and that is very exciting as
this may be something we can potentially incorporate into our
own play.’
Part of the great fun of writing this book was to search for features
in AlphaZero’s play reminiscent of great players past and present, as
well as unearthing the new techniques that AlphaZero has
developed. By blending the key lessons from hundreds of years of
human endeavour (which AlphaZero reproduced in its own voyage of
discovery) with the original AlphaZero themes we have described in
this book, we hope the reader gains a deeper understanding and
appreciation of chess.
There are many areas where we have learnt from AlphaZero’s
games, or where we believe that chess thinking and play will now

develop:
Choice of opening repertoire
AlphaZero exhibits certain marked preferences in its choice of
openings: it avoids 1.e4 as White (due to the reply 1…e5), showing
a clear preference for either 1.d4 or 1.♘f3.
It is likely that AlphaZero’s opening choices will influence
professional and club players alike, particularly since AlphaZero’s
choice of opening lines dovetails beautifully with its general
conception of chess strategy. Not only can you improve your general
chess level by studying AlphaZero’s games, you also have a ready-
made opening repertoire to be able to apply those lessons
effectively!
New discoveries in opening preparation
As we saw in the chapter ‘ZeroZeroZero’, AlphaZero’s evaluation of
complex, unbalanced positions – for example, those in which one
side has sacrificed a pawn or two for the initiative – can vary
significantly from that of traditional engines. Looking through our
own opening analysis, both authors noticed situations that looked
risky but the engines claim 0.00. We’re starting to revisit these
variations and trying to imagine an AlphaZero way to play them! We
are sure that professional players will do the same with their analysis
and that this will have a significant influence on the theoretical
status of certain complex opening variations.
Re-evaluation of compensation and the initiative
Related to the point above, we believe that AlphaZero’s games will
cause a readjustment in what humans consider to be acceptable
long-term compensation for sacrifices. AlphaZero’s approach has
shown that many material sacrifices for the initiative can be
objectively correct even against the most superlative defensive play.
A new range of attacking techniques

AlphaZero frequently builds up kingside attacks in a schematic way
by combining pressure along a file and a diagonal against the
opponent’s king’s position. It supplements its attacking forces by
transferring a knight to a threatening outpost where possible. This is
demonstrated in the games ‘No Minority Attack for AlphaZero!’
and ‘When a plan comes together’, to name just two. AlphaZero
has made copious use of a rook’s pawn march to weaken the
opponent’s king’s position and restrict the movement of the
opponent’s king, and its handling of attacking positions with
opposite-coloured bishops is extremely impressive. These are
techniques that can be added to our own arsenals and we will
doubtless see many such AlphaZero-style attacks from human
players.
New strategies based around piece mobility
The most impressive feature of AlphaZero’s play – and there are
many to choose from – is its understanding of the mobility and
activity of its own pieces relative to the opponent’s pieces. This has
created astounding passages of play: for example, the wonderful
‘Python Squeeze’, in which AlphaZero switches seamlessly from a
kingside pawn storm aiming for checkmate, to a strategy based
around the incarceration of a passive black rook on h8. The clarity
and purpose with which AlphaZero implements this theme should
prove an instructive guide for bringing this advanced chess skill into
the mainstream.
New avenues for teaching the game
Finally, AlphaZero’s games open new opportunities for teaching the
game both to upcoming young players and to mature adults. Its
creative play contains elements recognisable from our past
knowledge and is executed with a rhythm and purpose that feels
intuitively human. We can’t think of a better guide to learning and
improving your game!

What was it like to work with AI?
With the wealth of ideas covered in the course of this book, it would
be easy to forget that AlphaZero is about more than just chess.
AlphaZero is a proof of concept, demonstrating AI’s capacity to crack
complex problems without the use of human knowledge of strategy.
In other words, chess is the testing ground.
During the course of writing this book we wondered if DeepMind
could make AlphaZero even stronger by giving it traditional chess
knowledge such as endgames tablebases or an opening repertoire.
While someone may choose to try this in the future – and it would
be interesting to see the results – it would misunderstand the point
of DeepMind’s work in chess.
Both from the strength that AlphaZero has achieved and from the
fresh chess discoveries that it has enabled, the proof of concept was
a huge success and the work on AlphaZero is a major milestone of
machine learning and the development of AI.
What would it be like to be part of a collaboration between people
and algorithms? Our domain expertise was not used in this project
to make AlphaZero stronger. Rather, our role was to understand as
far as possible what AlphaZero had discovered about chess and to
give an engaging explanation that people could learn from and
enjoy.
However, from our own experiences we can readily imagine
scientists and researchers in other domains collaborating with AI to
find promising avenues of investigation for complex problems such
as disease prevention and climate change. As Demis described in an
article for the Financial Times on April 21st 2017, ‘AI in many ways is
analogous to the Hubble telescope – a scientific tool that allows us
to see farther and better understand the universe around us.’
We have already discussed what we might learn from AlphaZero’s
play to improve our own games. However, there is another
interesting question that may prove relevant for the scientists of the

future as they use AI to explore their own domain of expertise. What
was it like to work with an AI?
Natasha:
Almost as soon as the 10 AlphaZero games were published in
December 2017 I suggested to Matthew that we could write a good
book about AlphaZero. We had collaborated to write an earlier book
called Chess for Life and had previously discussed a new book on
learning from chess computers. Matthew’s first reaction was dubious
(‘It sounds like a lot of work!’) but I reminded him that in fact he
likes to work hard and that AlphaZero and AI is the big game
changer happening now in chess. We approached Demis with the
idea and he liked it – it tied in with his desire to show how humans
can learn from AI – and soon the project was born.
It was a whirlwind project. We had to keep everything confidential
because DeepMind were publishing the follow-up peer-reviewed
paper on AlphaZero. At the same time Matthew was making
discoveries such as long-term sacrifices, the rook pawn’s march and
0.00, that we wanted to share with our friends. On top of which I
was working hard to ensure our writing remained simple and logical
and within the designated word limit.
A little warning for those readers whose chess strength is closer
to mine than to Matthew’s: you still need to apply the chess
knowledge you have rather than simply go with any AlphaZero
theme in isolation. Believe me, I tried it! In my excitement during
the first few months of 2018 I played some very interesting and
ultimately unsuccessful games simply launching my rook’s pawn
forward regardless of the position and seeing what happened. The
result was usually a post-mortem with my opponent patiently
explaining to me that it wasn’t quite the right plan yet to push the
rook’s pawn as it weakened my kingside!
My favourite parts of a highly memorable few months would have
to be the interviews with Demis and the DeepMind team, and getting

to understand how AlphaZero thinks. Its construction is based on the
way our brains are wired, which I found captivating but also a bit
scary! There is no doubt in my mind that this technology is
extremely powerful and will develop rapidly to give insights on
complex decision-making in many aspects of life.
Matthew:
I felt I was working with an intelligence that had a view on the
whole subject, with a unified conception that manifested itself in the
way that it opened the game, linking those initial steps to its
favourite concepts in the middlegame. I have no idea whether this
conception is the ultimate truth – is 1.d4 really better than 1.e4? –
but working with this type of intelligence was as enriching as a deep
collaboration with a very strong expert. [Natasha: ‘Thank you!’
Matthew: ‘You are fantastic to work with too but I was referring to
AlphaZero!’]
I also felt that the sum total of my knowledge, acquired through
years of painstaking study, had been verified and evaluated by a
powerful, impartial intelligence. Many of the fundamental things I
knew and apply consistently seemed to be correct (for example, the
value of central control). Fascinatingly however, I realised that other
concepts which I had viewed as incidental and perhaps only of use
in a limited set of situations – for example, piece mobility, and in
particular the relative mobility of the pieces of both sides – were
viewed by AlphaZero as fundamental building blocks for a
consistently successful strategy. After many hours of analysis, I
could only agree. This has led to a profound shift in the factors I
attempt to take into consideration when evaluating a course of
action.
Looking back on the whole experience, I was suddenly struck by
how unique this opportunity had been. I had spent many months
exploring my field of expertise with the help of a powerful artificial

intelligence. I felt that my conception and understanding of chess
had been altered and immeasurably enriched by this process.
From chess to the wider world
Following AlphaZero’s adventures in chess, the authors are intrigued
about how AlphaZero will leave its mark on the world. Demis told
us:
‘I believe AI will be one of humanity’s greatest inventions.
DeepMind is working together with other organisations to develop
this technology so that it can ultimately help us, as a society, to
face the biggest and most complex challenges of our times.
AlphaZero represents an important step towards achieving that
goal and it means a lot to me that we were able to test its
potential on one of the most enduring and fascinating games ever
devised, my childhood game, chess. If we can now apply that
same thinking to society’s most intractable problems, we could be
about to enter into an incredibly exciting new era!’
These words conclude our book, through which we hope to have
equipped you the reader (and us the authors!) with fascinating new
knowledge and fired you with inspiration for the future, both for
mankind’s most challenging problems and for our own smaller
struggles at the chessboard!

CHAPTER 18
Technical note
I. Games
The AlphaZero games presented in this book were provided by
DeepMind and originate from the following sources:
1. A match played between AlphaZero and Stockfish in January 2018
from the initial starting position
110 games from this match were provided to us for analysis. Of
these, AlphaZero played White in 80 games and Black in 30 games
(there was significant duplication of games in particular when
Stockfish was White and AlphaZero Black, hence the smaller number
of black games provided to us). In the match, AlphaZero defeated
Stockfish, winning 155 games and losing 6 games out of 1,000.
2. A match played between AlphaZero and Stockfish in January 2018
from opening positions used in a previous TCEC competition
100 games from this match were provided to us for analysis.
For the games starting from the initial board position, one game
was selected at random for each unique opening sequence of 30
plies; all AlphaZero losses were also included. For the TCEC match,
one game as White and one game as Black were selected at random
from the match starting from each opening position. AlphaZero won
17, drew 75 and lost 8 games in this series.
3. Games played between AlphaZero and Stockfish as part of the review
process for the publication in Science of DeepMind’s paper about
AlphaZero
For the Science publication, a series of matches was played starting
from common opening positions as specified by a popular chess
website. 2000 games were made available to us.

When playing matches, AlphaZero used a single machine with 4
first-generation TPUs. All matches were played using time controls of
3 hours per game, plus an additional 15 seconds for each move.
Stockfish was configured according to its 2016 TCEC world
championship superfinal settings: 44 threads on 44 cores, a hash
size of 32GB, Syzygy endgame tablebases.
4. 140 games between AlphaZero and Stockfish played on our request
from specific opening positions
We wished to understand which opening scheme AlphaZero would
choose as Black against 1.c4 and against 1.d4, 2.c4 systems (which
Stockfish rarely played) and also to understand which systems
AlphaZero would choose as White when faced with a King’s Indian or
Grünfeld. These games were played at a much faster time control of
18 minutes per player per game with 1.5 seconds added per move.
For each of the games above we received the moves of the game
and also evaluations by both AlphaZero and Stockfish after each
move.
II. Analysis of AlphaZero games
During the preparation of this book, analysis was performed on the
games between AlphaZero and Stockfish in the following way:
1. Original analysis without engine assistance
Analysing games in which wins are gained in positions which
challenge the evaluations of existing engines is an unusual challenge
for the annotator. For this book, I have done far more unaided
analysis than ever before, mainly directed at guessing AlphaZero’s
attacking intentions!
2. Real-time verification by engines
I checked my analysis on the following system:

CPU
Intel Core i7-7660U CPU @2.50Ghz (2 cores)
RAM
8GB
The following engines were used throughout the project:
Engine
Version
Komodo
11.2.2
Komodo
11.3.1
Stockfish
8
Stockfish
9
Houdini
6.02
3. Blunder checking
Games were blunder-checked using the Fritz GUI ‘Blunder Check’
option, allowing a maximum of 10 minutes per game. The games
were blunder-checked on systems with these specifications:
CPU
Intel Xeon CPU E5-2667 v3 @3.20Ghz (6 cores)
RAM
8GB
4. Deep Analysis of positions
Individual positions were analysed for at least 240 minutes using the
Fritz GUI ‘Deep Analysis’ option. The games were analysed on
systems with these specifications:
CPU
Intel Xeon CPU E5-2667 v3 @3.20Ghz (6 cores)
RAM
8GB
5. Playing out positions
I have also played out positions between AlphaZero and Stockfish,
mainly with the intention of gauging Stockfish’s defensive resources.
I played these games at a 15 minute + 5 seconds increment time
control against this system:

Platform
iPhone 7 Plus
Engine
Smallfish (Stockfish 9 engine)
6. AlphaZero analysis
Positions were submitted to AlphaZero for analysis and I received
output as a graphical representation of the tree of analysis (an
example of which is presented in the chapter ‘How AlphaZero
thinks’). AlphaZero analysed each position submitted for 60 seconds.
This analysis was performed on the same hardware used in the
match between AlphaZero and Stockfish: one single machine with 4
first-generation TPU’s.
III. TCEC Hardware for the match between Stockfish and Houdini
TCEC Hardware according to information on the TCEC website
(http://tcec.chessdom.com/live.php).
CPUs: 44 Cores – > 2 x Intel Xeon E5 2699 v4 @ 2.8 GHz –
Motherboard: Supermicro X10DRL-i – RAM: 64 GB DDR4 ECC – SSD:
Crucial CT250M500 240 GB – Chassis: Supermicro – OS: Windows
Server 2012 R2

Footnotes
1 The 2016 Top Chess Engine Championship (TCEC) season 9 world champion.
2 A description of the AlphaZero games we received and the technical settings
used for matches is given in the Technical note (Chapter 18).
3 A system for calculating the relative skill of players in games such as chess.
4 Called Reversi in the U.S.
5 Perfect information games are those where any player is perfectly informed of all
the events that have previously occurred, including how the game started.
Examples include Go, chess, shogi and Backgammon.
6 By David Silver, Thomas Hubert, Julian Schrittwieser, Ioannis Antonoglou,
Matthew Lai, Arthur Guez, Marc Lanctot, Laurent Sifre, Dharshan Kumaran, Thore
Graepel, Timothy Lillicrap, Karen Simonyan and Demis Hassabis. Science, 7 Dec
2018, Vol. 362, Issue 6419, pp. 1140-1144, DOI: 10.1126/science.aar6404.

Glossary
A
Alpha-Beta search algorithm
A way of searching efficiently through a tree of possibilities by
reducing the number of options to be considered. A new move no
longer needs to be evaluated once a counter has been found that
demonstrates the new move is inferior to a previously found move.
Compare it to a typical practical situation in which you can choose
between a safe move and a brilliant but risky idea. Luckily you spot
quickly that the brilliant idea loses a piece at once! You can thus
discard the brilliant idea quickly and focus your efforts on the safer
and better option.
AlphaGo
The first computer program to defeat a professional human Go
player, and the first program to defeat a Go world champion. It
starts by learning from data on human expert play, and then learns
from self-play reinforcement learning, to reach superhuman
performance in Go.
AlphaGo Zero
A system that learns completely from self-play to achieve
superhuman performance in Go, without the need for human expert
data.
AlphaZero
A single algorithm that can achieve, tabula rasa, superhuman
performance in many challenging games. Starting from random play
and given no domain knowledge except the game rules, AlphaZero
achieved within 24 hours a superhuman level of play in the games of

chess and shogi (Japanese chess) as well as Go, and convincingly
defeated a world-champion program in each case.
Artificial Intelligence
A field dedicated to the design of intelligent agents that perceive
their environment and take actions to maximise the chance of
successfully achieving their goals.
B
Brute-force computing/calculation
Systematically enumerating all possible candidates for the solution
and checking whether each candidate is an optimal solution. In the
context of games: an exhaustive search of every possible move, and
every possible sequence of moves that might follow.
C
CPU
Central Processing Unit – Chip for computer processing, most
commonly found in all modern computers.
D
Dan-levels, Go
See ‘Go’.
Deep Learning
A sub-discipline of machine learning that uses neural networks to
learn abstract representations of knowledge.
Deep Reinforcement Learning
A powerful combination of deep learning and reinforcement learning,
pioneered by DeepMind and used to create systems such as
AlphaZero.

E
Elo
The Elo rating system is a method for calculating the relative skill
levels of players in zero-sum games (such as chess).
Endgame tablebases
A database of endgame moves created by working backwards from
the final position (checkmate). The evaluation of positions with up to
seven pieces on the board – the Syzygy tablebases – have been
worked out and documented in a database.
Engine
A computer program that plays chess very well! Well-known
examples are Stockfish – Alpha-Zero’s opponent in this book –,
Houdini and Komodo.
Evaluation function
A function used by game-playing programs to estimate the value or
how good a position is.
F, G
Go
Go is a deceptively simple strategy game that originated in China
around 3,000 years ago. Players take turns to place black or white
stones on a 19x19 board, in an effort to capture their opponent’s
stones and surround more empty space than their opponent. Despite
the simple rules, Go is incredibly complex, with more than 10 to the
power of 170 possible board configurations.
Go, dan levels
Go players are ranked using kyu and dan grades, the same system
used in martial arts. Beginners progress through kyu grades, which

decrease as playing level increases until a player achieves 1 kyu.
These are followed by the amateur dan grades, which increase from
1 dan to 6 or 7 dan. Professional Go players have a separate ranking
system which runs from 1 dan to 9 dan.
GOFAI
Good old fashioned AI – or Symbolic AI – was an early approach
used to build intelligent systems that used symbolic reasoning and
logic. This is in contrast to today’s learning systems.
GPU
Graphics Processing Units – specialist computer chips that were
developed specifically for graphics processing.
H, I, J, K, L, M
Machine learning
Machine learning is a subfield of artificial intelligence that uses
statistical techniques to give computer systems the ability to learn
from experience, without being explicitly programmed.
Monte Carlo search algorithm
A powerful alternative to Alpha-Beta tree search, that has the added
advantage of being able to take into account prior knowledge about
which moves are promising and which ones are not. This allows the
search to focus mostly on promising and relevant variations.
Furthermore, MCTS is robust with respect to inaccuracies of the
evaluation function, which it averages across many different
positions.
N
Neural network

A computer system loosely modelled on the connections and
neurons in the brain.
O
Openings book
A database of moves originating from the starting position, often
used by traditional engines in their games. Over hundreds of years
of human practice, many ways of starting a game have been
investigated. These have been documented extensively, first in
books – chess opening books are the most popular chess literature –
and more recently in computer databases.
P
Perfect Information games
Perfect Information games are those where any player is perfectly
informed of all the events that have previously occurred, including
how the game started. Examples include Go, chess, shogi and
Backgammon.
Q, R
Reinforcement learning
A technique now commonly used in AI research for training systems
by trial-and-error, using rewards or punishments (source:
https://deepmind.com/blog/deep-reinforcement-learning/). Systems
are designed to maximise the reward, helping them learn a task. In
the case of a chess game, the reward is 1 point for a win.
S
Shogi
Shogi is also known as Japanese chess. It is a two-player strategy
board game. Captured shogi pieces can later be dropped back on to

the board and this leads to some exciting tactical sequences.
Stockfish
An open-source chess engine that ranked first or near the top of
chess-engine rating lists, and won several unofficial world computer
chess championships.
T
Tabula rasa
A Latin phrase meaning ‘blank slate’, i.e. starting from nothing.
TCEC (Top Chess Engine Championship)
Currently the premier computer chess competition. Whereas the
participation of the top chess engines in the World Computer Chess
Championship is somewhat patchy, a star in this book, Stockfish, as
well as big guns Houdini and Komodo, are regulars at the TCEC. 30
engines with an Elo above 2800 take part in the competition that
features five Divisions (with promotion and relegation) and a
Superfinal between the two top engines in the First Division. All the
engines run on identical high-end hardware.
TPU
Tensor Processing Units – specialist computer chips that were
developed by Google specifically for machine learning.
U, V, W, X, Y, Z

About the authors
GM Matthew Sadler:
Two-times British Champion Matthew Sadler is one of England’s
strongest chess players. He was ranked 14th in the world in July
1997 before turning his back on professional chess and switching to
a career in IT in 1999. In 2010 he returned to the game as an
amateur and he was ranked 48th in the world on the July 2018
rating list. Matthew is the author of six chess books, of which two
have won the prestigious ECF Book of the Year award, most recently
in 2016 with Chess for Life, co-written with Women’s International
Master (WIM) Natasha Regan.
Matthew Sadler (right) takes on AlphaZero, 18th May 2018. DeepMind’s Matthew
Lai (left) is at the controls.
WIM Natasha Regan:
Having studied mathematics at Cambridge University, Natasha is an
insurance and risk management professional and an accomplished
games player.
She has represented England at both chess (Olympiads at Manila
1992, and Moscow 1994) and Go (World Mind Games, Beijing 2008)
and is a 7-times UK Pair Go champion.

Natasha lives with her partner and three children. Her son, Oscar,
shares a love of games and recently took bronze in the European
under 16 Bridge Pairs Championships.
Natasha Regan plays a Réti against AlphaZero, 18th May 2018.

Index of names (numbers refer to pages)
A
Aagaard 102
Alekhine 9, 12, 168, 170, 235
Allen 12
Anand 137, 147-148
Antonoglou 68
Arkell 380-381
Aronian 51, 216-217, 347, 362-363
Asimov 57
B
Bacrot 152
Bank 57
Bareev 268
Bennett 12
Blackburne 276, 280-281
Bogoljubow 349-350
Botvinnik 24, 120, 354, 361-362, 384, 389, 393-395
C
Capablanca 9, 327, 389-390
Carlsen 8, 27, 129, 168, 198-199, 203, 268, 344-345, 347, 353, 380,
391, 393
Caruana 223, 347-348
Champernowne 7
Chigorin 132-134
Christie 12
D
Dokhoian 376

Dreev 377
Dvoretsky 380, 382, 385
E
Euwe 389
F
Fan Hui 60
Fildes 12
Fischer 391
Flohr 389
Fressinet 201
G
Graepel 12, 68-69, 87, 92
Guez 68
H
Haba 365
Hassabis 9, 12, 14, 17, 19, 54, 68, 87
Hebden 363
Hofstadter 57
Hou Yifan 323, 350, 384
Howell 284
Hubert 12, 68
Hübner 233
I
Ivanchuk 144, 152, 198
K
Kamsky 127, 147
Karpov 30, 129, 147, 193, 208, 223-225, 380
Kasparov 24, 26-27, 30, 33, 167, 193, 208, 213-215, 222-223, 266,
310, 364, 376
Keene 395

Keres 384, 393-394
Kholodkevich 362
King 391-392
Kortchnoi 186
Krakops 365
Kramnik 26, 51, 361, 384
Kumaran 12, 68
L
Lai 12, 68, 75-78, 87, 91, 96
Lalith 336
l’Ami 284
Lanctot 68
Larsen 235, 253-254
Lautier 26, 376
Li 345
Li Chao 344-345, 384
Lillicrap 68
M
Maddison 59
McCoy 12
Molyneux 57
Moore 7
Moravec 89
N
Nakamura 222-223, 391-393
Nepomniachtchi 384
Nikolic 213, 284
Nimzowitsch 327
P
Petrosian 140, 217, 380
Polgar 28, 168, 200-201, 235, 265-266

Polugaevsky 186, 253
Portisch 253
R
Ramirez 254
Razuvaev 30-31
S
Sadler 327, 330, 332
Sämisch 170-171
Schrittwieser 12, 68
Schwarz 280
Sedol 16-17, 19, 61-62, 128
Seirawan 127-128
Selby 13
Shabalov 293
Shankland 223-225
Shannon 7, 16
Shchekachev 31
Shirov 276, 293, 297
Short 266
Sifre 68
Silver 12, 58, 68, 74, 87
Simons 95
Simonyan 68
So 223
Spielmann 349-350
Steinitz 132-135
T
Taimanov 224
Tal 233-234
Talbert 12
Tarrasch 121

Thomas 12, 68, 389-390
Thompson 8
Thorhallsson 297
Tiviakov 138
Tomasev 12
Turing 7, 16, 24
V
Valsecchi 336
Von Neumann 16
Vorobiov 216, 362
W
Wang Yue 345
Z
Znosko-Borovsky 327