GARRY KASPARi
N
BARRY KASPAROV
PART 1: 1973-1985
Gloucester Publishers pic 
www.everymanchess.com
EVERYMAN CHESS

First published in 2011 by Gloucester Publishers plc (formerly Everyman Publishers plc), 
Northburgh House, 10 Northburgh Street, London EC1V OAT
Copyright © 2011 Garry Kasparov 
English translation © 2011 Ken Neat
First published 2011 by Gloucester Publishers plc
The right of Garry Kasparov to be identified as the author of this work has been asserted in 
accordance with the Copyrights, Designs and Patents Act 1988.
All rights reserved. No part ofthis publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval 
system or transmitted in any form or by any means, electronic, electrostatic, magnetic tape, 
photocopying, recording or otherwise, without prior permission of the publisher.
British Library Cataloguing-in-Publication Data
A catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library.
ISBN: 978 185744 672 2
Distributed in North America by The Globe Pequot Press, P.O Box 480,
246 Goose Lane, Guilford, CT 06437-0480.
All other sales enquiries should be directed to Everyman Chess, Northburgh House,
10 Northburgh Street, London EC1V OAT 
tel: 020 7253 7887 fax: 020 7490 3708 
email: info@everymanchess.com 
website: www.everymanchess.com
Everyman is the registered trade mark of Random House Inc. and is used in this work under 
license from Random House Inc.
EVERYMAN Chess Series
Chief advisor: Byron Jacobs 
Commissioning editor: John Emms 
Assistant editor: Richard Palliser
Translation by Ken Neat.
Typesetting and editing by First Rank Publishing, Brighton.
Cover design by Horatio Monteverde.
Printed and bound in Printed and Bound in the US by Sheridan Books.

Contents
Forew ord 
5
1 
Baku U n iversities 
7
Childhood Years 
7
First Steps 
15
En try in to  the all-un io n  A ren a 
20
‘He attacks like A lekh in e!' 
28
‘W ho w ill be th e C ham p io n  a fte r Karpov?' 
38
M eetings w ith  th e G reats 
49
Young C ham p io n 
59
T w o -tim e s C ham p io n! 
71
T u rn in g  Po int 
78
2 
A du lt G am es 
93
M aster Class 
93
Sm ile o f Fortune 
120
High Society D ebut 
142
‘This is the n e w  Fischer!' 
161
First ‘Bronze' 
172
European 'Gold' 
190

G ra n d m a ste r 
197
C hess Prince 
21 7
O lym p iad  D ebut 
233
First Battle w ith  th e C ham p io n 
247
M osco w  'T o u rn a m e n t o f Stars' 
263
A u d acio us C hallenge 
276
C o n firm atio n  o f Class 
285
Tilbu rg  Lessons 
297
USSR C ham p io n  
324
Dress Rehearsal 
348
3 
C hallenger 
365
D ecisive Finish 
365
First 'O scar' 
382
M atch w ith  Beliavsky 
404
Riga N ovelty 
421
Fairy-tale in N iksic 
429
M atch w ith  Korchnoi 
450
M atch w ith  Sm yslov 
46 7
'Return M atch o f th e  C en tu ry' 
481
First M atch w ith  Karpov: 1984 /85 
4 8 7
Ind ex o f O penings 
514
Index o f O pponents 
516
Ind ex o f G am es 
518

Foreword
The autobiographical three-volume Garry Kasparov on Garry Kasparov is a continuation of 
the series My Great Predecessors (Parts 1-V) and Modern Chess (Parts 1-4).
Initially I was intending simply to annotate about three hundred of my best games, di­
viding them into three volumes in accordance with the stages of my competitive career: 
the pre-champion period (1973-1985), the time when I was champion within the FIDE 
framework (1985-1993) and the years outside of FIDE (1993-2005). But then I realised that 
to complete the picture I needed to include not only the best, but also the most memorable 
games and endings, which became landmarks on my chess career (although some of them 
have already been annotated in previous books).
Throughout my life it has been said that I won mainly thanks to deep and comprehen­
sive opening preparation. Thereby - deliberately or otherwise - my ability to play creatively 
at the board itself was disparaged. 'I don't know another player who would prepare so 
thoroughly for a match or a tournament. In this respect he surpasses even the legendary 
Botvinnik', Anatoly Karpov once said about me. In fact, without the ability to play creatively 
at the board, nothing can be achieved, whereas the art of preparation has been a distin­
guishing feature of many world champions and has always furthered the progress of chess 
thinking.
In the 1920s Alekhine worked at chess more persistently than anyone before him in his­
tory, and as a result the entire culture of the 'amateur game' sharply improved. In the 
1940s Botvinnik's methodical mind and scientific approach assisted the transformation of 
chess into a genuine profession. In the 1970s Fischer's fantastic enthusiasm for anal ytical 
work forced any player who did not want to 'miss the boat' to devote more time to theo­
retical preparation. In the 1980s, when I became the leader of the new opening revolution, 
the need for such preparation was already axiomatic.
I grew up in an atmosphere of strict discipline, created by my mother. My chess outlook 
was formed at the school of Mikhail Botvinnik, and my opening repertoire developed under
5

Garry Kasparov on Garry Kasparov: Part One
the influence of my trainers - the outstanding analysts Alexander Nikitin and Alexander 
Shakarov. Apart from an innate combinative gift, from childhood I possessed an unlimited 
appetite for analytical work. I studied all the latest games of the leading grandmasters, 
recorded novelties and analysed critical positions, trying to find improvements. The choice 
of a particular opening system was always the fruit of deep creative processing, and cer­
tainly not blind imitation.
Later, in the period when I was fighting for the world crown, my circle of analytical help­
ers expanded, but as before I tirelessly generated my own ideas. And when personal com­
puters appeared, I was the first player to include machine analysis in my system of prepa­
ration and to make systematic use of playing programs and databases. Soon I discovered 
how weak some of my earlier preparations had been. A useful, sobering discovery! Under 
the microscope of powerful computer programs it transpired that at times I had gone 
along to a game not with a some kind of Excalibur, but with a blunt pen-knife.
Nevertheless, my intensive preparation was invariably rewarded with good results, even 
when by no means all the ideas were used. Between labour invested and success achieved 
there always exists if not a direct connection, then some almost mythical one. Probably 
also a psychological one: after all, every time when beginning a battle, I thought that I 
possessed some 'deadly weapon', and this gave me confidence, even if the weapon was 
unused or proved to be altogether ineffective.
This volume contains one hundred newly annotated games and endings. It is partly 
based on my first book The Test of Time (1986). In the preface to it Botvinnik wrote:
‘Kasparov is on the right path: analyses of games should be published by a player not 
only to afford pleasure to the readers, but also, by putting forward the results of his work 
to their strict judgement, to be able to use the readers' criticisms to check the objectivity of 
his searchings. This is an essential step for anyone who wishes to become a researcher in 
chess. In this way creative and competitive successes can be raised, and the very maximum 
possible "squeezed" out of his talent...'
The large amount of annotation work done then was, of course, not free of analytical 
mistakes, and in addition the rapid progress of opening theory has changed the assess­
ments of numerous variations. Therefore a number of annotations had to be significantly 
refined and amplified, and some shortened. As Botvinnik anticipated, 'not all the games 
have survived'. But on the whole my earlier conclusions have withstood the test oftime.
I should like to express my gratitude to my former trainers Alexander Nikitin and Alexan­
der Shakarovfor their help in preparing the manuscriptfor publication.
6

Chapter One
Baku Universities1
Childhood Years
It is the spring of 1963. In Moscow, in the 
Estrada Theatre, the Botvinnik-Petrosian 
match for the world championship is taking 
place, and in Baku Vladimir Makogonov, 
trainer in the chess section of the Regional 
Officer’s Club, is carefully analysing each 
game with his pupils.
Valery Asriyan: 'In early April, when the 
scores were level, I asked Makogonov who, in 
his opinion, would win the match. “Petro­
sian", he replied without thinking. “And who 
will be champion in 10 years time?'' I ven­
tured to ask. "Probably Fischer", said Ma­
kogonov after a slight pause. "And in 20 
years time?", I jokingly enquired. Vladimir 
Andreevich smiled: “You are wanting to look 
too Jar ahead. It is possible that the player 
who will be world champion in 20 years 
time has not yet been born". Of course, it 
was hard to imagine that just a few  days 
later, 13th April, would see the birth in Baku 
of a boy, whom his parents would name
Carry and who within 22 years would 
become world champion!’
Strictly speaking, I could have been born 
a day later, since I came into this world at a 
quarter to midnight. In a sense my mother 
would have preferred this to happen. But I 
was nevertheless born on the 13th day of 
the 4th month of the year 63 (again 
4+6+3=13) and, contrary to all supersti­
tions, for me this has proved a lucky num­
ber. So much so, that I even became the 
13th world champion, and, moreover, after 
an unscheduled match for the title, which 
took place in the year of 85 (8+5=13).
The origin of my name is curious. This 
was one of the strong-willed decisions of 
my father, which influenced my fate and 
my character. 'My name is Kim - short, and 
rather voiceless’, said my father, 'whereas a 
boy's name should be resounding. Let it be 
pronounced firmly, let there be a letter Y. 
We will call our son Carry!’
Baku was the capital of Soviet Azerbai-
1 T h e  c h a p te r title  is an  a d a p ta tio n  o f t h e  a u to b io g ra p h ic a l M y Universities, in  w h ich  M axim  G orky d escrib es 
l-Jis e x p e rie n c e s  o f e arly m a n h o o d  in th e  u n iv e rsity  o f life. (T ran slato r’s n ote)
7

Garry Kasparov on Garry Kasparov: Part One
jan, a typical outpost of the imperial state. 
A kind of large ‘Odessa on the Caspian' - a 
melting-pot 
of 
different 
nationalities, 
united by the common Russian language 
and the dominating Russian-Soviet culture. 
My own roots are no exception: my mother 
was Armenian, and my father Jewish. This 
is sometimes called an explosive mixture. 
At any event, I think that I inherited both 
the sensible pragmatism of my mother, and 
the capricious, creative nature of my father
- and it was a combination of these traits 
that determined the atmosphere in our 
home.
My father, Kim Moiseevich Weinstein, 
grew up in a family of musicians. He had an 
excellent ear and he studied the violin at 
music school, but then he entered the 
Azerbaijan Industrial Institute and became 
an electrical engineer, and later the author 
of scientific articles and an almost com­
pleted dissertation. Five years later my 
mother, 
Klara 
Shagenovna 
Kasparova, 
completed a course at the same Institute, 
but in a different faculty, and after obtain­
ing her engineer's diploma on the speciality 
‘automatic equipment and remote control', 
in the autumn of 1959 she joined the 
laboratory where my father was then 
working. It was there that they met.
My parents had a wide range of interests 
in common - books, music, theatre, cinema
- and chess! Both my mother and my father 
had learned to play when they were young, 
and they loved solving the studies and 
problems published in the Baku Vyshka 
newspaper. In the early 1960s my father 
changed jobs and began working in a 
specialised construction bureau associated 
with the oil industry, where chess was also 
especially popular. It can be said that, from 
the first days of my life, chess fluids were 
floating around me.
The biographies of famous chess players 
usually begin with some remarkable epi­
sode from their early childhood. Thus the 
young Capablanca and Reshevsky, without 
knowing the rules of chess and by simply 
watching the game being played in their 
family, suddenly began defeating their 
fathers. Karpov was introduced to chess in 
the same way, although his father was a 
much stricter examiner (this was, after all, 
the Soviet Chess School!).
I will not break with tradition and I will 
also begin with my early childhood. My 
relatives recall that I began walking at 10 
months - and I immediately became reso­
lute and free. But even before that I dis­
played exceptional tenacity in achieving a 
goal. Once my grandmother sat me down 
with toys in my cot and went off to the 
kitchen to prepare dinner. But I got bored 
and, overcoming all the obstacles, I gradu­
ally crawled my way to the kitchen, where 
there was my favourite folding chair. My 
grandma was surprised and carried me 
back. Within ten minutes I crawled in 
again. .. My grandma wondered: 'How many 
times will he do this?' But in the end she 
lost count and merely repeated: ‘There's 
character for you!'
It is said that I was a very self-sufficient 
child: I could play for hours in a sand pit 
with a bucket and spade. And when I 
started talking, I loved a game called ‘Why?' 
The idea of the game was to put an adult 
on the spot, by making them unable to find 
a reply to this eternal question. And often, 
cheerfully smiling, I would exasperate 
those around by endlessly asking 'Why?'.
Very early I learned the importance of 
numbers and once I surprised my relatives 
by being able to distinguish on the street 
where the even and odd-numbered houses 
were. Like all the children, I went to the
8

Baku Universities
kindergarten, but I was very unwilling and I 
was often unwell - this was obviously a 
defensive reaction of the organism. But if I 
had to go there, I used to display a feeling 
of responsibility and innate punctuality. I 
was usually taken to the kindergarten by 
my grandma, and if she were to linger 
carelessly at home, when the hour hand on 
the wall clock inexorably began approach­
ing the figure ‘8' I would become terribly 
nervous and begin crying: 'Grandma, I'm 
going to be late!'
I began reading at the age offour, and I 
learned to put letters together to make 
syllables - from newspaper headlines. I 
knew that, before we went out for a walk, 
my father would look at the newspapers, 
and I would patiently wait for him to finish. 
When a newspaper was put to one side, I 
would promptly unfold it and with a most 
serious expression I would also unhurriedly 
'look at it'. My desire to imitate everything 
my father did was a source of great 
amusement to my parents, and in this way 
I was introduced to 'reading' newspapers. 
And soon, during one of our walks, sitting 
on my father's shoulders, I saw on the roof 
of a building some large neon letters. I 
pointed with my index finger and slowly 
pronounced 
the 
syllables: 
'Dru-zhba'
('Friendship' - this was our local cinema).
When I was unwell, I spent long days in 
bed, and reading completely replaced my 
toys. On one occasion, roughly a year later, I 
staggered a visiting friend of my mother, 
when she saw me reading a newspaper 
aloud: 'Po-lo-zhe-ni-e v Ka-i-re' ('Situation 
in Cairo'). And then the whole article to the 
end. When she asked if I remembered what 
I had read, I told her everything I knew from 
the newspapers about the situation in the 
Middle East.
I had an exceptional memory. When I
was not yet able to read, I would remember 
by heart all the stories that had been read 
aloud to me, and later I would enthusiasti­
cally retell them. And when I learned to 
read without hesitating, I would do this 
very quickly and grasp everything. A pas­
sion for books, like some kind of spiritual 
greed, has always possessed me.
My innate chess gift revealed itself at the 
age of five, when my parents, sitting at the 
table, were racking their brains over the 
regular problem in the Vyshka newspaper. 
As usual, I was sitting beside them, atten­
tively following the movements of the 
pieces. I didn't yet know how to play, but I 
knew the point of the Latin letters and 
numbers along the edge of the board. And 
at some point I suddenly suggested the 
solution of a difficult problem, which 
greatly amazed my parents. 'If you know 
how the game ends, we'll have to show you 
how it begins!' my father exclaimed, and he 
began explaining the rules. Soon I was 
inseparable from chess, and a year later I 
was already beating my father.
Had I not shown an ability for chess at 
that time, I might well have gone to music 
school. This is what my paternal grand­
mother Olga Yulevna, a music teacher, was 
very much hoping. Her husband and my 
grandfather, Moisey Rubinovich Weinstein, 
who died prematurely in the summer of 
1963, was a composer, conductor and 
violinist, and worked as artistic director of 
the Baku Philharmonia. They thought that a 
musical education for a child was essential, 
even if he did not have perfect pitch. ‘The 
main thing is a sense of rhythm', Olga 
Yulevna used to say. ‘That's how it was with 
Lyona, whose musical talent only emerged 
when he was eleven.'
And how it emerged! In contrast to my 
father, his younger brother, my uncle
9

Garry Kasparov on Garry Kasparov: Part One
Leonid Weinstein, did not give up music, 
but completed a course at the Conserva­
toire and became a well-known composer, 
an Honoured Artist in Azerbaijan. He com­
posed several operas and symphonies, 
numerous chamber and vocal works, musi­
cal operettas, variety pieces, three dozen 
songs, and music for the theatre, cinema 
and television, and when he was a student 
he was a member of the legendary Baku 
group who in 1967-68 were the champions 
of a popular national TV competition. 
(Incidentally, his son Teimour, my younger 
cousin, although he studied medicine, was 
the artistic director of the 'Lads from Baku' 
group, who were famous in the 1990s. 
Nowadays he is a prominent Russian TV 
and film producer.)
My father was categorically against me 
attending the music school. 'The boy has an 
excellent analytical brain', he said. ‘He will 
study chess, not music!’
It was an unexpected decision: after all, 
my father had never been a serious chess 
player, whereas my mother had a definite 
talent for the game. At the age of six she 
used to beat boys older than herself, and 
she also competed successfully with adults. 
But she preferred more active games. When 
she was in the eighth class, a trainer visited 
her parents and tried to persuade them to 
allow their daughter to play for the republic 
basketball team. But my grandmother 
would not allow it: she did not like the idea 
of the inevitable travelling that it would 
entail. So my mother did not take up either 
chess, or basketball. But she firmly sup­
ported my father's decision to take me to 
the chess club.
There is no doubt that, during the seven 
short years that fate granted us to live 
together, my father managed to exert an 
enormous influence on my entire future
life. My mother recalls how I literally used 
to keep watch at the door, waiting for him 
to return from work, and with what joy I 
went for walks with him. It was during 
those hours that my father gradually in­
stilled in me his own perception of life, and 
laid the foundations of my future outlook 
on things. Our relationship was always 
adult-like.
My father loved geography and on my 
6th birthday he gave me the best possible 
present. When I woke that morning I dis­
covered by my bed an enormous globe. And 
I even rubbed my eyes, not believing that it 
was real. I was so happy! Already then I 
loved looking at maps, and above all hear­
ing stories about the journeys of Marco 
Polo, Columbus and Magellan. It all began 
when my father read me Conqueror of the 
Seas - the Story of Magellan by Stefan 
Zweig. From then on our favourite game 
was to trace on my globe the routes fol­
lowed by famous seafarers.
Soon I knew the names of the capitals of 
most countries, their populations, land 
areas and masses of other interesting facts. 
On one occasion at Baku airport, waiting 
with my parents to board a plane, I over­
heard one of the passengers incorrectly 
naming the capital of Uruguay - an d I 
politely listed all, without exception, the 
Latin American countries and their capitals. 
It was only my mum and dad who were not 
surprised - they, like all our relations, were 
already accustomed to my daily questions 
such as: 'Do you know what the population 
of Guatemala is?'
Real stories about pioneers entranced 
me more than any fairy-tales. Although my 
father did not draw attention to the terrible 
misfortunes and hardships associated in 
those times with seafaring, I realised that 
to accomplish such a journey, incredible
10

Baku Universities
courage was needed. These stories awak­
ened the pioneering spirit in me. I have 
always wanted to lay new paths, even if, as 
in childhood, it only meant taking a new 
way home. Throughout my chess career I 
aimed for unexplored tests by challenging 
existing stereotypes. This is how important 
the timely present of a globe can be... (Later 
this globe became a relic and was displayed 
in the geography room of my former 
school.)
Equally early - this time thanks to my 
mother - I developed an interest in history. 
Unable to do anything by halves, I im­
mersed myself in the history of Ancient 
Rome, France, Spain and England. It was 
those countries that fired my imagination. 
At the age of eight I read a book about 
Napoleon by the Soviet historian Tarle, 
which made an enormous impression on 
me. I have always been attracted by the 
biographies of strong individuals who 
forged their own destinies.
In the summer of 1970 my father fell se­
riously ill. He spent many months in Mos­
cow, at the Oncology Centre in Kashirka, 
then he died of lymphatic sarcoma at the 
age of 39. The last time I saw him was on 
1st January 1971. He gave me a present of a 
chess clock - I had just achieved third 
category rating. After that they would not 
let me see him. It was my father's wish: he 
wanted me to remember him healthy and 
cheerful, as I had always known him. They 
also did not take me to the funeral, fearing 
that it might upset me too much.
I remember saying to my mother: 'Let's 
pretend that dad has gone away on busi­
ness.' And at school for a long time I con­
tinued talking about him as though he was 
still alive ... But years later there came a 
bitter realisation. When you're five or six, 
you think that's how it will always be: your
dad, and your mum, and life the way it is. 
But then suddenly you wake up and you 
realise that your dad is no longer there.
My father was a man of firm principles, 
uncompromising, and I am glad that I have 
inherited these traits. I always have with 
me a photograph of him. By the age of 
thirty I became outwardly very similar to 
him. My relatives think that, when speaking 
on the phone, I gesticulate exactly how my 
father used to; and like him I easily get 
worked up, but just as quickly I come back 
to normal.
The two of us were left on our own, so 
my mother and I moved in with her parents 
in Armenikenda - an ancient district of 
Baku, where since time immemorial and 
until the tragedy ofJanuary 1990 there was 
a large Armenian community. Our address 
was Yerevan Prospect, block 3.
My other grandmother, Susanna Bag- 
dasarovna, completed a course at the 
Moscow Finance Institute, but she worked 
for only a short time in her speciality (for 
the State Bank in the 1930s), and she de­
voted the greater part of her life to bringing 
up her three daughters - Klara, Nelly and 
Zhanna, and then me. She taught me to be 
truthful, to trust people, and to appreciate 
any human creation. A strict woman of 
strong 
character and good sense, my 
grandmother enjoyed universal love and 
respect. Although she had lived through 
hard times, she never lost her natural 
optimism and kindness. When I remember 
today the words that she liked to repeat: 
‘It's wondeiful that all my grandchildren are 
of different nationalities', I admire her 
wisdom. Among my cousins there are 
Armenians, Azeris 
and Jews. 
But 
my 
grandmother did not single any of us out, 
preserving the right of each of us to her 
warmth and love.
11

Garry Kasparov on Garry Kasparov: Part One
My 
maternal 
grandfather, 
Shagen 
Mosesovich Kasparov, was an oil worker by 
profession. Back in 1949 on the Caspian 
Sea, 100 km from Baku, they began extract­
ing oil from the sea bed, for the first time in 
the world erecting offshore derricks. And by 
the end of the 1950s directly on the water, 
on piles and stationary platforms, joined by 
gantries, the unique town of Neftyanie 
Kamni had developed. At the age of nine I 
gave a simul' there against oil-workers, 
which gave Shagen Mosesovich particular 
pleasure: for a good twenty years he had 
worked as the chief engineer of a large 
offshore oil field.
After my father died, my grandfather 
retired and he was with me throughout my 
school years. We became very close. He was 
an old communist, he revered Marx's 
economic theory, and he believed that I 
would live in better times. Towards the end 
of the 1970s he spent hours talking to me 
about politics, and he introduced me to 
books on philosophy. We often argued 
about the various events occurring in the 
country and in the world, and it was not 
always the older person who won the 
argument. I was a very inquisitive youth; I 
read dozens of books, to say nothing of 
newspapers, I listened to the seditious 
recordings of songs by Vysotsky, Galich and 
Okudzhava, I asked a mass of questions and 
on much I had my own point of view. But 
my grandfather did not greatly approve of 
this spirit of defiance. Although we listened 
together on the radio to 'Freedom' and 
'Voice of America', he found it hard to 
accept criticism of the state ideology.
We had an especially heated debate at 
the end of 1979, after the Soviet invasion of 
Afghanistan. But even my 'sincerely believ­
ing' grandfather could no longer under­
stand much of what the country's leaders
were doing. The endless queues and empty 
shelves in the shops, resembling the post­
war times, became a great disappointment 
to him.. .
Nikitin: ‘I often had occasion to visit the 
Kasparov home, where the ambience of 
Klara's parents reigned - Shagen Mosesovich 
and Susanna Bagdasarovna. The time spent 
with these calm and wise people is remem­
bered now as a joyous dream. They instilled 
much good in the heart of their favourite 
grandson.’
Incidentally, my late paternal grandfa­
ther was also a convinced communist. It 
was no accident that he gave his first son 
the revolutionary name Kim - in honour of 
the Communist Youth International (Kom- 
munisticheskiy Internatsional Molodyozhi). 
Despite the fact that in 1937 his older 
brother, the chief of medical staff in one of 
the Baku hospitals, was subjected to re­
pression and my grandfather himself was a 
whisker away from being killed, he retained 
his ideological convictions and his devotion 
to the Communist Party. But after the 
exposures expressed at the 20th Commu­
nist Party Congress, he suffered a severe 
heart attack... In the family circle, however, 
Moisey Rubinovich was essentially alone. 
His sons Kim and Leonid (later he too had a 
great influence on me), his nephew Marat 
Altman (a prominent lawyer), and their 
friends were typical representatives of the 
intelligentsia: they always queried the 
official viewpoint and were very critical 
about Soviet propaganda. For them it was 
quite natural to have doubts about gener­
ally-accepted values.
My mother's scepticism was more a con­
sequence of her analytical mind, rather 
than mistrust of officialdom. Far more than 
ideology, she was concerned about purely 
practical problems. She did not teach me
12

Baku Universities
what I should think, but that I should have 
a critical attitude to everything that I read 
and heard. Her technical education and 
work in a scientific research institute 
instilled in her the habit of always relying 
only on concrete, trustworthy facts. After 
spending 22 long years advancing from 
junior technician to section manager and 
scientific secretary, in 1981 she left the 
scientific research institute in order to 
devote herself entirely to her son's career. 
'My mother plays a big part in my life', I 
wrote in a school essay. 'She has taught me 
to think independently, and she has taught 
me to work and to analyse my own behav­
iour. She knows me better than anyone 
else, because I discuss all my problems with 
her - school, chess and literary problems. 
My mother has taught me to appreciate 
fine things, and to be principled, honest 
and frank.'
It was probably my father's and uncle's 
love of freedom, my mother's sensible 
thinking and the many years of heated 
discussions with my grandfather that 
determined my interest and serious atti­
tude to politics throughout the entire 
politically conscious part of my life.
My family did not spoil me, and there 
was no hint of imitating childish speech. 
They cultivated conviction. At that time my 
mother was trying to restrain my obstinate 
striving for chess, and not to pander to­
wards it. When the first successes came and 
they began praising me in the press, she 
gave me 'inoculations' against conceit, 
suggesting: ‘Everyone has a talent for 
something, but that talent doesn't always 
reveal itself. You are lucky that your abilities 
have shown themselves so early. Simply 
lucky!' And she would give me jobs around 
the house, like sending me to the shop for 
bread and milk, or leaving me to look after
my younger cousins.
My mother also remembers being sum­
moned to the school and talking to the 
teacher of the first-year classes, who re­
proached me for my cheeky behaviour in a 
lesson. I had tried to correct her! And to the 
comment that I shouldn't behave like that, 
since the rest would think that I regarded 
myself as the cleverest, I retorted: ‘But isn't 
that so?' Yes, my teachers had a hard time 
with me.
Later, when chess became my profession,
I had hardly any free time. But before this, 
after lessons I would run around the 
streets, and quarrel and fight, like all little 
boys. At school my closest friend was Vadim 
Minasian, with whom I remained friends 
for many years. The number of times we 
got into scrapes together! But our most 
desperate escapades involved fires. On one 
occasion we lit a bonfire in the school itself 
and began jumping through it, to impress 
the girls . .. True, until I was sixteen I did not 
pay any particular attention to girls, treat­
ing them disdainfully (although I was also a 
little afraid of them). I once asked my 
mother: 'Why do girls spend so long prepar­
ing for lessons? Why are they so narrow­
minded? I hate them!' Now, when she tells 
this story, she adds with a gale of laughter: 
'Six months later hefell in love.'
I remember that in the third year at 
school a girl sent me a note: 'I love you. And 
I want you to marry me.' I 'm afraid that my 
reply was not terribly gallant. Fortunately 
(or otherwise), my message was intercepted 
by the teacher before it broke my admirer's 
heart.
But when I finally fell in love, the whole 
situation was reversed. She was younger 
than me and was in a different class, so I 
somehow had to attract her attention. But 
how? I gathered my friends and we played
13

Garry Kasparov on Garry Kasparov: Part One
out a little show. They met her on the street 
and pretended to pester her. It was a criti­
cal moment. And then I appeared - a knight 
in shining armour, courageous and strong. 
Later I arranged a firework display in her 
honour, with real rockets!
My health, or more correctly my illnesses, 
caused my mother a great deal of concern. 
At the age of nine I had my appendix re­
moved. The day after the operation my 
uncle arrived at the hospital and found my 
bed empty. He was alarmed, but the nurse 
calmed him down and took him to the staff 
room. Looking in, he saw me lying on a 
trolley, giving a blindfold simul' against the 
doctors.
When I was ten the doctors became con­
cerned about my heart, and diagnosed 
rheumatic carditis. They said that I should 
avoid catching colds, as this might strain 
my heart. After that my mother learned 
how to give injections, and wherever we 
travelled she carried a syringe with her, 
since up to the age of fifteen I had to take 
antibiotics. Later, thanks to my sports 
activities, I was able to lead a normal life. I 
swam, played football and badminton, and 
went cycle racing...
I began travelling abroad to chess tour­
naments from the age of thirteen. Before 
every trip I would prepare myself thor­
oughly for the unfamiliar country, eagerly 
absorbing all the information I could find 
and discussing it with my school teachers. I 
would return so full of impressions, that at 
first I couldn't sleep. And only after I had 
released my emotions, and told my class­
mates about everything I had seen, did I 
calm down. I remember being hugely 
impressed by the fact that in Paris you 
could sit on the grass in the parks.
With my childish curiosity and the same 
thoughtfulness that I applied to chess, I
would compare what I had seen with our 
everyday life. Occasionally this got me into 
trouble. Some adults reprimanded me for 
criticising my own country. But already 
then I knew that you should not be afraid to 
say exactly what you think.
At school I found mathematics, especially 
algebra, quite easy. I enjoyed solving diffi­
cult problems. The teacher even tried to 
insist that I should take extra lessons with 
the aim of developing my mathematical 
ability, but my mother was against this. She 
thought that the combination of mathe­
matics and chess was unlikely to lead to me 
becoming a fully-rounded person, and she 
wanted me to study literature, and to read 
not only prose, but also poetry. Life has 
shown that she was right.
Deep down I am a romantic, a person of 
feeling, or at least that is how I see myself. 
This may seem surprising, but only to those 
who think that chess is mainly a science 
and that it is played by impassive, com­
puter-like people. I firmly believe that the 
game of chess is an art, because, among 
other qualities, a chess player must have a 
well-developed and rich imagination.
In view of their abstract character, chess, 
music and mathematics do not require a 
knowledge of the world and a great experi­
ence of life. And so at the age of five Re- 
shevsky used to give simuls' against adults, 
at the age of four Mozart was making 
compositions, the 12-year-old Pascal was 
drawing 
proofs 
of complex 
geometry 
theorems on the walls of his home, and a 
boy called Kim Ung Yang from South Korea 
was solving integral equations.
There is a well-known theory that chess, 
music 
and mathematical 
abilities are 
linked to a powerful but narrowly special­
ised zone of our brain, and that in some 
way this zone goes into action in early
14

Baku Universities
childhood and develops independently of 
the brain as a whole. Well, this is quite 
possible. At any event, this theory explains 
the emergence of child prodigies. But to 
emerge, even their extraordinary gifts need 
favourable conditions! If Mozart's father 
had been, for example, a painter, and not a 
music teacher, we might never have heard 
about the brilliant composer.
First Steps
When I arrived for my first day at school on 
1st September 1970 I was already able to 
read and to write in block capitals. The lady 
teacher handed everyone a sheet of paper 
and invited us to write or draw anything 
we wanted. And the first words that I wrote 
at school were: 'Party, world, mama'. I still 
have this sheet at home.
At that time I was intending to become a 
medical officer: an officer - in order to 
fight, and a doctor - in order to save the 
wounded. But soon, when I was accepted 
into the chess club, such thoughts no 
longer entered my head.
For two years I played chess at school at 
the slightest opportunity. And after I began 
beating my father, my constant trainer 
became uncle Kotik - Konstantin Grigorian, 
the husband of my mother's sister Nelly. 
Later I even gave him a book with the 
inscription: 'To my first trainer'. My uncle 
recalls: 'Initially I won more often, but when 
Garik began going to the club it became 
increasingly hard to beat him. He made 
amazingly rapid progress, and within two or 
three months I was no longer able to win a 
single game - against a seven-year-old boy! 
And that was it - we stopped playing. In the 
only game we played later, Garik gave me 
odds (I think it was a whole rook), and in the 
end he had just his queen left, while I had 
my queen, some piece and a couple of
pawns. Here he loudly exclaimed “check!" 
and made an unexpected queen move. With 
the words “well, no one ever died from  a 
check", I moved my king, but Garik instantly
- bang! - took my queen with his and won 
the game. It turned out that, in giving check, 
he had deliberately placed his queen en 
prise in the desperate hope that I would not 
notice. He really hated losing!'
It was uncle Kotik who on 3rd September 
went with me on a reconnaissance to the 
Pioneers Palace - to find out how and what. 
And later uncle Lyonya took me down and 
enlisted me in the chess club. At that time I 
had already moved in with my mother's 
parents, since my mother had flown to 
Moscow, where my father was in hospital. 
My grandfather proudly informed her by 
telephone that 'the trainer discovered Garik 
has 
phenomenal capabilities', but 
my 
mother, naturally, was not in the mood for 
compliments.
When I first saw the Baku Pioneers Pal­
ace named after Yuri Gagarin - a white, 
two-storey building overlooking the Cas­
pian Sea - it looked to me like some kind of 
fairy-tale chess castle. I was taken to my 
first lesson by Rostislav Korsunsky - he was 
six years older than me and lived in the 
neighbourhood. When I was a child my 
favourite piece was the bishop, and once 
Rostik and I played a unique type of match: 
in the initial position, apart from the kings 
and pawns, the only pieces I had were two 
bishops, and he had only two knights! 
Already in 1975 Korsunsky became a mas­
ter (alas, in the mid-1990s he passed away). 
Incidentally, it should be said that apart 
from him there was a whole group of gifted 
chess players in Baku: the future grand­
master Elmar Magerramov, future interna­
tional masters Mikhail Shur, Alexander 
Avshalumov and Elena Glaz (and also Boris
15

Garry Kasparov on Garry Kasparov: Part One
Sheynin - the future father of the promi­
nent grandmaster Teimour Radjabov). And 
earlier the chess section of the Pioneers 
Palace had trained more than 300 first 
category players, 2 5 candidate masters, a 
good dozen masters, the first Baku grand­
master Vladimir Bagirov, and the chal­
lenger for the title of lady world champion 
Tatiana Zatulovskaya.
My first real chess teacher was Oleg lsa- 
akovich Privorotsky, a strong candidate 
master and later an honoured trainer of the 
Azerbaijan Republic. He immediately no­
ticed my chess memory and my ability to 
shut myself off from the outside world 
during a game. And after the first few 
lessons he remarked in surprise: ‘I don't 
know whether there have been similar 
beginners in other towns, but there has been 
no one like him in Baku!' Indeed, I easily 
solved the exercises given to the older 
children, within three months I had a­
chieved third category rating, at the age of 
eight - second category, and at the age of 
nine - first category.
In addition, in the initial classes I also 
went swimming. But on one occasion in the 
pool the trainer reproached me for turning 
up for training only fifty per cent of the 
time, and he demanded: 'You have to 
choose - either chess, or swimming.' On 
returning home I shouted from the thresh­
old: ‘Mama, I've been told to choose one of 
two. I'm choosing chess!'
Years later Privorotsky recalled: 'Garik 
mastered all the rudiments of chess by 
himself, before he went to school; somehow 
imperceptibly he understood the point of the 
movements of the pieces and the pawns - in 
this way many great players are introduced 
to the ancient game. The boy was interested 
not so much in chess puzzles, as in the logic 
itself of the construction of combinations.
Possibly this forced him to relate very seri­
ously to chess... I saw a small, sociable boy, 
who had an exceptional knowledge of chess 
history. 
About the Capablanca-Alekhine 
match he knew everything. It seemed that he 
was simplyfanatical about chess... Successes 
came quickly. He has an excellent memory. 
He achieved first category rating in the 
second year of studies. When the documents 
fo r awarding the title reached the city sports 
committee, they phoned me from  there and 
asked: “Why this forgery? How can there be 
any talk aboutfirst category at his age?" Six 
months later they began talking about 
Garik's talent: everyone was staggered by his 
brilliant and confident play in blitz tourna­
ments.'
I was awarded first category rating after I 
reached the final of the Baku adult blitz 
championship in June 1972 and my success 
was first mentioned in the press: ‘Thirdyear 
pupil Garik Weinstein, playing standing up 
(when sitting he can't reach all the pieces), 
achieved the overall best result in the first 
stage - 9 points out of 9.' Or: 'Among the 
fourteen winners of the second stage were
13 candidate masters - and a second cate­
gory player.' And the main West German 
newspaper Neues Deutschland unexpect­
edly published an article entitled ‘Chess 
wunderkind from Baku'.
That memorable blitz championship took 
place in the Republic Chess Club, where 
usually serious individual and team tour­
naments were held. After triumphantly 
concluding the quarter-final and semi­
final, I 'lost my rhythm' in the final: never­
theless it was still hard for me to play 
without a break against strong adult oppo­
nents.
Vitaly Melik-Karamov: 'Directly above the 
chess pieces a tuft of wiry black hair stuck 
out on his crown. Garik won, without even
16

Baku Universities
having the opportunity to look at the board 
from above. He looked at it from the side, 
the board was transformed into a battle­
field, and the pieces into a live little army, 
going into battle with the enemy.'
Valery Asriyan: 'A thin, lively, dark-eyed 
boy stands with his mother, awaiting the 
moment when the arbiters will invite the 
players to take their seats at the board. W e- 
a group of candidate masters, playing fo r 
not the first time in such a tournament - 
looked with interest at this "child", who had 
already caused a stir by qualifying fo r the 
semi-final. We didn't know much about him: 
he was called Garik, surname Weinstein, and 
he was studying in the Pioneers Palace with 
the trainer Oleg Privorotsky. And from  time 
to time the anxious thought occurred to 
each of us: “Suppose I lose to this boy? They 
will all laugh at me!" It went ok. The only 
one they laughed at (and, as it soon tran­
spired, quite wrongly) was Slava Gadzhika- 
sumov. Garik lost the remaining eight games 
in the first nine rounds, but then he burst 
into tears, and his mother took him away, 
not allowing him to finish the tournament. 
It was June 1972, and in distant Reykjavik a 
match was about to start, a match which 
would present the chess world with its 11 th 
champion - Robert Fischer. And you would 
have had to possess an excessively rich 
imagination or a very rare gift of foresight, 
to guess both Fischer's departure, which 
shocked everyone, and the extraordinary 
fate of that nine-year-old boy, who on that 
hot summer day departed in tears from  a 
modest club on the banks of the Caspian.'
At precisely that time my mother was 
very concerned about the fact that at night
I would recite in my sleep: 'King b2, king 
b2 ...' etc. She approached a paediatrician, 
who advised her to take the child to Kislo­
vodsk. And in August, five of us - my
mother and I, my aunt Nelly (a doctor by 
profession), uncle Kotik and their five-year- 
old son Zhenya - had a holiday there, 
renting rooms in private flats. In the 
grounds of the nearby sanatorium, where 
we usually went for walks, we immediately 
discovered a giant chess set - an invariable 
piece of equipment at health treatment 
establishments in Soviet times. Of course, I 
promptly went into battle - and easily 
defeated the adults, until I ran up against 
some candidate master. After losing the 
game, again I burst into tears...
And so, in my third year at school I began 
playing in the city tournaments, and life 
immediately became divided into hum­
drum days and festive ones. The festive 
days were tournaments, while all the others 
were humdrum. But soon I also began 
enjoying daily chess lessons, and there were 
no longer any humdrum days!
In January 1973 I reached a new level by 
achieving success in the Baku junior cham­
pionship - a Swiss event with more than 
thirty players (in one of my notebooks the 
games from this tournament are pre­
served): 1-2. Korsunsky and Melkumov - 
7V out of 9; 3-4. Mamedov and Weinstein
- 7. I began with four wins, including one 
over Korsunsky, but then suffered two 
defeats and could no longer catch the 
leaders, although I won my last three 
games.
The chief arbiter of the tournament, 
which took place in the regional officers' 
club, was my future long-standing trainer 
Alexander Shakarov. As the senior trainer of 
the Azerbaijan junior team, he was looking 
for players for his team. And whereas my 
contact with him at the time was restricted 
to handing in scoresheets at the end of 
games, my mother came to the games and 
got to know Alexander Ivanovich. After
17

Garry Kasparov on Garry Kasparov: Part One
finishing high up in the championship, I 
caught his eye and at the age of nine (!) I 
was included in the junior team of the 
republic.
In March 1973, as preparation for the all­
union junior games in the summer, the 
Azerbaijan team made a tour of Latvia and 
Estonia, where two matches were played 
against the teams of each of these repub­
lics. There I ‘bagged' 4 out of 4, and the 
trainers were finally convinced that I 
should be included in the team.
And in May, in the chess club attached to 
the 'Veten' (Motherland) cinema in Baku, 
we played another friendly match against 
our Caspian neighbours - the Turkmeni­
stan junior team. There I played one of my 
first memorable games.
G am e 1 
G .W e in ste in -S .M u ratk u lie v
A zerb aijan-Tu rkm en istan  M atch, 
Baku 1973 
Ruy Lopez C84
I e4 e5 2 lt:lf3 lt:Jc6 3 ..tb5 a6 4 ..ta4 lt:Jf6 5 d4 
At that time my opening repertoire was
largely formed under the influence of 
Privorotsky, who avoided the main theo­
retical paths and showed his pupils side­
lines such as 5 d4 (instead of the usual 5 
0-0 - Game Nos. 14, 31).
5...exd4 6 e5 lt:Je4 7 o-o !Ji.e7 8 E e l
I also employed 8 lt:Jxd4 lt:Jxd4 9 'iVxd4 
lt:lc5 10 !Ji.b3 (the usual move is 10 lt:lc3)
10...1t:Jxb3 (10...0-0 was considered more 
accurate, and if 11 !Ji.f4 lt:le6 with equality)
I I  axb3 0-0 12 !Ji.f4 'it>h8?! (after 12 ...d6 13 
exd6 !Ji.xd6 14 !Ji.xd6 'i'xd6 15 'i'xd6 cxd6 16 
lt:Jd2 White has only a minimal plus) 13 lt:lc3 
b6 14 l:tad1 
c5 15 'ife4 l:tb8 16 b4 !Ji.b7 17 
'iVc4 !Ji.e7 18 'i'd4 ..tc6 19 Hd3 f6 20 .l:h3 f5
21 H dl ..tg5 22 'i'e3 ..txf4 23 'i'xf4 'Jie7 24 
l'lid4l:be8 25 f4 l'lee6 26 lt:ld5 l:tc8 27 c4, and 
White 
won 
(Weinstein-Rudyka, 
Vilnius 
1973).
8..lt:Jc5 9 ..txc6 dxc6 10 lt:Jxd4 0-0 11 lt:lc3
1 1 ...lt:Je6?!
This move surprised me: Black allows the 
active lt:lf5 (I always liked placing a knight 
on f5), then 'Jig4 etc. The position is roughly 
equal after the old continuation of Ja- 
nowski and Keres - 11 ...He8 12 ..te3 !Ji.f8 13 
f4 f6, or the more energetic 11. . .f5! with the 
idea of 12 f4 lt:le6 (Kostic-Trifunovic, Zagreb 
1946).
12 lt:lf5 ..tg5
The ancient 12...f6!? is slightly better, 
although here too after 13 'Jig4 fxe5 14 
lt:Jxe7+ 'Jixe7 15 Hxe5 'Jid6(f6) 16 'i'g3 
White retains some advantage.
13 'Jig4lt:Jd4
This tactical trick somewhat confused 
me, and I stopped to think. Earlier and later 
Black invariably went into an inferior 
endgame by 13 ...!/i.xcl 14 :.a x c l Wg5 15 
'i'xg5 lt:Jxg5 16 lt:le7+ Wh8. But what now?
14 !Ji.xg5 ..txf5 15 % 3 ?!
An error. 15 'Ji4 ! with the initiative was 
more accurate: 15...f6 16 exf6 gxf6 17 J h6 
.l:f7 (Stohl) 18 Sad1 fld7 19 Sd2!, or
15 ...'i'd7 16 :.a d l c5 17 
e7 
xc2 18 !Ji.xf8!
18

Baku Universities
Axd1 (after 18...]:);.xf8 19 Sc1 White has the 
exchange for a pawn) 19 .Jli.xc5 (19 ..ixg7 
{/Vg4 20 Wxg4 &xg4 21 &f6 is also good - 
Stohl) 19 . tt:le2+ 20 tt:lxe2 ..ixe2 21 We4 i¥b5
22 .S:xe2 'tjxc5 23 e6 etc. ‘However, the 
thinking of a child is unsophisticated and 
pure: Garik knew that the main thing in 
chess is to give mate to the king, and for the 
creation of mating threats the queen 
stands better on g3' (Nikitin).
15...1Vc8?!
After 15...'i¥d7! 16 ]:l;.ad1 c5 with such a 
fine knight on d4 Black would have had 
nothing to fear (17 b4 b6 - Stohl).
16 S a d i (of course, I sacrificed the pawn)
16...tt:lxc2 17 .Ue2 'i¥e6?!
An oversight, allowing White to regain 
the material with an elegant combination 
and to obtain an obvious positional advan­
tage. The prophylactic 17 ...\ih8 (17..Ag6?
18 l:r.dd2!) was sounder, although after 18 
e6! fxe6 19 .Udd2 the knight on c2 would 
have given Black problems: 19...h6 20 'i'h4 
(20 ..ih4!? - Stohl) 20 ...'1We8 21 &xh6 gxh6
22 Wxh6+ £g8 23 CZJe4 #g6 24 iYxg6+
l.xg6 25 l:txc2 with the better endgame.
18 .: f 6! A g 6 19 ..ixg7! 'it>xg7
19....:fd8 20 Af6 Sxd1+ 21 tt:lxd1 tt:ld4 22 
:d 2  tt:lf5 23 Wf4 is to White's advantage, 
when 23 ...'ixa2? is bad in view of 24 g4
tt:lg7 25 ..ixg7 ^xg7 26 h4. The kingside 
pawn offensive is the recurrent theme of 
the entire game.
20 Sxc2 1:!.ad8 21 l:tcd2 'ile7
In the event of the more resilient
21...S:xd2 22 Hxd2 f6 (Stohl), 23 exf6+ l:txf6
24 f3 would have led to a favourable struc­
ture for White. I think that objectively 
White already has a technically won posi­
tion, even against the opponent's best 
defence: he can quite quickly create a pair 
of connected passed pawns on the kingside, 
whereas it is far harder for Black to do the 
same on the queenside.
22 h4! 'it>h8
Muratkuliev's last two moves are frankly 
amateurish, dictated by the illusion of 
counterplay on the g-file. Again 22 ....Uxd2 
23 .S:xd2 ^h8 24 'iVg5! f6 (Stohl) was more 
appropriate, but nevertheless the endgame 
after 25 exf6 Wxf6 26 'iVxf6+ Hxf6 27 f3 is 
better for White, for example: 27 ... .Uf7 28 
'it>f2 h5 29 tt:le2 \ig7 30 g3 Se7 31 tt:lf4 f
32 a3 b6 33 g4 with winning prospects.
23 % 5 !
I remember being terribly proud of this 
far from obvious move. 'It turns out that 
the h2-h4 advance also contained a posi­
tional threat. White unexpectedly seizes 
control of the d-file and takes play into a
19

Garry Kasparov on Garry Kasparov: Part One
highly favourable ending. "So young - and 
so cunning!", you will say. "Fantastic!", I say 
as a trainer. For this one idea - combining 
the romanticism of attack with the prose of 
the endgame - one can immediately enlist 
a boy in the most prestigious chess school. 
The level of understanding of technical 
subtleties is a good indicator in assessing 
how promising a young player is.' (Nikitin)
23...'ikxg5 24 hxgS Sxd 2 (things would not 
have been changed by 24...l:tde8 25 f4 or 25 
g4 - Stohl) 25 Sxd 2 f
 26 f4
Now Black can no longer escape from the 
vice: he does not have ...f7-f6, White is 
threatening 'if2-f3, g2-g4, f4-f5 and so on, 
and therefore ...h7-h6(h5) has to be played, 
but then White simply captures on h6 and 
all the same he advances his pawns.
26. ..Wg7 27 ' i f 2 h5 (or 27...l:th8 28 'if3  h5
29 gxh6+ l:xh6 30 ltJe4) 28 gxh6+ 'it>xh6 29 
'it>f3 .Ug8 30 ltJe4 ^g4+ 31 'ie3
31...'it>g6? (a blunder; however, 31...^e6 32 
tbf6 l:lh8 33 b3 'ig6 34 g4 was also hope­
less) 32 tbf6 1-0
After the rook moves there follows ltJxg4.
Not a complicated game, but an interest­
ing one. Nikitin is still astonished by it: 'It is 
hard to believe that the white pieces were 
brought into battle by a ten-year-old com­
mander. There is not a single futile, pointless 
move, and the harmony and logic in the 
actions of the white army are amazing. This 
little masterpiece shows with what an 
enormous chess talent Garik was endowed 
from  birth.'
En try in to  th e all-union A rena
My first baptism of fire outside of Baku 
came at the All-Union Youth Games (Vil­
nius, 14-24 July 1973). Teams of the fifteen 
union republics, plus Moscow and Lenin­
grad, were divided into three semi-final 
tournaments (6+6+5). from the results of 
which the first, second and third final 
groups were determined (also 6+6+5). Each 
team consisted of eight players: four jun­
iors not older than 18, two not older than 
15 (I in fact played on board 5), and two 
girls.
In these Games, as was usual in such 
events, many future grandmasters partici­
pated - Yusupov, Dolmatov, Alexander 
Ivanov (on board 2 he scored 8 out of 8!), 
Malaniuk, Kochiev, Yermolinsky, Kengis, 
Lputian, Machulsky, Kantsler and so on, to 
say nothing of a future world champion, 
the future lady world champion Maya 
Chiburdanidze, and a challenger to this 
title, Elena Akhmylovskaya.
The top, final group produced the ex­
pected results: 1. Russia, 2. Moscow, 3. 
Leningrad, 4. Ukraine, 5. Belorussia, 6. 
Georgia. At that time the Azerbaijan team 
was a 'solid second division team' (this was 
considered great progress, but from 1974 
we began regularly finishing in the top six), 
and in Vilnius it confirmed its reputation, 
finishing 3rd in the semi-final. In this stage 
I scored just 2 out of 5. losing in the first 
round to the formidable Kiev player Leonid 
Zaid (within six months he became USSR 
junior champion, and soon also a master).
20

Baku Universities
What told were the anxiety and inexperi­
ence of a novice: my opponents were four 
or five years older than me. But in the final 
stage I went through undefeated, making 
four fighting draws, and my team, finishing 
ahead of Uzbekistan, Armenia, Lithuania, 
Moldova and Latvia, won this tournament 
and finished in 7th place overall.
The game that I remember best was the 
one with the Latvian candidate master 
Edvins Kengis, which was later published in 
Volume 16 of the Yugoslav Informator (this 
was our debut in the cult publication of the 
late 20th century).
Nikitin: ‘That day I watched Garik's game 
almostfrom the very start. My attention was 
immediately drawn to the board at which 
two contestants of quite different sizes were 
playing. A small, puny, dark-haired boy was 
looking seriously at the board and endlessly 
fidgeting on his chair. And sitting immobile 
opposite him was a tall, good-looking Lat­
vian, who when thinking would literally 
tower over the battlefield. Compared with 
Garik, Kengis looked not only a giant, but 
also a highly-experienced fighter, but the 
events which occurred on the board forced 
the age difference to beforgotten.'
Gom e 2 
E.K eng is-G .W ein stein
A ll-U nion Y o u th  G am es, 
V iln iu s 20.07.1973 
Sicilian Defence 889
1 e4 c5 2 tt:lf3 d6 3 d4 cxd4 4 tt:lxd4 tt:lf6 5 
::Jc3 tt:lc6 6 ..ic4 e6 7 .; b3 ^e7 8 &e3 a6 9 
#'e2
The Velimirovic Attack was fashionable 
at that time, and it had also been analysed 
by the Azerbaijan team.
9 ...Wc7 10 0-0-0 0-0
11 g4
This is what Fischer played against Lar­
sen (Palm a de Mallorca Interzonal 1970). 
Later 11 Hhg1 came to the fore, with the 
idea of 11...tt:lxd4?! 12 &xd4!. For details, 
see Revolution in the 70s (pp.154-155).
11...tt:ld7
A new move, employed by Larsen, but 
before that recommended by Nikitin - my 
future trainer! But 11 ...tt:lxd4! 12 J:txd4 (12 
..ixd4 involves a dubious pawn sacrifice)
12 ... b5 is objectively better. I followed this 
course in a game with Dvoyris (Vilnius 
1975) and gained an advantage after 13 g5 
tt:ld7 14 Wh5 J:.dS (14. ..g6!?) 15 tt:ld5? (15 
.l:!.g1 is correct) 15...exd5 16 
xd5 tt:le5!.
12 g5
21

Garry Kasparov on Garry Kasparov: Part One
Fischer responded badly - 12 h4?! lLlcs
13 g5 bs 14 f3? (14 hs!), and after 14...i.d7!
15 'li'g2 b4 16 lLlce2 lLlxb3+ 17 axb3 as 
Larsen repelled the premature attack and 
gained a memorable victory (Game No.42 
in Volume IV of My Great Predecessors). This 
symbolic game influenced an entire chess 
generation. Only later did it transpire that 
here there is a very dangerous piece sacri­
fice - 12 lLJfs!.
12 ...lLlc5 13 .nhg1 ..id7 14 Sg3 IfcB  15 Wh5
(this typical attacking plan looks menacing, 
but I was prepared for it) 15...g6 16 'Yi'h6
- f 8 17 Wh4 lLlxb3+ 18 axb3 i e7
With the idea of 19 Sh3 hs - an impor­
tant defensive device! Shakarov taught us 
that Black's fortress was impregnable, and 
later this confidence came in useful to me 
in similar Scheveningen positions.
Today it is apparent that 18...lLlxd4!? 19 
..ixd4 es 20 = e3 bs is also good (Valenti- 
Paoli, Reggio Emilia 1975/76). But I played 
‘as I had been taught'. And whereas up till 
now we had made our moves quickly, here 
Kengis stopped to think.
19 f4
Avoiding the repetition of moves - 19 
^ 6  
^ f8. If 19 lLlde2 either 19...hs or
19...lLlb4! is acceptable (but not 19...bs? 20 
lLlf4!).
19. 
..b5 20 'Yi'h6
Now White himself repeats moves - per­
haps to gain time on the clock. Black would 
have been happy with 20 Sd2 hs 21 lLlxc6 
\'Wxc6 22 f5 b4 (22 ...as!?) 23 fxg6 fxg6 24 
lLla4:lf8 2 s lLlb6 2f1+ 26 2d1 Haf8.
20.....if8 21 '*'h4 b4l
Why play 21... . ; e7, if it is possible to 
launch a counterattack?!
22 lLlxc6?
A serious mistake. We both overlooked 
the spectacular blow 22 lLlf5!! - in the event 
of 22 ...bxc3 (22 ...gxfs? 23 Sh3 \g7 24 exfs 
and wins) 23 Sh3 hs 24 gxh6 White has the 
initiative, although after 22. ..) e8 23 l:.h3 
hs 24 gxh6 'Yi'd8! the chances are roughly 
equal.
22 ....1li.xc6
22 ...bxc3! would have won immediately
- because of the weakness of the c2-point 
White loses a piece: 23 lLld4 e5 or 23 ..id4 
e5! 24 fxes dxes 25 ..ixes cxb2+ and 
...\'Wxc6.
23 fih3 h5l 24 gxh6 bxc3?
24. ....ie7! would have won, for example: 
25 'iVg3 'it>h7 or 25 h7+ 'it>h8 26 Wg3 (26 
I'Wg4 ; f6) 26. ....ixe4 27 ..id4+ f6 etc. Now, 
however, the situation becomes much 
sharper.
25 ^’f6 'it>h7 26 ..id4! cxb2+ (a small plus
22

Baku Universities
would still have been retained by 26. ..es! 27 
fxes We7) 27 'ix b 2 e5 28 fxe5 i.xe4
29 e6?
Kengis overrates his chances: this seem­
ingly spectacular blow meets with a refuta­
tion. The balance would have been most 
easily maintained by 29 l:i.f1! Wxc2+ 30 'ia 1  
Wd2! 31 Wxf7+ 'ih 8  32 Wf6+ with perpet­
ual check (pointed out in 1996 by the 12- 
year-old Serb Milos Perunovic - atthat time 
a pupil of Nikitin).
29...^xc2+ 30 'it'a3 d5+ 31 e7 i.xe7+ 32 
Wxe7 Wc7!
This strong reply (incidentally, the only 
move!) was overlooked by White: it turns 
out that Black is also threatening mate - 34 
Wf6? Wa5+ etc. White is forced to seek 
salvation in a difficult ending.
33 Wxc7 .l:!.xc7 34 .l:i.g3 (Kengis begins acting 
very enterprisingly, creating counterplay)
34...1:i.c2 
35 Sf1 f5 36 h4 'ix h 6?!
Having decided that Black was easily 
winning, I relaxed. 36...Be8(g8) was correct. 
37 i.e3+ 'it'h7 38 2 fg1?! (the immediate 38 
h5! was more accurate, with good drawing 
chances) 38. ..Sc3 39 h5
39 
'it>b4 l:i.d3 40 h5 was probably more 
resilient, although in this case Black's 
moves would have been easier to find:
40....1:!.b8+ 41 'ia s  .l:!.dxb3 42 hxg6+ 'ig8 43
ii.a7 S8b5+ 44 'ixa 6  f4 etc.
39...g5?
Alas, in time-trouble I became frightened 
by ghosts of some kind and I missed a win, 
which 
could have 
been 
achieved by
39... 
Bb8! 40 hxg6+ 'it>g8 41 i.f4  lbxb3+ 42 
'it'a2 Ia3+  43 'it'b2 i.d3! 44 i.e s l:i.cb3+ 45 
'it'c1 d4! (from afar it is not easy to find such 
a move) 46 i.xd 4  .l:!.a2!.
40 i.xg 5 .l:!.xg3 41 .l:!.xg3 .l:!.g8 42 'ib 2 d4 43 
i.f4
I had thought that this too was a win­
ning endgame, but when Kengis offered 
the exchange of rooks, I belatedly realised 
that the position was a draw.
43 ...&xg3 44 i.xg3 'ih 6 45 i.e 5  d3 46 *c3 
'it'xh5 47 'id 2 'ig 4 48 *e 3
23

Garry Kasparov on Garry Kasparov: Part One
48^<;t>h3
Black can win the bishop - 48. ..f4+ 49 
&xf4 d2 50 Wxd2 Wxf4, but not the game: 
the queening square of the rook's pawn is 
of the wrong colour! It was hard to accept 
the inevitable...
49 ^d4 Wg2 50 .i.c3 'itfl 51 i.d 2 'itg2 52 
^c3 'it>g3 53 -&e5+ Wg4 54 i.d 6 'it>g5 Vi-V*
At the conclusion of the games I received 
my first ever prize - 'for the youngest 
player in the tournament'. But the most 
important result of this trip was my meet­
ing with Alexander Sergeevich Nikitin, state 
trainer of the USSR Sports Committee - my 
future friend, mentor and reliable support 
in the most difficult periods of my life. He 
became a master at a very early age and in 
his youth he played for the national stu­
dent team, alongside Boris Spassky. But 
then, after qualifying as a radio engineer, 
he for a long time disappeared from the 
chess scene. And yet his love for the game 
outweighed other things: early in 1973 
Nikitin decided to devote himself entirely to 
training work (and later he developed the 
system of opening preparation by which we 
studied).
Nikitin: ‘Playing side by side in Vilnius 
were 18-year-old youths and boys who were 
barely visible above the chess board. That 
was how, through a gap in the row of heads, 
on the first day I "discovered" Garik. At the 
board he found it hard to maintain his 
composure - and he promptly lost it, no 
sooner had the game ended. The childish 
spontaneity of his ideas merely added charm 
to his array of obviously outstanding chess 
qualities. The ability of his pieces to occupy 
“correct" positions in the most natural and 
rapid way was amazing. Also amazing was 
his opening erudition and his memory - 
capacious and sticky, like blotting-paper. He
did notfind it at all hard to calculate varia­
tions many moves ahead - fo r him this was 
not difficult work, but an amusing game. 
Several times during the tournament I 
managed to talk to this amazing boy. It 
turned out that he loved reading and his 
range of interests was unusually wide. He 
had an excellent knowledge of geographical 
names, historical facts and dates. He read 
very rapidly, and his exceptional memory 
ensured that things were firm ly retained. 
Attempts to test his erudition often put the 
questioners in an awkward position, be­
cause it would suddenly transpire that the 
boy knew more than the examiner. But most 
of all I was staggered by Garik's eyes - 
intelligent, with a kind of amazing sparkle. 
At the time I decided purely intuitively that 
such eyes were a sign of great talent.'
It was Nikitin who in August 1973 ar­
ranged an invitation for me to Dubna, to the 
next session of Mikhail Botvinnik's junior 
school. It had opened back in 1963, the year I 
was born, but at the time it did not function 
for long - just eighteen months. Among its 
first pupils were Karpov, Balashov, Razuvaev, 
Timoshchenko and Rashkovsky. The lessons 
were resumed in 1969. and from around the 
mid-1970s Botvinnik’s pupils began achiev­
ing notable successes. Two or three times a 
year, some fifteen boys and girls from vari­
ous towns assembled for 10-day sessions. 
They included Yusupov, Dolmatov, Psakhis, 
Akhmylovskaya, Akhsharumova, Kharitonov, 
Ehlvest, Andrey Sokolov, Rozentalis, Ne- 
nashev...
The Kiev player Borya Taborov and I were 
summoned to an interview with Botvinnik 
and questioned by the famous champion 
for a couple of hours: we showed him our 
games and talked about ourselves. Mikhail 
Moiseevich asked his favourite questions, 
such as ‘do you analyse your own games?',
24

Baku Universities
or ‘do you play any sports?'. I remember 
how staggered I was when he suddenly 
stood up and supported himself on a chair 
with just his hands! This particular exam­
ple showed what a person is capable of 
even at the age of 62 (however, he was still 
able to do this at the age of 77).
For some reason only one of us was ac­
cepted into the school. I was a 10-year-old 
first category player, whereas Borya was a 
12-year-old candidate master, who had just 
won the board six tournament at the youth 
games in Vilnius (71/2 out of 9!). His games 
were, of course, more substantial than 
mine, but it was I who was accepted into 
the school. A symbolic event! Two years 
later Taborov became a master (the young­
est in the country!), played for a few more 
years, but then gave up chess: his parents 
wanted him to go to a respectable institute, 
to study science ... One has to give Botvin- 
nik's intuition its due: he lived chess and he 
deeply understood and sensed all its nu­
ances. Something about me caught his 
fancy - they say, ‘liveliness ofmind'.
Nikitin: 'The great Maestro was delighted 
by the contact with Garik. He became visibly 
younger when chatting with the boy, who 
immediately became his favourite pupil. The 
teacher liked everything - the smartness of 
his replies combined with their accuracy, the 
speed with which he calculated variations, 
his staggering memory... Being enlisted as a 
pupil of the great Botvinnik stirred his young 
heart, and Garik became even more fasci­
nated by the ancient game. As fo r me, after 
Vilnius I returned to my work in the chess 
section of the Sports Committee. But the link 
with Garik was not broken: bulky parcels 
with chess magazines and books were sent 
from Moscow to Baku, and it was a rare 
week when we did not have conversations by 
phone.'
To come under Botvinnik's wing was un­
doubtedly a stroke of good fortune. This 
fact was also remarked on by the republic 
newspaper Spo rt, which in the autumn of 
1973 published an article by Valery Asriyan, 
'Ex-world champion's ten-year-old pupil'. At 
that same time Botvinnik wrote a letter to 
the chairman of the Azerbaijan Sports 
Committee, where, in particular, he gave 
the following directive: 'I consider it advis­
able to arrange individual studies fo r Garry, 
and fo r him to play in tournaments with a 
stronger line-up. The number of tournament 
games peryear in the period 1973-75 should 
not exceed 40... ' The letter had the desired 
effect.
Privorotsky: ‘For two years I gave individ­
ual lessons four hours a week in Garik's 
apartment. We selected positions, developed 
the technique of calculating variations, 
studied the endgame and the opening, and 
so on. During the lessons Garik always raised 
questions, and sometimes the answers were 
very difficult tofind. In such cases I promised 
to reply at the next lesson, and I gave him a 
lot of homework which he always carried 
out... '
Lessons with Alexander Shakarov also 
continued - for the moment not individual, 
but group lessons, as part of the junior 
team. Thus at the age of ten and a half I 
had a full program of commitments, and 
soon I went to the Pioneers Palace only to 
play blitz with the older lads and with my 
first teacher, or to play training games.
One of these games became, as Nikitin 
expressed it, ‘another high-quality chess 
canvas, painted by a youthful hand'. My 
opponent Elmar Magerramov was five 
years older than me, but this did not pre­
vent us being friends. In the 1970s we 
played numerous training games, in which 
there was always a sharp, uncompromising
25

Garry Kasparov on Garry Kasparov: Part One
fight. Gradually Elmar developed into a 
strong master, and then also a grandmas­
ter - I should remind you that he shared 
1st-2nd places in the last, 58th U55R Cham­
pionship (1991).
G am e 3 
E.M ag erram o v-G .W ein stein
Train in g  M atch, 
Baku 18.11.1973 
Sicilian Defence 885
1 e4 c5 2 tZ:lc3 e6 3 tZ:lf3 tZ:lc6 4 d4 cxd4 5 
tZ:lxd4 d6 6 &e3 tZ:lf6 7 i. e2 a6
My first experience of the classical 
5cheveningen, which Privorotsky taught me
- it was his favourite defence, along with
2...tZ:lc6 3 d4 cxd4 4 tZ:lxd4 tZ:lf6 5 tZ:lc3 d6 
(Game No.6). My trainer quite reasonably 
assumed that two central pawns against 
one was a good basis for Black, promising 
him a favourable endgame. Nikitin was also 
a 5cheveningen devotee, so that this set-up 
remained with me for ever.
8 f4 &e7 9 0-0 &d7
A little trick, which I had learned at the 
lessons: Black immediately creates the 
threat of simplifying by ...tZ:lxd4 and ... ;, c6. 
After the usual 9 .0-0 10 a4 &d7 11 tZ:lb3 he
does not have the reply ...b7-b5.
10 tZ:lb3?!
10 a4 is nevertheless better, and if
10...tZ:lxd4 11 Wxd4 jt,c6, then 12 b4! (in the 
1970s this was not considered) 12 ...0-0 13 
bs &e8 14 es (an example: Grischuk- 
Rublevsky, 1st match game, Elista 2007).
10...b5 
(now Black is completely alright) 11 
jt,f3 '¥ic7 12 a3
12 a4!? is perhaps safer, in order after
12 ...b4 to maintain the balance by 13 tZ:le2 
es 14 f5 tZ:las 15 tZ:lxas Wixas 16 c4 or 13 
tZ:lb1 0-0 14 Wd3 es 15 f5 Sfc8 16 tZ:l1d2.
12..J:!b8
The position after 12. ..0-0! is the dream 
of any 5icilian player. But I decided to 
launch an immediate attack and I could 
have been made to pay for this.
13 '¥ie1 a5 14 Wg3 a4?! (again 14. ..0-0! was 
more sensible) 15 tZ:ld4 tZJxd4 16 ^xd4 b4?
And here 16...0-0 was simply essential, 
although after 17 e5 White has the initia­
tive (and it was not for the sake of this that 
I embarked on the attack!).
17 axb4?
Elmar also missed the typical stroke 17 
e5!, refuting Black's premature aggression. 
We both overlooked that after 17...bxc3? 
White has the decisive 18 Wxg7 with the 
pretty idea 18 ...Eg8 19 exf6!! Sxg7 20 fxg7.
26

Baku Universities
17...dxe5 is also hopeless: 18 fxe5 i.c5 
(18 ...bxc3 19 'i'xg7) 19 tt:le2 bxa3 20 bxa3 or
18...g6 19 exf6 &d6 20 'l1Vh4 bxc3 21 ^xc3.
17 ..J'lxb4 18 iLle2?!
Again passive (it appears that Elmar was 
slightly afraid of me). The 18 e5! break 
would have still enabled White to fight for 
the initiative: 18...dxe5 19 fxe5 .:xd4 20 
#xg7 Sf8 21 exf6 We5 22 tt:le4!? lx e 4  23 
Axe4 i.c5+ 24 <i¥th1 'i/Vxe4 25 'Yi'g3! etc.
18... 
0-0 (at last!) 19 ; c3 (now there is no 
longer any point in 19 e5 dxe5 20 fxe5 lLld5)
19...1.c4 20 e5?!
At the most inappropriate moment! 20 
2fd1 g6 21 Sd4 was more solid, aiming to 
exchange the active black rook.
20...dxe5 21 fxe5?! (the lesser evil was 21 
Jl.xe5 'iWb6+ 22 'ih 1 .:x c 2 23 tt:lc3 with 
some 
compensation 
for 
the 
pawn)
21 ...tt:ld5?!
21...tt:le4! 22 i.x e 4  :l:xe4 23 tt:lf4 Wc4! 
(and if 24 tt:lh5 !:tg4) would have given me 
an obvious advantage.
22 i.xd S 'i'c5+ (not wishing to spoil my 
pawn structure by 22. ..exd5!?) 23 'ih 1 
tx d 5  24 fLlf4?1
This plays into Black's hands, although 
all the same his chances would have been 
better after 24 Sad1 Wb7 25 tt:ld4 i.b 4  or
24 Sfd1 ifb7 25 tt:lf4 'ih8 26 tt:lh5 .:g8.
24. .. We4! 25 J:ae1 (25 'i:Yd3 .i.b5!) 25. ..'ix c 2
26 l:f2 'YiNf5?
Underestimating the opponent's threats. 
After 26 . ..'iWb3!? White would not have had 
sufficient compensation for the pawn: 27 
tt:lh5 g6 28 tt:lf6+ i.xf6  29 exf6 h6!.
27 B efl?
The losing move. 27 tt:ld5! would have 
equalised - after 27 ...'¥ig5(?) we both 
missed the strong reply 28 i.d2!, when 
after 2 8 ...^ 4  29 tt:lxe7+ '/fjxe7 30 ^h6 g6 
(30. ..f6? 31 exf6 Sxf6 32 &g5) 31 .&xf8 'i/Vxf8
32 'Y1Ng5 Black is in difficulties. I don't know 
whether I would have found the saving 
queen sacrifice: 27... exd5! 28 e6! !:txc3! 29 
bxc3 Wxe6 30 !:txe6 i.xe6 with a probable 
draw.
27 ...i.c5! 28 !:td2 Ac6
28 ...i.b5 with the threat of ...!:txc3 was 
also good. The bishops have begun operat­
ing at full power, and Black has not only an 
extra pawn, but also a menacing attack. It 
was possibly under the influence of this 
game that Elmar, as far as I remember, 
never played 1 e4 again ...
29 1'1dd1
If 29 h4 the most unpleasant is 29. ..fle4!.
29...h5!? (I could have won ‘as I pleased', 
but I had my own plan, based on a deep 
calculation) 30 h3
27

Garry Kasparov on Garry Kasparov: Part One
If 30 tt:Jd3, then 30. ..h4! 31 fixfs hxg3 32 
figs (32 S ff1 ? fih4!) 32. ..i.f 2! 33 hxg3 ^e3! 
and ...a4-a3.
30...h4! 31 'iWh2
Of course, not 31 'iWxh4? g5!. ‘Very few at 
such a young age could conceive the idea of 
such a pawn storm: ... h7-h5, and then also 
...g7-g5' (Nikitin).
31...'iVg5 (31...'iWc2! was more forceful) 32 
'2ld3 (32 ..td2 'iVfs) 32...^d4 (32. ....te3!?) 33 
fif4 fid 8 34 .l:tdf1 (34 Sg4 'ife3 35 '2le1 fixc3
36 bxc3 ..tb6 etc. was also hopeless)
34....:d7 (34. ..a3!?) 35 ^e1 .kxe5
Or 35 . ..fic2!?. But, as it was, White resigned 
(0-1).
In December, just four months after the 
first session of the Botvinnik School, I 
achieved the 
candidate 
master norm, 
scoring 8 out of 14 in an interesting double­
round tournament held on the Schevenin- 
gen system: seven candidate master train­
ers (including Shakarov) against the seven 
best junior first category players. We again 
played in the club attached to the Veten 
cinema - this was one of the training 
points of the special-purpose chess school, 
where lessons were held, as well as compe­
titions with the participation of the repub­
lic junior teams.
That was how 1973 concluded - a year 
which was undoubtedly a turning point in 
my chess career: first success in junior 
chess, a place in the Azerbaijan junior 
team, emergence into the all-union arena, 
and acquaintance with the Moscow trainer 
Alexander Nikitin and the great Botvinnik!
'He attacks like A lekh in e !'
The following year, 1974, began for me with 
a fresh victory. In January the team from 
the Baku Pioneers Palace won the qualify­
ing stage in Kiev for the prize of the news­
paper Komsomolskaya pravda, and on 
board 2 I scored 41/2 out of s. The home 
team from Kiev were considered the fa­
vourites, and they did indeed defeat all 
their rivals, including us - 4-3 (that day I 
made my only draw). But in the end, thanks 
to big wins in our remaining matches, we 
finished ahead of the Kiev team by 4 points! 
To many this seemed incredible luck: the 
strength of our ‘magnificent seven’ (which 
apart from me included Korsunsky, Mager- 
ramov, 
and 
Elena 
Glaz) 
was 
clearly 
underestimated.
The final of the All-Union Tournament of 
Pioneers Palaces took place from 25-31 
March in Moscow. Six teams contested an 
unusual competition-they did not play 
against one another, but in daily simulta­
neous displays with grandmasters - the 
captains of the rival teams. The points 
scored by the team and the captain were 
added together, which determined the 
result of each 'match'. I remember that 
Privorotsky prepared us for this test and 
advised us to make a careful study of a 
small 
brochure 
published in 
Moscow, 
dedicated to the previous final (1972). 
There it was described how Zaid won 
against Petrosian, Dvoyris against Spassky, 
and so on. The trainer said that we had to 
try and understand how to play against 
grandmasters.
Nikitin: ‘In these clock simuls' on seven 
boards (six boys and one girl) the grandmas­
ters sometimes had a very hard time of it. 
Although they did not play one another and 
it was only the totals of their simul' results 
that were compared, the habit o f beingfirst 
forced the grandmasters to fight just as in 
the most prestigious tournament. But fo r 
the youngsters playing in these simuls' it 
was not so much the result that was impor­
tant, but rather the invaluable experience
28

Baku Universities
and the impression left by their formidable 
opponents.'
On the very first day I experienced a se­
vere shock, on seeing in front of me a living 
legend - Mikhail Tal! I could even shake his 
hand! I had heard about his intimidating, 
hypnotic glare with which he would fix his 
opponents. True, to overcome me, Tal did 
not need this... Later, largely under the 
impression of these feelings, I considered it 
my direct duty to take part in these 'tour­
naments of chess hopes' (as the Pioneer 
Palace tournaments were rightly known), 
as captain of the Baku team, since I realised 
how important it was for young players to 
meet renowned grandmasters at the board.
I also failed to cope with my excitement 
in the 2nd round, losing to Lev Po- 
lugayevsky (whereas Rostik Korsunsky, by 
contrast, won both games!). Then I ad­
journed my game with Yuri Averbakh in a 
not altogether clear queen ending with an 
extra p a w n ;a t these tournaments ad­
journed games were not resumed, but were 
adjudicated by a grandmaster panel, and at 
the insistence of our captain Vladimir 
Bagirov I was awarded a win. In the 4th 
round came a draw with Gennady Kuzmin, 
after which my opponent declared to a 
reporter: 'It never occurred to me that a 10- 
year-old boy could play the endgame so 
competently.' Alas, at the finish I lost 'stu­
pidly' to Mark Taimanov and finished up 
with 11/2 out of 5.
Nevertheless the 
prominent Moscow 
journalist Alexander Roshal drew attention 
to me: ‘It should be said that playing in the 
Baku team is one of our most interesting 
young players. Garry Weinstein is only 10 
years old, but he (like his older colleague 
Korsunsky) has already achieved the candi­
date master norm. Botvinnik, in whose 
school the boy studies, speaks highly of his
capabilities; national master Dvoretsky, the 
ex-world champion's assistant, is also de­
lighted by the youngster. We will not hurry 
to draw conclusions, which may harm the 
young player, but comment that whereas 
Tal and Polugayevsky managed to outwit 
the 10-year-old in complications, Averbakh 
lost to him! Curiously, when I asked him 
whether it was a good game that he had 
won 
against 
the 
grandmaster, 
Garik 
Weinstein replied: “No, no! Yuri Lvovich 
simply blundered a pawn in the opening...
The tournament was confidently won by 
the Leningrad team, who together with 
Taimanov scored 421/2 out of 70, ahead of 
Moscow with Averbakh and Chernovtsy 
with Kuzmin (both 34), Riga with Tal (331/z), 
Baku with Bagirov and Chelyabinsk with 
Polugayevsky (both 33).
These battles earned the Baku players 
respect. At the All-Union Schoolchildren's 
Spartakiad (Alma-Ata, July 1974) the Azer­
baijan team, for which I played on board 3, 
reached the main final for the first time 
and finished in an honourable 4th place! 
But we could even have won the bronze 
medals, had Korsunsky and I not both lost 
in the final match with Georgia... And in 
general I did not perform very successfully: I 
started with 3 out of 3. but then in my 
game with the Muscovite Baryshev, after 
obtaining a completely won endgame, I 
overlooked an elementary draw - and 
either through vexation or fatigue my play 
sharply declined at the finish (which, how­
ever, was excusable for the youngest player 
in the tournament).
During the previous months I had also 
attended two sessions of the Botvinnik 
school. Nikitin: 'Lessons at the school run by 
Botvinnik, who at that time was helped by 
the splendid instructor Mark Dvoretsky, 
brought much benefit, since the boy had
29

Garry Kasparov on Garry Kasparov: Part One
sufficient tim efor the homework he was set.
I also continued setting him questions, and 
Garik not only succeeded in solving all the 
problems, but even asked fo r more. His 
mother wrote to me, saying that sometimes 
she had to forcibly tear her son away from  
chess. I was afraid of putting too much early 
psychological pressure on Garik, and the 
exercises sent by me were never obligatory.'
From the autumn of 1974 I began play­
ing in Baku team tournaments, as chess life 
in the city was bubbling over. And I sensed 
that adults were already a little afraid of 
me. Appearing on board 2 for the Pioneers 
Palace team in the City Spartakiad, I scored
5 out of 7, and, moreover, I missed a win in 
a very interesting endgame with Velibekov 
of the Burevestnik team (in adjournment 
analysis Bagirov found a miraculous saving 
line for my opponent).
Also memorable for me was the game 
with 
Rafael 
Grigorievich 
Sarkisov, the 
Spartak junior trainer (incidentally, this 
team was headed by Shakarov, who battled 
on the neighbouring board with Korsun­
sky). It displayed my natural inclination for 
Benko-King's Indian positions.
Gam e 4 
R .Sarkisov-G . W einstein
C ity Spartakiad, 3rd round, 
Baku 17.09 .19 74 
King's Indian Defence E90
1 d4 tt:lf6 2 ctJf3 g6 3 c4 - g7 4 tt:lc3 0-0 5 e4 
d6 6 &g5 (a way of getting away from 
theory) 6...c5
6...h6 is also good, but I was seized with 
the idea of undermining the queenside, 
even at the cost of a pawn.
7 d5 a6 8 Ad3 b5 9 cxb5 axb5 10 tt:lxb5
10 .ixb5? is weak in view of 10...tt:lxe4!.
10...c4!
I was also to make successful use of this 
idea in a game against Hernandez (Banja 
Luka 1979).
11 ..ic2 (11 .ixc4?! tt:lxe4!) 1 1..:YiVa5+ 12 
ctJc3 : g4! (in order to exchange this inac­
tive bishop for the knight on f3 and create 
pressure on the b-file) 13 0-0 ct:Jbd7 14 h3 
&xf3 15 Wxf3 .l:.fb8 16 Bab1
For the moment White has a sound posi­
tion, but also Black's chances are no worse 
than in the Benko Gambit.
16....1:.a7 17 We2 (or 17 a4 ct:Jcs 18 We2 
.l:!.ab7) 
17...Bab7 
18 'ixc4  
(18 ctJa4!?)
18....1:.b4! 19 Wd3 tt:lc5 20 We3 .l:.xb2
2 1 .l:.xb2?
A mistake. Approximate equality would
30

Baku Universities
have been maintained by 21 i.b3 or 21 es.
21. ..l:.xb2 22 ^b1 ?! (this aggravates White's 
difficulties; 22 e5 or 22 ..td1 was more 
resilient) 22...h6
The alternative 22 . ..t2Je8!? 23 e5 .&xe5 24 
t2le4 t2lc7 would also have given a big 
advantage.
23 Wc1? (resistance would have been 
prolonged by 23 es hxgs 24 exf6 .= xf6 25 
t2le4 tt:\xe4 26 Wxe4 Wcs) 23....Uxb1 24 
'iVxb1 hxg5!
More vigorous than 24...Wxc3.
25 l:.c1 g4 (25...t2lfd7 was also good) 26 Wb5 
(26 es t2lfd7 and wins) 26...'*'a3 27 l:.c2 
gxh3 
28 gxh3?1 tt:\fd7! 
29 'iWc4 t2le5 
(29...t2lb6!) 30 We2 t2led3 31 t2ld 1 t2lf4 32 
fe 3  Wa4 33 l:.d2 Ae5 34 t2lc3 &xc3! 35 
#xc3 'iVxe4 0-1
Times: 1.20-0.50.
Then I played for my own, 151st school in 
the Baku Schools Team Championship. On 
this occasion in this normally weak event 
there were also candidate masters compet­
ing. My opponent in the next game, Viktor 
Gazarian, playing for the 42nd school, was 
a pupil of Shakarov (who worked there as a 
trainer and teacher), and later was to 
become a member of the national Azerbai­
jan junior team.
G am e 5 
V .G azarian -G .W ein stein
Baku 25 .11 .19 74 
G riinfeld  Defence 0 8 6
1 d4 i2Jf6 2 c4 g6 3 i2Jc3 d5
My sole junior experience of employing 
the Grunfeld.
4 cxd5 t2lxd5 5 e4 i2Jxc3 6 bxc3 &g7 7 i.c4
(7 iLlf3 - Game Nos.38, 48) 7...0-0 8 tt:\e2 (8 
i.e3 - Game No.72) 8...b6
I was always attracted by fianchettoed 
bishops, and this set-up (instead of the 
usual 8...cs) was one that I copied from 
either Smyslov or Simagin. But in general at 
that time I had only vague notions about 
the Grunfeld Defence, and I handled it 
rather uncertainly.
9 0-0 &b7 10 f3 t2lc6 (Smyslov nevertheless 
played 10...cs) 11 &e3 e6 (and Simagin
11...i2Jas) 12 Wd2 .Ue8 (with the 'uncom­
promising' idea 13 i.h 6  ..th8) 13 l:.fd1 'il&'d6
14 l:.ac1 Sad8 15 &f4 We7 16 &g5 f6 17 
&e3 tt:\a5 18 &b5 c6 19 ..td3 c5 20 &b5 l:.f8
21 'i!Vb2 f5!
Thanks to his opponent's rather slow 
play, Black has achieved a good game.
22 e5 c4?! (22...a6! 23 &d3 bs was correct, 
with equality) 23 'iWb4! '*'c7?!
31

Garry Kasparov on Garry Kasparov: Part One
Not wanting to go into a depressing end­
game (23...'ixb4 24 cxb4), or to give up a 
pawn (23. ..'il'f7 24 ^xc4).
24 i.g5 a6
A Petrosian-style positional exchange 
sacrifice!
25 i  xd8?
The culmination of the battle. We both 
overlooked the strong reply 25 tt:f4!, when 
both 25 ...axbs 26 tt:Jxe6 'ir'c8 27 tt:Jxd8 Bxd8 
28 ,ixd8 Wxd8 29 iVxb5 and 25 . . . f  26 d5! 
are dismal for Black.
25...1:txd8 26 i.a 4
Here 26 tt:f4 'if7  27 d5 no longer gave 
anything in view of 27...exds 28 e6+ 'itf6!. 
Or 27 l  a4bs 28 ,&c2 ,&h6 etc.
26...b5 
27 &c2
27...i.h6!
Now my idea completely justifies itself: 
Black is able to exploit the power of his 
bishops and his knight on the ds blockad­
ing square.
28 l:f.b1 tt:c6 29 'i1Nb2 tt:e7 30 a4 _• c6 31 axb5 
axb5 32 l:f.a1 'lib7 H  'itf2?
33 l:f.fl tt:Jds 34 2as was correct, still hop­
ing to maintain the balance.
33 ...tt:d5 34 l:f.a2? (a blunder in a difficult 
position) 34...'il'e7?
34...^e3+! 35 'it>fl 'ie7 36 g3 'Yi'gs and 
...'i¥hs would have been quickly decisive.
35 g3?
The king should have been urgently 
brought back ‘to base' - 35 'ig l, although 
after 35 ...Wh4 36 It fl tt:e3 the initiative 
would have remained with Black.
35 ...'i¥g5 36 f4 "ifh5 37 h4
37 l:f.g2 'ixh2+ 38 Hg2 ^ 5  was also 
hopeless.
37. ..&xf4l 38 tt:xf4 tt:xf4 39 gxf4 Wxh4+
(the attack on the light squares is irresisti­
ble) 40 'it>f1 "ifh1+ 41 'i?if2 'ir'g2+ 42 'ie3 
Wg3+ 43 'it>d2 iVxf4+ 44 'it>e1 'iVe3+ 45 'it>f1 
'i¥h3+ 46 'it>e1 'il'h4+ 47 'id 2 iff4+ 48 'ite1 
Af3! 49 i.a 4  bxa4 50 Sd 2 'ir'h4+ 51 l:.f2 
We4+ 52 ^ 1  'Yi'd3+ 53 'ig1 i.e 4 54 'iVd2 
'i¥g3+ 55 'it>f1.1d3+ 56 Se 2 Sb8 0-1
32

Baku Universities
The year concluded with the Azerbaijan 
Spartakiad, which differed little from the 
City Spartakiad: the teams consisted largely 
of the same Baku players (it was simply 
that these competitions were staged by 
different sports committees - city and 
republic). I again played on board 2 for the 
Pioneers Palace and started with 41/2 out of 
5, beginning with an amusing game which 
abounded in mutual tactical strokes and 
mistakes.
G am e 6 
R .Sarkiso v-G .W ein stein
A zerbaijan Spartakiad, 
1st round, Baku 4 .12.197 4 
Sicilian Defence 856
1 e4 c5 2 tt:f3 tt:c6 3 d4 cxd4 4 tt:xd4 tt:f6 5 
:Jc3 d6 6 f4 
After 6 .i.gs Privorotsky showed us the 
variation 6...e6 7 Wd2 a6 8 0-0-0 &d7 9 f4 
h6 10 .i.h4 tt:Jxe4, which I employed against 
Polonsky (Kiev 1974).
6 ...gd7 7 tt:b3?! (Sarkisov was not strong on 
theory and he again played the opening 
unpretentiously) 7...g6
At that time I fianchettoed my bishop at 
the slightest opportunity.
8 &d3 (8 i.e2 i g7 9 ^e3 and 0-0 was more 
purposeful) 8...&g7 9 0-0 0-0 10 'ih 1 a6 11 
a4 tt:Jas!
Enterprising play: I already had a good 
knowledge 
of Black's 
various 
‘Sicilian 
manoeuvres'.
12 tt:Jxa5 Wxa5 13 iVe1 (13 -&d2 Wcs)
13 ...bs!
This sharp attack confused my opponent, 
and he thought that I had overlooked a 
typical combination.
14 tt:Jd5 iYxe1 15 tt:Jxe7+?
Strangely enough, the decisive mistake.
In the event of 15 fix e l bxa4 16 tt:xe7+ 'ih 8
17 tt:Jds tt:Jxds 18 exds .l:!.fe8 Black would 
merely have had somewhat the better 
chances.
15...'ih 8 16 .l:!.xe1 Sfe8?
An error in reply: after 16....l:!.ae8! 17 axbs 
axbs 18 ct:Jxg6+ fxg6 19 .l:!.a6 Be6 White 
would not have had sufficient compensa­
tion for the piece.
17 axbs .l:!.xe7 18 .l:!.xa6 (and this is already a 
double-edged position) 18....l:!.xa6?
18...fiae8(b8) was correct, with favour­
able prospects.
19 bxa6 A c6 20 e5 ct:Jd5 21 i.d 2 dxe5 22 c4?
And now White loses his advantage, 
which he would have retained after 22 fxes 
(after all, he has three connected passed 
pawns!), and he again finds himself on the 
verge of defeat.
22...ctJc7 (the a6-pawn is under attack, and 
also the bishops on the d-file are hanging)
23 
b4? 
(23 
£f1 was more resilient)
23...tt:xa6?
23 
...fid7! would have won, but I saw a 
combinative blow that was possible in 
three moves time and I could not refrain 
from capturing the a6-pawn. I quickly 
calculated a variation - and promptly 
rattl ed it off!
24 b5 tt:Jc5?! (here too 24....l:!.d7! was better)
33

Carry Kasparov on Carry Kasparov: Part One
25 i.b4?
Overlooking the excellent latent resource 
25 bxc6! l2Jxd3 26 S b l! with equality.
25 ...l2Jxd3 26 i.xe7
26... i.xg2+! 27 'ixg2 l2Jxe1+ 28 'it>f1?! (28
'it>g3! is not so clear) 28. ..l2Jf3 29 b6 lt:Jd4 30 
f5?
The immediate 30 b7 lbc6 31 i.d 6  is 
stronger, but after 3l...e4! 32 b8W+ l2Jxb8
33 &xb8 'it>g8 34 c5 'it>f8 Black has a won 
endgame: his king succeeds in stopping the 
passed c-pawn.
30. ..gxf5 31 b7 l2Jc6 32 jLd6 e4 33 b8^+ 
lt:Jxb8 34 i.xb8 i.d4 35 i.d6 'it>g7 36 c5 'it>f6
37 c6 'it>e6 38 i.f4  f6 39 i.b 8  i.e5 0-1
But in the 6th round I lost to the strong 
candidate master Karo Askarian, and he 
overtook me by half a point. Now, in order 
to fight for the best result on my board, I 
had to win 'to order' in the 7th, last round.
And here our match opponents. the Bu- 
revestnik team, made a substitution, and 
put out against me their reserve player - 
Oleg Privorotsky! I don't know, perhaps my 
first trainer had decided to relive the good 
old days and give me a 'farewell' lesson? At 
any event, initially he did indeed outplay 
me. But he faltered as soon as I was able to 
complicate the play.
G am e 7 
G .W ein stein -O .P rivo ro tsky
A zerbaijan Spartakiad, 7th round, 
Baku 11.12 .1974 
Sicilian Defence 840
1 e4 c5 2 l2Jf3 e6 3 b3 (avoiding my oppo­
nent's favourite weapon - the Schevenin- 
gen) 3...lt:Jc6
If 3 ...l2Jf6 I would have replied 4 e5, fol­
lowing the familiar game Westerinen-Tal 
(Tallinn 1973).
4 i.b 2 d6 (I was already confused by this 
move) 5 g3?!
5 
d4! is more energetic, as occurred in 
the ancient game Kieseritzky-Anderssen 
(London 1851). But - I liked fianchettoing 
my bishops!
5...12Jf6 6 We2
A loss of time. The immediate 6 d3 was 
better, in the spirit of the King's Indian 
Attack (although the moves b2-b3 and jLb2 
do not fit in well with it).
6...ge7 7 gg2 0-0 8 0-0 i.d 7 (the immedi­
ate 8 ...e5!? was more accurate) 9 d3 e5!
10 c4?!
10 
c3 was preferable, trying for d3-d4 (at 
least this would somehow justify 6 We2). 
Now Black has slightly the better game.
34

Baku Universities
10...i.g 4 11 h3 i.x f 3 (hardly any stronger 
was 11 .. .lt:Jd4 12 
xd4 .txf3 13 .txf3 cxd4
14 lt:ld2 or 14 a4) 12 .txf3  a6 13 .tg2 lt:ld7
14 ctJd2 b5 (the correct plan) 15 f4
It was quite possible to manage without 
this thrust: 15 h4 lt:Jd4 16 "iVd1, intending 
the manoeuvre of the knight to e3 and d5. 
But I was dreaming ofan attack!
15 ...i.f 6 16 ctJf3 b4
Not the best move: it was more advanta­
geous for Black to retain the pawn tension, 
threatening a possible ...b5xc4.
17 f 5 a5 18 a4! (suppressing the threat of 
...a5-a4) 18 ...bxa3
With the queenside blocked White has 
nothing to fear, for example: 18 ...lt:Jd4 19 
l,xd4 cxd4 20 h4! (depriving the black 
bishop of the g5-square) 20. ..tt:Jc5 21 lt:ld2.
19 l:!.xa3 lt:Jd4 20 .txd4 (20 'id 2! ^ 6  21 
l.c3 was sounder, with equality) 20...cxd4
21 h4?!
The immediate 21 Efa1 was more accu­
rate, with the idea of b3-b4 and the inevi­
table exchange of the a- and b-pawns. Here 
White would probably have maintained the 
balance.
21 ...lt:Jc5 22 lf a 1 ?!
With a delay, alas. It would appear that 
already I needed to go in for extreme 
measures: 22 lt:Jxd4!? exd4 23 e5 .txe5 24
^xa8 Wxa8 25 b4! with sharp play.
22...^b6
Now White has a difficult position: he 
does not manage either to capture on a5, or 
to create an attack on the kingsi de.
23 g4?! (a desperate pawn sacrifice with the 
aim of complicating the play) 23- .nfb8?!
Stronger was 23. ..lt:lxb3 24 'inl2 (24 l:tb1 
a4) 24...fifb8 or 23 ... i-e7 24 g5 (24 Sb1 
^ 4 !) 24... lt:lxb3 with an obvious advan­
tage.
24 g5 i.d S
An interesting psychological moment: 
Privorotsky removes all his pieces to the 
queenside, demonstrating his faith in his 
own attack and his lack of faith in White's 
counterattack.
25 l:!.f1?!
Objectively 25 lt:ld2 'i'h4(c6) 26 i . f l  was 
far more resilient, but that was not in my 
style! ‘White's timidity in the first half of 
the game can be explained by the natural 
restraint of a boy, playing against an adult, 
indeed against his teacher. One should not 
forget about the colossal psychological 
pressure on the boy. Garik cast off the 
shackles only at the instant when the threat 
of defeat was finally hanging over him.' 
(Nikitin)
25...Wb4 26 fia2 ’#xb3 27 :td2
35

Garry Kasparov on Garry Kasparov: Part One
White would not have been saved by 27 
tt:lxd4 exd4 28 e5 tt:lxd3 29 .txa8 tt:lf4! etc. 
Here Privorotsky stopped to think: how best 
to neutralise the threat of g5-g6 and con­
vert his material advantage?
27...f6
The most vigorous was 27... a4! and only 
after 28 g6 - 28...f6 29 gxh7+ Wh8! with the 
ideas of ...a4-a3 and ....ta5. The move in the 
game gives White a ghost of a chance.
28 ctJh2l
My steadily growing King's Indian ex­
perience came into action: I immediately 
saw the attacking scheme - tt:lh2, ^
5, 
tt:lg4, i.f3  and .l:Ig2. Of course, nothing 
should have come of this, but - it did!
28. ..a4 29 't:Vh5
And at this moment, on seeing that the 
situation 
was 
beginning 
to 
become 
sharper, my teacher unexpectedly pan­
icked. ..
29...1.e7?
By instinctively wanting somehow to re­
inforce the defence, Black throws away the 
win. After the fearless 29... i.a5! 30 Sdd1 
tt:lxd3 31 gxf6 Sb7! White's attack would 
have petered out.
30 l2lg4 (with the threat of 31 g6!)
30...tt:ld7?
A catastrophic mistake: the knight and
bishop have blocked the 7th rank and the 
black rooks are unable to come to the aid of 
their king. Indeed, they were called on to 
defend the 7th rank (Capablanca's princi­
ple!), while on c5 the knight was carrying 
out an important function - it was attack­
ing the d3-pawn.
30....l:a7! was essential. Now the hasty 31 
g6? h6 32 tt:lxh6+ gxh6 33 g7isbad because 
of 33 ... ; f8! 34 gxf8i¥+ Sxf8. However, after
31 i.f3 ! the attack is good enough for at 
least a draw:
a) 31. . .tt:lxd3 (if 31...Sf8?, then 32 g6 h6
33 'iSth2! is very unpleasant) 32 g6 h6 33 
tt:lxh6+ gxh6 34 g7! tt:lc5 (34. ...tf8 with a 
draw) 35 .!:!.e1 or 35 Se2, and the threat of 
'i¥xh6 forces 35 ...i.f8 with a draw;
b) 31...i.f8 32 gxf6! Wh8 33 fxg7+ Sxg7
34 f6 SgS 35 f7 Sg6 36 Sg2 Wxd3 37 tt:lf6! 
'i'e3+ 38 'it>h1 '^16 39 2fg1! Wg7! 40 tt:le8+! 
'it>xf7 41 'Llxd6+ .txd6 42 .l'!xg6 'i+Vxh5 43 
.l:g7+ 'it>f6 44 
xh5 Sb7 45 Sg8 with a 
draw.
31 i.f3 ! (now both g5-g6 and Sg2 are 
threatened)
31...'i¥c3
Black would no longer have been saved 
by either 31...'it>h8 32 g6! tt:Jf8 33 tt:lh6!!, or
31... 
a3 32 g6! tt:lf8 33 tt:lh6+! gxh6 34 Sg2! 
hxg6 35 .i:xg6+ tt:lxg6 36 Wxg6+ 'ih 8  37
36

Baku Universities
'li'xh6+ 'it>g8 38 'i'g6+ '>t>h8 39 'ih1 'ft 1  40
l.d1 with unavoidable mate, or even the 
most resilient 31....&f8!32 .l:g2! 'ih8 33 
gxf6 a3! 34 f
 Sb7 35 i.d1! 'tlrb6! 36 lt:Jh6! 
:t:lxf6 37 'i'xf6!! d5! 38 lt:Jf7+ 'it>g8 39 it'e6! 
i'xe6 40 fxe6 dxc4 41 i.a4! l!c7 42 dxc4, 
and White should convert his extra piece 
without particular problems (if 42.....ics or 
42 ...d3, then 43 i.b3!).
32 g6! (Privorotsky underestimated this 
thrust: he was hoping to repel the assault 
after 32 .Ug2? Sb2!) 32...lt:Jf8
32...hxg6 33 tt:Jh6+! would have led to 
mate. And after 32...h6 33 tt:Jxh6+! gxh6 34 
i'xh6 lt:Jf8 White wins by 35 g7 lt:Jh7 36 
.lh s, although the immediate 35 ..ihs or 35 
.:.fd1! is simpler.
33 lt:Jh6+! (or first 33 .l:g2! Is also good)
33...'>t>h8
In the event of 33.gxh6 34 Sg2! hxg6 
(34...Sb2 35 gxh7+) 35 Sxg6+! tt:Jxg6 36 
"ixg6+ White would have given mate:
36...Wf8 37 i. h 5! (the decisive blow is struck 
by this 'blunt' bishop, which has been 
inactive for the entire game), or 36...'it>h8 37 
"ixh6+ 'itg8 38 'il'g6+ <4>h8 39 'ih1! 'il'd2 40 
Sg1.
34 lt:Jf7+ 'it>gB 35 gxh7+ tt:Jxh7 36 .l:g2!
The finishing touch. 'Nevertheless David 
outwitted Goliath' (Nikitin).
36...®xd3 (or 36...Sb2 37 Sxg7+! '>t>xg7 38 
'i'g6+ 'if8  39 tt:Jh6) 37 lt:Jh6+! '>t>h8 38 Ixg 7 i 
Black lost on time (1-0). After 38 . ..Sg8 39 
tt:Jxg8 '>t>xg7 40 tt:Jxe7 White's threats are 
irresistible. ‘A splendid finish, disclosing the 
strong features of the future world cham­
pion' (Nikitin). Times: 1.45-2.00.
The final attack made a big impression 
on those present, and I was terribly proud 
of this win. But when I showed the entire 
game at the Botvinnik 5chool, I was rightly 
criticised by both Botvinnik and Dvoretsky 
for my ‘disgraceful play' in the opening and 
early middlegame.
A year later in a match with Burevestnik I 
had one more duel with Privorotsky (I was 
now playing on board 1, and on this occa­
sion Bagirov avoided meeting me). This was 
a crucial battle: my first trainer was eager 
for revenge, especially as he had the white 
pieces. But I again won, and at that our 
‘confrontation' came to an end.
From the memoirs of an eye-witness - 
Valery Asriyan: 'Garik's mastery developed 
amazingly quickly. One was struck by his 
astounding combinative 
talent. Already 
then he attacked with enormous power, and 
he 
calculated 
variations 
uncommonly 
quickly and very deeply, astonishing all the 
Baku players, including his trainer. In the 
mid-1970s Garik twice defeated Privorotsky 
in team competitions, with both games 
following one and the same course. In a 
positional struggle the trainer outplayed the 
pupil and began active measures on the 
queenside, but Garik succeeded in develop­
ing a strong attack against the opponent's 
king, which Oleg was unable to parry: Kas­
parov was already too strong in such as­
saults. After the games Privorotsky could 
only spread his hands: "What can I do, if he 
attacks like Alekhine!".'
37

Garry Kasparov on Garry Kasparov: Part One
'W h o  w ill be th e Cham pion 
a fte r Karpov?'
In January 1975 Magerramov and I were 
dispatched to Vilnius to the USSR Junior 
(under-18) Championship - our first indi­
vidual competition of this standard. Among 
the thirty-six participants in this Swiss 
event were at least a dozen future grand­
masters, and the tournament was won 
‘with obvious superiority' by the almost 18- 
year-old Alma-Ata master Evgeny Vladimi­
rov (later one of my seconds).
I made a stunning start - 3 out of 3! 
Moreover, in the 2nd round I beat the Kiev 
player V.Sokolov, who in the end shared 
2nd-3rd places. But in the 4th round I 
suddenly lost without a fight to Yurtaev (cf. 
Game No.13, note to Black's 18th move). In 
the 5th round I made a confident draw with 
Black against Vladimirov, and in the 6th, 
after passing through a lost position, I 
overcame Gorelov. In the 7th round I had a 
peaceful encounter with Kengis (after 1 e4 
c5 2 CDf3 d6 I played 3 &b5+), and in the 
penultimate, 8th round, by contrast, a 
sharp, gripping duel with Dvoyris - but 
again a draw.
Soon afterwards Nikitin wrote in the 
magazine Shakhmaty v SSSR: 'I would like to 
talk about 11-year-old Garik Weinstein. 
Mature beyond his years, a confirmed 
bibliophile, he at the same time has retained 
the spontaneity of his age. Garik is passing 
through that golden period, when fo r him 
there are notyet any problems, but there is 
already a mass o f problems fo r the people 
taking care of him. Garik's chess develop­
ment is being carefullyfollowed by ex-world 
champion Botvinnik, who is already decid­
ing his ration of chess studies and playing 
commitments. I will not praise the boy - for 
the moment he is simply playing chess, I 
repeat - playing.'
Thus I was on 51/2 out of 8, and in the 
event of a win in the concluding round I 
could have shared 2nd-4th places and on 
the tie-break won the silver medal. I was 
paired with White against the Leningrad 
player Alexey Yermolinsky, who was half a 
point behind. He was five years older than 
me and proved to be a difficult opponent 
(this was also confirmed two years later in 
Leningrad - cf. p.84). Nikitin: ‘That day I did 
not urge Garik to win, seeing his anxiety and 
fatigue, but simply asked him to play a 
“good " game...'
G am e 8 
G .W ein stein -A .Y erm o lin sky
USSR Junior C ham pionship, 
9th round, V iln ius 15.01.1975 
A lekhine Defence 805
1 e4 lt:Jf6 2 e5 tt:Jd5 3 d4 d6
The expected opening - Yermolinsky's 
favourite defence.
4 CDf3 i.g 4  (4...g6 - Game No.27) 5 i.e 2 e6 6 
o-o $.e7 7 h3 ..ih5 8 c4 lt:Jb6
9 exd6
It is evidently better to play 9 lt:Jc3 0-0 10 
$.e3 d5, and now not 11 c5 _g_xf3 12 = xf3 
lt:Jc4 or 12 gxf3 lt:Jc8 (the earlier main line,
38

which was upheld for Black by Alburt and 
Bagirov), but the new set-up with 11 cxd5!? 
lt.Jxds 12 #b3, as I played against Gitsyn 
(Riga 1977), or 11...exds 12 g4 ^g6 13 h4 (I 
enthusiastically analysed these variations 
with Korsunsky). But Nikitin and I had 
prepared something different.
9...cxd6 10 lt.Jbd2 0-0 11 b3
‘Garry chose a piece set-up which he had 
spotted a week before the tournament, 
studying Informator Volume 17 sent by me 
to Baku.' (Nikitin)
1 1 ...lt.Jc6 12 &b2 Ji.f6
At that time they usually played 12...d5
13 c5 lt.Jd7 14 a3, but later Alburt's plan 
with 12...&g6 13 a3 as and ...&f6 was 
deemed more flexible.
13 a3 d5 (here too 13...gg6 is acceptable, 
not hurrying to increase White's spatial 
advantage) 14 c5 tt:lc8?!
A new move, not as good as 14...tt:ld7, 
which would have led to a position from 
the Informator game Torre-Schmid (Nice 
Olympiad 1974), where after 15 b4 a6 16 
.i:!.c1! b6?! 17 cxb6 'l'ixb6 18 Wa4 Bfc8 19 
.i:!.c3! White seized the initiative.
15 b4 a6 16 Sc1
The cunning ‘Torre manoeuvre'. If 16 
lt.Jb3 there is the good reply 16...^xf3 17 
.ixf3  tt:l8e7, but now in the event of
Baku Universities
16. ..Ji.xf3 White retains a plus by 17 lt.Jxf3!.
16...tt:l8e7??
An unexpected blunder of a piece. Hardly 
had he made the move when Yermolinsky 
saw the winning 17 g4! &g6 18 g5 and his 
face promptly changed. But I did not notice 
anything, since I replied without thinking. 
17 tt:lb3??
'After this for almost the whole of 1975 I 
called Garik not by his name, but only “g4"! 
Even a mistake can become a part of useful 
experience, if you remember about it.' 
(Nikitin)
17...Ji.xf3 
18 &xf3 tt:lf5
A secondary drawback to 17 tt:lb3 is that 
the move .i:!.c1 has been depreciated; with 
the rook on a1 it would have been possible 
to play Ji.c3, a3-a4 and Wd3, preparing b4- 
bs, but now White is forced to change plan.
19 Ji.g4! g6 20 'iVd3 Ji.g7 21 &C3 'iVf6 (by 
intensifying the pressure on the d4-pawn, 
Black provokes the exchange of the enemy 
bishop for the knight on fs) 22 ..ltxf5
22 
Bfd1!? with the idea of 22. ..tt:lh6 23 
&e2 was more forceful, but I wanted to 
deny the opponent any counterplay.
22...1.ixf5 23 Wxf5 exf5 (23. ..gxfs was no 
better) 24 a4
A standard flank offensive, which, how­
ever, does not promise any great benefits.
39

Garry Kasparov on Garry Kasparov: Part One
24. ..tt:ld8 (directing the knight in good time 
to e6) 25 b5 tt:le6 26 li!.al
The rook has to be returned to the ‘cor­
rect place'.
26....l:.fc8 27 li!.fdl
27 
l:tfc1 !? was more interesting, intend­
ing the cs-c6 breakthrough (and if ...b7xc6, 
then b5-b6).
27. ..b6?
A serious mistake, which could have led 
to defeat. The simplest was 27 ...tt:lc7, forc­
ing 28 b6 tt:le6 with equality (29 tt:Jas?! is 
weak in view of 29 ...tt:lxcs!). However, the 
unexpected undermining move unsettled 
me: is it really possible to play this?!
‘The quiet course of the game has sud­
denly changed abruptly, and the situation 
has become sharp and uncertain. For a 
player who has just been rejoicing in his 
position, such a change is especially un­
pleasant.' (Nikitin)
28 l:!.dc1?
Again an error in reply! I saw immedi­
ately that after 28 c6? axbs 29 axbs tt:lc7 
the b5-pawn would be lost. But I completely 
overlooked 28 cxb6! Sxc3 29 :tac1! (not 29 
b7?! Bb8 30 bxa6 li!.xb3), when things are 
bad for Black: 29...li!.xc1 30 Itxc1 tt:ld8 31 
.l:.e1! axbs (31...tt:lb7 32 li!.e7) 32 Se 8+ ..lif8
33 as, or 29 ...l:Ic4 30 b7 li!.b8 31 bxa6 tt:lc7 32
tt:las tt:lxa6 33 tt:lxc4 dxc4 34 li!.xc4 li!.xb7 35 
2 c8+ .i f 8 36 ds etc.
28...bxc5 29 b6 cxd4
29 ...c4!? was also good: 30 b7 cxb3 31
l.b 2 l:tcb8 32 bxa8#  li!.xa8 with full com­
pensation for the exchange.
30 l.b2 (30 ..lid2!? was more accurate, with 
equality) 30...Sab8
More complicated play would have resulted 
from 30...Se8!? 31 li!.ab1 or the clever 
30. ..Bc3!? 31 tt:as Itb8 32 .ixc3 dxc3 33 
Hab1.
31 a5?!
After 31 I:xc 8+ Itxc8 32 S c 1 :txcl+ 33 
..ixc1 .lies 34 b7 with such a strong passed 
pawn White is not in danger of losing, 
despite his material deficit.
31...5c4! 32 tt:d2 li!.xcl+?! (I would have 
been set far more problems by the flam­
boyant 32 ...Sc3!) 33 1!xc1 f
 34 tt:lb3 l.e5
34...<it>e7 was a little better, although 
here too the position is one of dynamic 
balance.
35 ..lia3+ &e8?
A typical time-trouble ‘lapse'. 35 ...'ig7 36 
<it>f1 with equality was correct, whereas 
now Black is again on the verge of defeat!
36 l:!.e1! f6
37 f4l (a spectacular blow!) 37 ...tt:lxf4 38 
..lid6! l:!.d8 39 ..lic7!
40

Baku Universities
Nikitin: 'The tactical resources in the po­
sition stirred the boy's thinking, and he 
made several strong moves in succession. In 
terrible time-trouble and in a difficult 
position Black decides on a trick.'
39...d3?
Strangely enough, this losing move - 
wins! ‘Normal' continuations were insuffi­
cient: 39 ...Ct:Je6 40 .txd8 'it>xd8 41 l:rc1 CDf4 42 
l:tcs, or 39 ...l2ld3 40 Se 2 'itd7 (40...l2Jb4 41 
b7!) 41 .lixd8 'ixd8 42 .lid2 ctJb4 43 ctJxd4.
40 'it>f2??
Suicidal! As, however, was the naive 40 
b7?? l2le2+ 41 'it>f1 .txc7. I again cracked 
under the psychological 
pressure... 40 
:txes+! fxes 41 b7! would have been imme­
diately decisive. But the most annoying 
thing was that 40 'it>f1 would also have 
retained real winning chances - 40 ... ctJe2 41 
ix d 8  'it>xd8 42 .lid1 l2lg3+ 43 'if2  l2le4+ 44 
;;itf3 and .Uxd3.
40...d2! 41 Sxe5+ (alas, 41 l2lxd2 was bad 
because of 41...ctJd3+ and ...l2lxe1) 41...fxe5 
42 tt:Jxd2 l2ld3+ (42 ...ctJe6!?) 43 'it>e3 ltJc5! 44 
;.xe5 'it>d7 45 l2lf3 g,eS 46 'id4 l2lb3+ 47 
Sxd5 ltJxa5 48 .lif4 'it>c8 0-1
Nikitin: 'Garik manfully endured the blow 
of fate and, after signing the scoresheet, 
Nalked away in silence from the board. But
his composure did not last long - only asfar 
as the exit from the tournament hall. Here 
he went up to his mother, nestled up to her 
and quietly sobbed... After becoming a 
grandmaster, Garry was to gainfame as the 
best finisher - a player capable of winning 
any decisive game. But the first attempt 
proved a failure.'
Results of the 197 5 USSR Junior Champi­
onship: 1. Vladimirov - 71/2 out of 9; 2.  
Kengis and 3. V.Sokolov - 61/ 2; 4-6. Yurtaev, 
Yermolinsky and Gabdrakhmanov - 6; 7­
11. Weinstein, Dvoyris, Pekker, Magerramov 
and Dolmatov - 51/2 etc.
Taking into account my age, and the fact 
that I finished 7th on the tie-break, this was 
not a bad result for a debutant. On 24th 
February Leonard Barden, chess columnist 
for the Guardian newspaper, made the 
following forecast: 'Whatever happens to 
the world title in 1975, most experts predict 
that Karpov will be Fischer's successor - this 
year, in 1978, or in 1981. But who will be 
world champion after Karpov? In my opin­
ion there is a very clear favourite fo r world 
champion in 1990. He is 1 1 -year-old Garry 
Weinsteinfrom Baku, youngest player in the 
USSR junior championship and youngest 
candidate master since Karpov.' Barden was 
wrong by five years, but the very fact that 
he made such a forecast is worthy of note...
After the battles in Vilnius I returned to 
my school studies, where I was at the end of 
my 5th year, and to regular chess lessons. 
Twice, in February and May, I went to 
Dubna for sessions of the Botvinnik School.
Nikitin: ‘One spring day in 1975 into the 
Kasparovs' fla t walked Vladimir Andreevich 
Makogonov - one of the strongest Soviet 
masters of the pre-war period, a player with 
a subtle, “Rubinstein" style and a grandmas­
ter understanding of the game. He was 
already turned 70, and his meetings with
41

Garry Kasparov on Garry Kasparov: Part One
Garik were infrequent, but they continued 
fo r more than twoyears, to the end of 1977. 
They took the form of conversations, and I 
asked the boy to follow carefully the logic of 
the Master's thinking and his approach to 
the evaluation of individual moves and 
positions. 
These 
conversations 
were 
of 
invaluable benefit to Garik, they helped him 
to systemise his positional knowledge, and in 
time the Tartakower-Makogonov-Bondarev- 
sky Variation in the Queen's Gambit and the 
solid set-up with 4...Ji.f5 in the Caro-Kann 
became reliable weapons fo r him.' In Baku 
everyone learned the Caro-Kann from 
Makogonov's games! He was indeed a great 
master, an d I am grateful to fate that I was 
fortunate enough to have contact with him.
Early in July 1975 in Tbilisi the Baku Pio­
neers Palace team easily won the qualifying 
event for the final of the next ‘tournament 
of young hopes', and on top board I scored 
31/2 out of 4. And in the second half of July I 
made my debut in the junior championship 
of the all-union Spartak sports society.
This was an important moment: while 
retaining the right to play for the Pioneers 
Palace, I finally became a Spartak member, 
like my trainer in the republic's junior 
team, Alexander Shakarov (true, our indi­
vidual lessons began only a year later). My 
mother and I lived quite modestly, and it 
proved most opportune when Botvinnik 
and his friend, the prominent chess official 
Yakov Rokhlin, were able to 'procure' Spar­
tak food coupons for me, as well as a 
monthly stipend of 120 roubles. Nikitin: 
'Such support by the Teacher became in­
creasingly necessary with each new chess 
success by Garry, and each time it was 
timely and effective.'
That junior tournament took place in 
Peterhof, the famous suburb of Leningrad. 
The fourteen contestants were divided into
two all-play-all semi-finals, and the four 
winners of each went through into the 
final. Here the results of the semi-final 
games between them were carried forward, 
and after the four final rounds the overall 
scores 
were 
determined. 
Nikitin, 
who 
regarded this event as a preparation stage 
for future serious tournaments, asked me 
to try and avoid any set-backs and to finish 
in the first six.
Endeavouring to fulfil my trainer's objec­
tive, I became over-anxious and began with 
a loss, but I was able to take myself in hand 
and score three successive wins. But in the 
5th round I lost with White to the 16-year- 
old Kharkov player Mikhail Gurevich, in the 
future a grandmaster and one of my sec­
onds. And although I then defeated his 
contemporary, Leonid Yudasin from Lenin­
grad - also a future grandmaster, my 
starting position in the final eight was very 
modest - only 1 out of 3. Now everything 
would be decided by the games with the 
four players from the other semi-final.
My first opponent in the final, Boris 
Kantsler from Kirgizia, was just a year older 
than me and was reputed to be a promising 
young player. A few years later he was the 
winner (1979) and a prize-winner (1980) in 
the USSR Junior Championship, but later 
his chess development slowed sharply, his 
family emigrated to Israel - and at the very 
end of the century Boris nevertheless 
became a grandmaster!
Gom e 9 
G .W ei n stein -B .K an tsler
Sp artak Junior C ham pio nship, 
7th round, Peterhof 27.07.1975 
King's Indian A ttack AO8
1 e4 e6 2 d3
42

Baku Universities
After looking 
at Fischer's victorious 
games, for this tournament I prepared the 
King's Indian Attack and I successfully 
employed it in the 3rd round, but in the 5th 
Mikhail Gurevich obtained a comfortable 
game after 1 .!t:Jf3 ds 2 g3 cs 3 .lig2 e6 4 0-0 
l,d6 5 d3 lt:Je7 6 e4 lt:Jc6 7 Se1 Wc7?! 
(7...0-0) 8 tt:Jbd2?! (8 exds!) 8...0-0 9 b3 f6 10 
.lib2 d4 11 a4 es. I also did not achieve 
anything in a simultaneous game with 
Polugayevsky: 1 e4 cs 2 .!t:Jf3 e6 3 d3 d5 4 
::Jbd2 tt:Jc6 5 g3 ' d6 6 L g2 tt:Jge7 7 0-0 0-0
8 Se1 ic 7  9 We2 b6, etc.
‘I called this way of playing the opening 
with White “a set-up for a lazy-bones". 
Soon it found its way on to the list I com­
piled of set-ups which were temporarily 
forbidden, and against the French Garik 
had to switch to the more active 2 d4.' 
(Nikitin)
2 ...d5 3 tt:Jd2 c5 4 g3 tt:Jc6 5 .lig2
5 ...g 6
With this set-up Kantsler surprised me - 
did not know its subtleties and was ex- 
'Jecting only the popular s..tt:Jf6 6 tt:Jgf3 
_ie7 (an example: Fischer-Miagmarsuren, 
Sousse Interzonal 1967).
6 tt:Jgf3 .i.g7 7 0-0 tt:Jge7 8 l:te1 0-0 9 We2?!
The immediate 9 e5 is more popular, and 
only if 9...^c7 - 10 We2 with double-edged
play after 10...bs(b6), 10...as or 10...gs!?.
9... b5 10 e5 a5 (as a result, Black has gained 
a tempo for his thematic offensive on the 
queenside) 11 .!t:Jf1 .lia6 12 h4 b4 13 .!t:J1h2 
(2) 13 ...h6!
The key idea of the defence - otherwise 
..tgs and lt:Jg4. Here I felt rather dismayed, 
since I did not see how to breach the oppo­
nent's fortress.
14 .i.f4 'it>h7
15 .lih3?! (3)
A dubious undertaking: control over the 
fs-square is of no use. 15 tt:lg4 tt:Jfs 16 Wd2 
with the idea of h4-h 5 was correct, in order 
after ...g6-g5 (although in fact this is not 
obligatory) to sacrifice the knight on g5.
15...c4 16 'ig 2 (3) 16. ..tt:Jf5 17 .lixf5?! (2) 
Risky, but at the least consistent - eve­
rywhere Black has a comfortable game.
17. ..gxf5 (17. ...exfs!?) 18 g4!
White has to continue in the same vein. 
‘Garik remembered his game with Yer- 
molinsky and the jocular nickname "g4". 
But the deliberate making of such moves is 
an indicator of the boy's precociously 
mature thinking.' (Nikitin)
18...fxg4?
Releasing the ‘animal' from the cage - 
strangely enough, this is already the deci­
sive mistake. Black had several good replies,
43

Garry Kasparov on Garry Kasparov: Part One
in particular 18. ..cxd3 19 cxd3 d4 or first
18 ... tt:Je7 with the intention of ...cxd3, ...d5- 
d4 and play on the long light-square diago­
nal.
19 tt:Jxg4 
(building 
up the 
pressure)
19...tt:Je7
19...cxd3! was far more resilient: 20 cxd3 
(20 Wd2?! h5!) 20. ..tt:Je7, and in the event of 
21 .lig5!! hxg5 22 hxg5 - not 22 ...Sh8 23 
tt:Jf6+! (as in the game), but 22...tt:Jg6! with 
the pretty idea 23 tt:Jf6+ .ltxf6 24 .l:th1+ 'ig8
25 gxf6 tt:Jf4+ 26 'if1  i.xd3!, forcing 27 
fig1+ with perpetual check. But here too 
after the computer variation 23 Wd2! j_h8!
24 .l:th1+! (if 24 tt:Jf6+ 'ig7, then ...Sg8 and 
...<4>f8) 24...'ig7 25 l:th6! .lixd3! 26 flah1 Sg8
27 tt:Jh4! Sc8 28 tt:Jxg6 ; e4+! 29 f3 jLxg6 30 
'iVf4 itf5 31 lZJe3 .i.g6 32 b3! or 30. ..Sc4 31 
'¥Wf6+ '¥Wxf6 32 exf6+ f
 33 l:txh8 Black's 
problems are too great.
It only remained to play 20...tt:Jf5, and 
White's attack would die out after hardly 
managing to begin ...
20 .ltg5!! (18)
A sudden, purely intuitive bishop sacri­
fice. Of course, I did not see all its conse­
quences, but I sensed that White should be 
alright: his pieces are so well placed! At that 
time I did not yet realise that most of my 
opponents had a different attitude to
material. And Kantsler probably believed 
that with his extra piece Black would 
somehow be able to defend himself.
20...hxg5
A difficult choice. White also has a terri­
bly strong attack after 20...Sg8 21 'ih3! 
followed by jLf6 and Sg1, or 20. . .cxd3 (alas, 
too late) 21 '¥Wd2! hxg5 (21...Sh8 22 ..if6! or 
21 ...dxc2 22 Wxc2+ <4>g8 23 d 6 ! is also 
insufficient) 22 hxg5 .l:th8 (22...tt:Jf5 23 cxd3)
23 tt:Jf6+! 'ig6 24 Sh1, and Black has no 
defence.
21 hxg5 Sh8
This loses by force, as does 21...tt:Jg6 22 
tt:Jf6+! jLxf6 23 Sh1+! 'ig 8  24 gxf6 tt:Jf4+ 25 
<4>f1 tt:Jxe2 26 'ixe2 or 25- ..cxd3 26 '¥Wd2(e3) 
with un avoidable mate. However, it would 
also not have helped to play 21 ...cxd3 22 
'¥Wd2! (cf. the previous note), or 21 ...i.h8 22 
flh1+ 'ig 7  23 tt:Jd4 tt:Jg6 (23. ...l:tg8 24 '¥Wf3) 24 
We3! or 22 '¥Wf1!? tt:Jf5 23 '¥Wh1+ 'ig 6  24'¥Wh3 
flg8 (24 ... .lig7 25 tt:Jf6) 25 .l:th1 'ig 7 26 tt:Jf6 
and wins.
22 tt:Jf6+! 'ig6
It turns out that 22... ;, xf6 is not possible 
because of 23 Sh1+! 'ig 8 24 gxf6 tt:Jg6 25 
flxh8+ 'ixh 8  26 Sh1+ 'ig 8  27 We3 f
 28 
tt:Jg5 or 27...'if8 28 tt:Jh4! with crushing 
threats.
23 Sh1! tt:Jf5 (nothing would have been
44

Baku Universities
changed by 23 ...cxd3 24 cxd3 ct:Jf5 25 .l:lxh8 
g_('iW)xh8 26 Sh1) 24 Sxh8 .i.xh8 25 CDd4!?
25 
Sh1! was simpler. However, I picked 
up the knight on f3, in order to play 25 
-'Dh4+(?), but at the last moment I saw that 
Black would capture the knight with check!
I was forced to sacrifice it on d4...
25...ct:Jxd4 (if 25....lixf6 26 gxf6 CDh6 White 
decides matters with 27 Sg1 or 27 Sh1 'i'g8
28 M.g1) 26 'i'h5+ 'it>f5
The black king goes for its last walk.
27 g6+ (2)
This is not only the shortest, but also the 
most spectacular way to the goal.
27...'if4 28 S e ll k x f6  29 f3!
Threatening li'g4 mate. A pretty combi­
nation with the sacrifice ofthree pieces and 
lethal quiet moves! This conducting of the 
enemy king into my own camp was un­
doubtedly a prototype for my game with 
Topalov (Wijk aan Zee 1999).
29...ct:Jxf3 30 Wxf3+ (4) 30...'ig5 31 'i'g3+ 
(alas, I did not see the mating 31 Ilh1!)
31...'ih5?
Nevertheless blundering into a mate. 
However, 31 ...'it>h6 32 exf6 'ixf6  33 l:!.h1+ 
Sg7 34 M.h7+ 'ig8 35 Sxf7 'il'xf7 36 gxf7+ 
Sxf7 37 'i'c7+ 'it>f6 38 Wc6! Ia 7  39 'Vib6 
!a 8  40 'it>f2 cxd3 41 cxd3 etc. would also 
have been hopeless.
32 exf6
And in view of 32...Wxf6 33 Sh1+ Black 
resigned (1-0). Times: 0.50-0.42.
After this I scored a further 2 out of 3, 
beating the Leningrad player Yuneev and at 
the finish drawing with Black against the 
leader - Desyatkov from Kurgan, a strong 
candidate master, who, however, did not 
break through to the USSR Junior Champi­
onships (in Russia the qualifying tourna­
ments were incredibly tough). The results 
of the Spartak championship: 1. Desyatkov
- 51/2 out of 7; 2-4. Weinstein, Yuneev and 
M.Gurevich - 4 etc. On the tie-break I was 
placed second, and everyone considered 
this a great success.
This tournament was the last in which I 
played under the surname Weinstein. In 
August 1975, at a family council of the 
Weinsteins and Kasparovs, it was decided 
that I should take the surname of my 
mother, which she had not changed when 
she married. It seemed natural to become a 
Kasparov: for nearly five years I had been 
brought up in my mother's family, and had 
grown up under the care of my grandfather 
Shagen, who had no sons. But the real 
implication of what happened was revealed 
to me much later.
Nikitin: 'Changing surname is a delicate 
process. While normal with women, it very 
rarely occurs with men and only, as a rule, 
when it is obligatory. The main burden in 
the fight to carry out the juridical formali­
ties and, more important, to convince all the 
relatives andfriends of the correctness of the 
decision, fell on Garik's mother. How many 
unpleasant hours Klara had to endure, how 
many tears were shed... A year before that, 
with Botvinnik's agreement, I began insis­
tently trying to convince her of the need to 
change her son's surname. I had no doubts
45

Garry Kasparov on Garry Kasparov: Part One
about the boy’s brilliant chess future. From 
my work in the USSR Sports Committee I 
knew what inexplicable problems, not at all 
to do with chess, could suddenly be encoun­
tered by a youth with an "incorrect" sur­
name, and how his sports career could be 
imperceptibly hindered or even altogether 
ruined. My fears were justified: much has 
now been written about the latent anti­
Semitism, especially in the upper echelons of 
Soviet power. (I should remind you: in those 
times diplomatic relations with Israel were 
broken off and there was a mass emigra­
tion of Jews from the USSR - G.K.) I am 
convinced that Garry Weinstein would not 
have got through to a world championship 
match with Anatoly Karpov either in 1984, 
or in 1987. They would not have allowed it. 
He would have been eliminated at the 
distant approaches. At that time the system 
worked meticulously. ’
When in 1989, as three-times world 
champion and winner of the World Cup, I 
overtook Fischer's old rating record and 
reached the 2800 mark for the first time in 
history, Tal made one of his unforgettable 
jokes: 'Garry is playing so well, that now he 
can calmly perform under his previous 
surname!'
I carefully carried the memory of my fa­
ther through all the turbulent years, and I 
am absolutely sure that the Garry Kasparov, 
who became leader of the chess world, 
professed 
the 
same 
values 
as 
Garik 
Weinstein, who once, following the example 
of his father, became fascinated by chess...
In October 1975, appearing for the first 
time under the surname Kasparov, I also 
achieved my first success among adults: in 
Baku I won the 'City Cup', a knock-out 
tournament with a shortened time control
- an hour each for the entire game. At that 
time, on the initiative of David Bronstein,
rapid chess had become fashionable (but it 
soon died away; its time had not yet come).
There were 128 contestants: the strong­
est first category players, candidate mas­
ters, 
and 
one 
master 
- 
the 
highly- 
experienced Oleg Pavlenko, the No.2 in the 
republic team. His entry for the tourna­
ment was a surprise, and many thought the 
question of 1st place was already decided. 
The players met in mini-matches of two 
games: in the event of 1-1, two additional 
five-minute games were played. But I did 
not need these: all my matches, and there 
were seven (the tournament lasted exactly 
a week), I won by 11/ 2-1/2 or 2-0.
The culmination of the race was the final 
match 
with 
Pavlenko. 
My 
33-year-old 
opponent was a heavily-built man, and 
compared with me he was a genuinely ‘big 
chess player' (only Bagirov was taller than 
him). In addition, during the game he 
smoked incessantly - one cigarette after 
another. And in the 1st game I had to 
employ a ‘prepared variation': as soon as 
my opponent sat down at the board and, 
after making a couple of moves, lit up, I 
immediately took from my pocket some 
chewing-gum, removed its wrapper, shoved 
it in my mouth and began vigorously 
chewing! I think that this made an impres­
sion on the master: he had not expected 
such impudence from a youngster. At any 
event, this entire game, which proved to be 
decisive, Pavlenko conducted at blitz speed.
G am e 10 
O .P avlenko -G .W einstein
'C ity Cup' Final, Baku, 1st gam e, 
O ctober 1975 
K in g ’s Indian Defence £71
1 d4 ct:Jf6 2 c4 g6 3 C£Jc3 gg7 4 e4 d6
46

Baku Universities
This was the first year of my employing 
the King's Indian (beginning with Game 
No.4).
5 h3
A rare variation, but a popular one in 
Baku: this is what Makogonov himself 
played! Before this at a session of the 
Botvinnik School (Dubna 1975) Yusupov 
chose against me 5 t'Llf3 0-0 6 j(_e2 e5 7 d5 
and after 7...t'Llbd7 8 0-0 t'Llc5 9 Wc2 a5 10 
i.g5 h6 11 .lie3 tt:lh5 12 g3 .lih3 13 Sfe 1 
t'Lld7?! 14 C'tJd2 f5? 15 exf5 .lixf5 16 t'Llde4? 
(16 'iVd1 !) 16...t'Lldf6 17 f3 Wd7 18 c5 g5? 
(18...t'Llxe4 19 tt:lxe4 t'Llf6 is equal) 19 i.d3 
(19 #b3!) 19...t'Llxe4 20 t'Llxe4 g4?! (20. ..tt:lf6!)
21 fxg4 ..ixg4 22 Hac1 he gained an obvi­
ous advantage. But here I recklessly sacri­
ficed my knight - 22...CLlf4? 23 gxf4 exf4 24 
c6! bxc6 25 dxc6 'ic8, and my opponent 
faltered: 26 tilxd6? (26 .lid2! .lif3 27 .lic4+! 
'it>h8 28 t'Llf2 was correct, when White wins)
26...cxd6 27 'i'c4+ (27 .lib6!? .lif3!) 27....lie6
28 'i'e4 .lif5 (28....l:r.f7! with equality) 29 
Wd5+ (29 .lic4+!? 'lt>h8 30 Wxf4 was slightly 
better) 29 ....lie6 30 We4 - draw!
Botvinnik was unhappy with my play: it 
reminded him of his ill-starred game with 
Tal (6th match game, Moscow 1960), where 
out of nothing with ...t'Llh5-f4 Black also 
placed his knight en prise to the g3-pawn
(Game No.128 in Volume II of My Great 
Predecessors). My teacher strictly told me 
that I needed to study the heritage of the 
‘King's Indian classics' - Boleslavsky, Bron- 
stein, Geller, Gligoric, Petrosian, Fischer, 
Stein... And when I arrived home, from all 
possible sources I began copying model 
games into a special notebook, and later I 
looked at them. I also kept up with official 
theory. I tested variations in practice, and I 
gradually accumulated King's Indian ex­
perience.
5—0-0 6 i e3 e5 7 d5 t'Llh5?!
I did not yet know the finer points of this 
variation; I simply wanted to avoid the 
typical bind with g2-g4 and to carry out 
...f7-f5 at any price.
8 .lie2 (after 8 g3 Gerusel-Bukic, West 
Germany v. Yugoslavia 1973, went 8 ... a5 9 
.lie2 tt:la6!? 10 .lixh5 gxh5 11 'ixh 5  f5 with 
compensation for the pawn) 8...f5?!
Now this sacrifice is incorrect. After
8...tilf4 9 .lif3 f5 10 g3 fxe4 11 tt:lxe4 White 
has only a minimal advantage.
9 .lixh5?! (Pavlenko played this without 
thinking, although more was promised by 9 
exf5! tt:lf4 10 .lixf4 exf4 11 fxg6, then tilf3 
and 0-0) 9...gxh5 10 Wxh5 f4 (10...t'Lla6 11 
.i.g5) 11 .lid2 tt:ld7 12 0-0-0 t'Llf6 (12...a6! 
and ...b7-b5) 13 'i'e2 'it'e8
47

Garry Kasparov on Garry Kasparov: Part One
Again a non-essential move; 13. ..c6!? or
13 ... a6!? was more interesting.
14 'Llf3 C5?! (reducing the opportunities for 
counterplay; the immediate 14...a6 was 
better) 15 Wbl?!
Typical rapid chess: this merely deprives 
the knight of the b1-square and presents 
Black with an important tempo. 15 Shg1 a6
16 g3! would have given an appreciable 
advantage.
15...a6! (at last!) 16 g4?! ..id7?! (an ex­
change of mistakes: 16...fxg3! and ...b7-b5 
was correct, when Black succeeds in creat­
ing counter-chances) 17 'Llh4 b5 18 'Llf5?
An unexpected blunder of a piece - in­
stead of the promising 18 Sdg1! and 'Llf5.
18 ... b4 (at the sight of this move Pavlenko 
flinched) 19 ct:Jxd6 We7 20 'Llf5 .i.xf5 21 
exf5?! (White is rattled; 21 gxf5! bxc3 22 
..ixc3 was stronger) 21...bxc3 22 .i.xc3 
'Lld7?!
22...'Lle8! was more accurate. Now White 
has good compensation for the piece.
23 d6 (White could have managed without 
this move) 23...Wf7 24 f3 (24 Bhe1!?)
24....Mab8 25 l:td5?
Another slip - and this time the decisive 
mistake. 25 b3 would have maintained the 
balance.
25...ctJb6 26 l:thdl (desperation: 26 .Md3
ct:Jxc4 or 26 Bdd1 'Lla4!) 26. ..'Llxd5
The immediate 26...e4!? would also have 
won: 27 .i.xg7 Wxg7 28 f6 .Mxf6! 29 Wxe4 
'Llxd5 30 1/Vxd5+ 'ith8.
27 .Mxd5
27...e4! 28 f6 (or 28 ii.xg7 exf3 29 Wxf3 
11Vxg7 30 b3 .Mbe8) 28....lixf6 29 Hf5 .i.xc3
30 l:txf7 .Mxb2+ 3111Vxb2 i.xb 2 32 l:te7 (after 
32 Bxf8+ 'itxf8 33 'itxb2 exf3 the black 
pawn queens) 32...exf3 33 .Mel f2 34 .Mfl 
.i.d4 0-1
In the 2nd game there was quite a lively 
battle; I tried to play as solidly as possible, 
but in a completely drawn endgame I 
suddenly blundered a piece! However, in 
his haste Pavlenko missed a win - it was 
obviously not his day. I remember not only 
my opponent's grief, but also the reaction 
of the crowd of fans: they were as though 
benumbed - no one could believe in the 
sensational defeat of the local maestro.
A few days later the Moscow weekly 64 
published an article about the Baku Cup by 
the well-known chess arbiter Vladimir 
Dvorkovich: 
‘...The 
tournament 
created
great interest among Baku chessfans. Seven 
candidate masters and the master Oleg 
Pavlenko reached the quarterfinals, and in 
the final the higher-titled player met 12-
48

Baku Universities
year-old Garry Kasparov (earlier we knew 
him as Weinstein, but he now uses his 
mother's surname). A sharp battle ended in 
victory fo r the 6th class pupil by I / 2-/2. 
Within two weeks the young holder of the 
Baku Cup will be leading the Pioneers Palace 
team of the Azerbaijan capital in the all­
union tournament fo r the prize of the 
Komsomolskaya pravda newspaper.'
M eetings w ith  th e G reats
My first chess idol was Boris Spassky. It was 
in 1969, when I was beginning to play 
chess, that he became world champion, and 
my dad was one of his fans. The match 
collection 
Petrosian-Spassky 
1969 
with 
excellent commentaries by the players' 
seconds, Boleslavsky and Bondarevsky, was 
my first chess book. Apparently, this was a 
sign of fate: its special editor was - Alexan­
der Nikitin! But when in 1972 Spassky lost 
the match in Reykjavik, my interest in him 
cooled - and I developed a childish admira­
tion for Bobby Fischer (however, at that 
time who didn't admire him!). And when I 
began studying chess seriously, my idols 
became Alekhine and Tal, whose play 
excited the imagination. My favourite chess 
reading was a book about Tal and Petrosian 
by Viktor Vasiliev, and a simultaneous 
game with Tal in the spring of 1974 was 
one of the most memorable events of my 
childhood.
I keenly followed the sharp rivalry of the 
young Karpov with the 'old hand' Korchnoi
- first in the Interzonal Tournament (1973), 
and then in the final Candidates match 
(1974). And the 21st game of this match 
was one that I even saw live: I was passing 
through Moscow, returning home from a 
session of the Botvinnik School, and Nikitin 
took me with him to the game. For the first 
time in my life I became absorbed in the
amazing match atmosphere - that reveren­
tial quiet in the hall, occasionally broken 
first by murmurs of delight, and then of 
disappointment; to the seething of the 
press centre, where my trainer took me to 
'look at the thinking giants'. Then he took 
me back to the hall and left me there. 
Staring at the enormous demonstration 
board, I was stupefied: Korchnoi had a 
winning sacrifice! While the grandmaster 
was considering his 13th move, Nikitin 
returned. I whispered to him: ‘Knight h7!' 
And he replied only ‘Y-yes... ' Obviously 
others had also noticed this: the spectators 
became animated. Korchnoi played this - 
and won quickly. This first, brief encounter 
with top-level chess left an indelible im­
pression on me. Of course, I did not yet 
imagine that within a year I would be 
meeting both stars at the board. ..
This happened in November 1975 in Len­
ingrad, at the final tournament of the 
Pioneers Palaces. The line-up of the Baku 
team had changed significantly: Korsunsky 
and Magerramov were now too old, and of 
the ‘old-timers' in the seven, only myself 
and Elena Glaz remained. The line-up of the 
captains giving the simuls' was also half 
renewed: among them now were Smyslov, 
Karpov and Korchnoi!
Although I was already playing much 
more strongly than in the previous such 
tournament, I again began with a loss to an 
ex-world champion - the imperturbable 
Vasily Smyslov. And I was terribly upset, 
since first I squandered an advantage, and 
then in one move (26 tt:d4? instead of 26 
tLlg3!) I lost an equal position. The next day I 
gained an enormous advantage with Black 
against the Alma-Ata master Boris Kataly- 
mov, but I ‘did everything' to avoid win­
ning. By the time that the game was ad­
journed my opponent appeared to have
49

Garry Kasparov on Garry Kasparov: Part One
some saving chances, but I was neverthe­
less awarded a win on adjudication.
In the 3rd-round match against the Kuy- 
byshev team I had an interesting game 
with Lev Polugayevsky. From the opening I 
did not achieve anything (cf. Game No.9, 
note to White's 2nd move), but I was able to 
initiate tactical complications. Thinking 
over his 14th move, the grandmaster sat 
down at my board - and 'went to sleep' for
40 minutes! As a result - a rare occurrence 
in a simul' - his clock was going on all 
seven boards! Usually the simultaneous 
player does not allow this, but Polugayevsky 
was trying to solve a difficult problem: it 
turned out that the reply he had been 
intending would have lost a piece. In the 
end he found the only way of maintaining 
the balance and on the 26th move he 
offered a draw. I agreed, not seeing any real 
chances of success in a slightly better 
endgame. Polugayevsky breathed a sigh of 
relief - and won all the remaining games!
In the 4th round I finally made the ac­
quaintance of Anatoly Karpov, who was 
performing the role of captain of the Chely­
abinsk team. He was 24 years old, and not 
long before he had inherited from Fischer 
the title of world champion. Even so, the first 
meeting with Karpov did not provoke in me 
the same trepidation, as in the previous 
year's game with Tal. But the other lads in 
the team were nervous and they went along 
to the game as though they were already 
lost. In the foyer of the hotel, where the 
tournament was being held, I said: 'What 
are you afraid of? Karpov is the world cham­
pion, but even he can make a mistake.' 
Apparently these words were overheard, and 
the following day one of Karpov's backers, 
the secretary of the local regional party 
committee, Tupikin, said to my mother: 
‘Bear it in mind: Karpov is unforgiving.'
In its report on this round Soviet Sport 
wrote: ‘During Anatoly Karpov's simul' with 
the juniorsfrom  Baku there came a moment 
when the world champion was left with only 
one opponent - 12-year-old candidate 
master Garik Kasparov. Karpov sat down 
opposite the young player and, naturally, 
the photographers did not miss this mo­
ment. The point is that Garik is one of our 
most talented young players, and who 
knows, perhaps sometime in thefuture there 
will be another Karpov-Kasparov encoun­
ter. ..'
Who could then have imagined that 
years later, over a period of six years, we 
would have to play some hundred and fifty 
games against each other and spend more 
than 600 hours at the board?!
G am e 11 
A .K arp o v-G .K asp aro v
To urn am ent o f Pioneers Palaces, 
4th round, Leningrad 8.11.1975 
Sicilian Defence 892
1 e4 c5 2 tt:f3 d6 3 d4 cxd4 4 tt:xd4 tt:f6 5 
tt:c3 a6
I think this was the first time I played the 
Najdorf Variation. Before the game Nikitin 
showed me the latest subtleties of the 
Polugayevsky Variation: after 6 i!.g5 e6 7 f4 
bs!? 8 e5 dxe5 9 fxe5 WlO 10 We2 tt:fd7 11 
0-0-0 
b7 12 W/g4 one should play not
12 ...W/xe5, but 12 ...Wib6. I remember that I 
tried to find out from my trainer: 'But what 
about this, and what about that?' And he 
said to me: 'Work it out at the board!' 
However, Karpov chose his favourite 6th 
move...
6 .lie2 e5 7 tt:b3 .fi.e7 8 .ig 5
Although this move was occasionally 
employed by Fischer and Tal, it offers fewer
50

Baku Universities
chances than the usual 8 o-o. But here
8...Ji.e6 9 f4 would have led to a well-known 
position 
from 
the 
recent 
Karpov- 
Polugayevsky Candidates match (1974). 
And the champion did that which simulta­
neous players always do: he tried to deviate 
and take me away from my home prepara­
tion.
B... .lie6 (4)
Earlier 8. ..t2ibd7 9 a4! was in fashion 
(Fischer-Olafsson, Reykjavik 1960; Karpov- 
Balashov, 38th U5SR Championship, Riga 
1970).
9f4
In the aforementioned match Karpov 
played this with his bishop on c1, and in the 
event of 9... exf4 he would have gained an 
important tempo for development. And 
after 9...:'filc7 he used the tempo saved to 
squeeze Black on the queenside - 10 a4 
(Game Nos.54, 56, 57 in Volume V of My 
Great Predecessors). Now, however, Black is 
forced to capture on f4, and Karpov could 
have hoped that I would complicate mat­
ters unnecessarily, when he would be able 
to outplay me, even a tempo down.
Firm control over the d5-point - 9 o-o o-o
10 .lixf6 .lixf6 11 Wd3 (after 11 4Jd5 Petro­
sian and Fischer replied 11 ...4Jd7!?) 11 ...4Jc6
12 4Jd5 - leads to a roughly equal position
in the spirit of the Chelyabinsk Variation:
12....11g5 and ...4:le7 (a manoeuvre, known 
from the game Taimanov-Boleslavsky, 17th 
U55R Championship, Moscow 1949), or first
12...fic8 - as Tal played against K.Grigorian 
(39th U55R Championship, Leningrad 1971) 
and Hubner (Tilburg 1980).
9 .lixf6 is of more current interest:
9....11xf6 10 Wd3 4Jc6 (1o. ...lie7 11 o-o-o t2id7 
is also played) 11 o-o-o! (but not 11 4Jd5 
Ji.g5 
12 
o-o?! 4:le7! Arnason-Kasparov, 
Dortmund 1980) 11 . ..4Jd4 12 4Jxd4 exd4 13 
4Jd5 .lixd5 14 exd5 o-o, or 11 ....; ■
 e7!? 12 
'ib 1 o-o 13 4Jd5 .Jtg5 14 h4!? .lixh4 15 g3 
; f6 with sharp play (Kramnik-Anand, Wijk 
aan Zee 2004). This line has now acquired a 
large amount of practice.
9... 
exf4 10 .lixf4 (thus, Karpov has carried 
out the first part ofhis plan) 10. ..4Jc6 110-0 
0-0 12 'it>h1
In the variation with 8 o-o this move 
would already have been made, and White 
would retain chances of seizing the initia­
tive by 12 We1.
Ironically, a position has been reached 
from the very line of the Neo-Scheveningen
- 1 e4 c5 2 t2if3 e6 3 d4 cxd4 4 4Jxd4 ttJc6 5 
4Jc3 d6 6 .lie2 4Jf6 7 o-o .lie7 8 /. e3 o-o 9 f4 
e5!? 10 ttJb3 exf4 11 .lixf4 .lie6 12 \t>h1 - 
which later I was intending to play against
51

Garry Kasparov on Garry Kasparov: Part One
Karpov in our first two matches (1984/85 
and 1985). only here Black has played the 
additional move ... a7-a6, giving him an 
interesting possibility apart from 12... d5.
12...b5!? (2)
An active 'Sicilian' thrust (incidentally, it 
did not occur any more in practice), al­
though perhaps it would, nevertheless, 
have been better to maintain the balance 
with the typical 12...d5 13 e5 tbe4 14 i.d3 
f5 or 13...tbd7 14 ttJxd5 tbdxe5. In the Neo- 
Scheveningen, with the pawn on a7, these 
positions are problematic even today (cf. 
Revolution in the 70s p.151).
13 i.f3?!
After conceiving the rook manoeuvre via 
f2-d2, Karpov clears the necessary space for 
it. However, for the moment there is noth­
ing for the bishop to do on f3, and the 
inactive knight should have been immedi­
ately brought into play - 13 tbd4!. The 
exchange 13 ...tbxd4 14 '&xd4 gives White 
some advantage in the centre, while after
13 ...tbe5 both 14 a4 b4 15 tbd5 i.xd5 16 
exd5 Wd7 17 i.f3  and 14 tbf5 are possible.
13 ...tbe5 (now there is a much more point 
to this move) 14 tbd4 .lic4 (9) 15 i4f2?1 
The start of a standard manoeuvre, but 
in the given instance it proves unsuccess­
ful: the rook will not find any work on d2,
and the coordination of the rooks is dis­
rupted. 15 .Ue1 would have retained equal 
chances - it looks more passive, but in 
variations similar to those in the game the 
rook is obviously better placed. Thus, it was 
not I who complicated matters unnecessar­
ily, but Karpov...
15...b4! (10) 16 tbd5 tbxd5 17 exd5 i .f 6 18
.l:td2
Despite the weakness of the c6-square, 
Black feels very comfortable, and White 
already has to think about how to equalise.
18 tbc6!? came into consideration, and if
18...'ib6 the sharp exchange sacrifice 19
i.xe5 Wxf2 20 i..xd6 1Ife8 21 i.g3 'tic5 22 
d6 i.b5 23 'id5. It is safer to play 19...i.xe5
20 tbxe5 dxe5 21 .l:i.d2 (21 W1'e1 f5) 21...'ir'd6, 
blocking the passed d-pawn and planning 
... f7-f5, ...e5-e4 and so on. Objectively here 
too Black's chances are better.
18...^b6 (I did not even consider 18...tL\xf3: 
it is too early to exchange such a strong 
knight!) 19 "e3
19...'ic7! (2)
‘The position is a tense one, and at any 
moment a combinative explosion may 
occur. Great complications would have 
resulted from 19 ...iYb7 20 tbf5 tbxf3 21 
Wxf3 ..txb2 22 Sb1 i.c3 23 i.d 4  .1Lxd2 24 
.lixg7 f6 25 Wg4 .lig5', wrote Viktor Khen-
52

Baku Universities
kin. It is easy to see that after 26 .lixf8! flxf8 
(26....lixa2 27 :!.xb4; 26 ....lixd5 27 .lixd6) 27 
#xc4 White has an overwhelming advan­
tage: 27 ...#'d7 28 'ig 4  Wh8 29 .:.xb4 etc. 
Therefore 25. ..!:tf7! is correct, not fearing 
the discovered check. And if 25 'i¥g3 both
25 ...flf7 and 25 ...Wd7 are possible - every­
where White has no more than a draw.
But why provoke the dangerous knight 
leap to f5? With the queen on c7 it clearly 
does not work (the d6-pawn is defended) 
and Black continues to build up his initia­
tive.
20 .lie4
White's problems would not have been 
solved by 20 b3 .lib5 21 .lie2 (after 21 tt:Jxb5 
axb5 Black also has pressure on the a-file)
21....lid7 22 a3 'li'c3 23 #'g1 bxa3 (23...a5!?)
24 Hxa3 Bfe8 - the powerful knight on e5 
and the weaknesses in the enemy position 
give Black the advantage (although it is 
unclear how great it is).
20. .J:f.fe8 (it becomes uncomfortable for the 
white bishops on the e-file) 21 .lig l
If 21 b3?!, then 21... ; b5 is again good, 
but it is also possible to play 21...tt:Jg6 22 
J,.,xg6 (22 '/jVf3 ttlh4) 22...hxg6 23 '/jVf3, when 
3lack has a pleasant choice between
23 ....lib5 24 .lif2 .lid7 25 Sad1 Sac8,
23....lixd5 24 Wxd5 'ic3  and 23. .. xb3 24
cxb3 Wc3, in every case with the better 
chances. Now he is again at a cross-roads.
21...g6 (4)
A logical move, killing White's counter­
play on the kingside. Black prepares ... .lig7 
and ...f7-f5, and at the same time 22 ....lig5
23 lf 2  .lie3 is threatened. It also looks quite 
good to play 21. . .a5 22 a3 (Khenkin's rec­
ommendation 22 Sf2 is worse in view of
22. ..tt:Jg6!) 22. ...lia6 23 Sf2 ttld7, or immedi­
ately 21. ..tt:Jd7 with the intention of ...tt:Jb6, 
attacking the d5-pawn.
In either case Black continues to exert 
appreciable pressure on the opponent's 
centre and queenside.
22 a3?!
White needs to do something, and Kar­
pov sacrifices the exchange. 22 b3 ,b5 is 
more solid. Now in the event of the gambit 
move 23 a3?! .1 g5 24 l:tf2 (24 axb4 'ic3!) 
24. . ..lie3 25 axb4 (25 Sf6 ttld7!) 25. .. i. xf2 26 
.lixf2 'ilfc3! 27 'ie 1 (27 g3 ttlg4) 27. ..'i¥c8 the 
compensation for the exchange is insuffi­
cient and Black has every chance of win­
ning: 28 tt:Jxb5 (28 c4 ttld3!) 28...axb5 29 
flxa8 #xa8, or 28 'i¥d2 tt:Jg4 29 .lif3 tt:Jxf2+
30 Wxf2 Wc3 etc. There only remains 23 a4 
.lid7 or 23 tt:Jxb5 axb5 
24 
d4 ttld7 
(24....lig7!?), 
when 
White's 
position 
is 
inferior with the material equal.
53

Carry Kasparov on Carry Kasparov: Part One
22...a5?! (6)
When you are playing the world cham­
pion for the first time it is no great sin to 
fear the complications after the strongest 
continuation 22 ....lig5! 23 Sf2 .lie3! (but 
not 23. ..bxa3 24 b3 .lib5 25 c4!), which 
enables the exchange to be won without 
any particular compensation for White: 24 
axb4 (24 2f6 'iVe7!) 24. ...lixf2 25 .ix f 2 f5 26
ii.f3 lt:Jxf3 27 'iVxf3 'iVb7 28 lt:Jc6 .Me4 or 24 
b3 .lixf2 25 .lixf2 .lib5 26 axb4 'iVc3! (cf. the 
variation from the previous note).
Now, however, 
Black's advantage is 
greatly reduced, although the initiative is 
still on his side.
23 axb4 axb4 24 Sxa8 &xa8 25 b3 i.a 6  26
ct:Jc6 ct:Jxc6?! (18)
I was carried away by the idea of invad­
ing with my rook on the e-file, but this 
exchange is fundamentally incorrect, since 
it activates the enemy rook on d2, which 
hitherto has been trying in vain to find 
work for itself. 26. ...lib5! would have re­
tained the better chances for Black, for 
example: 27 Si.d4 .ig 5 28 l:tf2 ct:Jxc6 29 dxc6 
.ixc6 30 'iVf3 2e8! 31 .lixc6 l:.e1+ 32 2f1 
2xf1+ 33 'ix f1  Wxc6 with an extra pawn, or
27 lt:Jd4 .lid7 28 ct:Jc6 .lig7 (28...ctJg4!?).
27 dxc6 (attacking the d6-pawn)
27...&e8?
‘And this is already a mistake - Black 
tries for too much. The rook on the a-file 
was coordinating 
excellently with the 
bishop on f6, and all he needed was to give 
it scope by 27...) b5, after which it would 
not have been easy for White to guard the 
1st rank and simultaneously maintain his 
c6-pawn. Even so, after 28 i.d 4  (28 1i'f3 
.lic3) he would have gained a draw:
28 ....lixd4 29 2xd4 .ixc6 30 2xb4 (30 2c4? 
d5! 31 i.xd5 'iVe5) 30....ixe4 31 Mxe4 'iVc3
32 .l:!.e1 .l:!.a2 33 h3.' (Khenkin)
However, here Black has the thematic 
stroke 31 ...'iVxc2!. Therefore instead of 30 
2xb4? White must play 30 .lixc6 'iVxc6 31 
2xb4, avoiding major problems and with 
accurate play attaining the haven of a 
draw: 31. ..'iVc3 (now 31... 'iVxc2? is refuted by 
the spectacular 32 Mb8+! 'ig 7 33 'iVd4+) 32 
2a4l:te8 33 2a1 and h2-h3.
28 .td5?
A blunder in reply, typical of a simulta­
neous player: the fruit of not very deep 
penetration into the position when playing 
against several opponents. White was 
suddenly granted an opportunity to win a 
pawn and gain an overwhelming advan­
tage - 28 2xd6, but he did not do this, 
apparently because of 28. .. ; c3 29 l:td7 ' i f 4, 
overlooking an elegant refutation: 30 Me7!.
54

Baku Universities
Now the situation is again entirely favour­
able for Bl ack.
25...gc3 29 l:!f2 l:!el?!
But this is a mistake typical of a young 
player: also the fruit of a shallow penetra­
tion into the position. Through inexperi­
ence I did not realise that it was not yet 
time for such a stroke! First the threats on 
the f-file should have been neutralised:
29 . ...l:!.e7 30 'tf3 'it>g7 31 g4 f6 32 g5 f5 33 
'iYh 3 'it>f8 etc.
The position had become extremely 
sharp, and it was not surprising that Kar­
pov was spending the lion's share of his 
time on my board. Alas, my team col­
leagues were unable to support me: the 
score was 5-0 in favour of the simultaneous 
player plus a strategically hopeless position 
for Lyosha Eppelbaum. Soon Lyosha also 
resigned, and Karpov and I were left face to 
face...
30 Wf3
My ‘subtle' calculation - 30 .l:!.xf7? Bxd1
31 l:!xc7+ 'it'h8 32 g f3  :.c1 with the irre­
sistible threat of ....ltd4 said something 
about my inventiveness, of course, but it 
proved to be a simple little problem for the 
world champion. To the logical question 
'why has Black's vitally important f7-pawn 
been left undefended?' the answer was 
found immediately.
30....1d4?
A further error, which this time does not 
go unpunished. When I showed this game 
to Taimanov (after the tournament my 
mother and I, together with Nikitin, visited 
him at his home) he said: ‘Of course, 
30. ...l:!.e7! should have been played. Here 
Black has nothing to fear - all his pieces are 
in play.' And although after 31 ' i f  - gb5 32 
i'h4 g e l he would have lost a pawn - 33 
Sxf7 .Mxf7 34 'i'xe1 gxc6 35 = xf7+ 'i/Vxf7 36 
-i'Uxb4, he would have been in no danger of
losing: 36...'id5 37 'ig 4  'ie 4  or 36. ..'if1 37 
'ib8+ 'i1Vf8 38 'i!Vb6 (38 'ixf8+ '>t>xf8 with a 
draw) 
38 ...'i'f3! 
with 
the 
unavoidable 
exchange of queens and a drawn ending 
with opposite-colour bishops.
31 .ixf7+ 'it>g7 (4)
32 gc4!
Here is the punishment. In my prelimi­
nary calculations I missed this decisive 
retreat: mate at f8 is threatened, and the 
bishop at a6 is attacked.
32 ...Ixg1+ (9)
‘Black is rattled. The exchanging opera­
tion should have been carried out in a 
different order - 32 ...gxf2 33 Wxf2 .l:!.xg1+
34 'ixg1 Wxc6, although here too after 35 
'i/Vd4+ 'it'h6 36 .ixa 6  'ixa 6  37 Wxb4 'ie2  38 
Wc3 White would remain a pawn up.' 
(Khenkin). This is too modest a summary!
35 'i!Va7+! gb7 36 Wd4+ is far stronger and 
prettier. Now 36. ..'it'h6 37 'ie3+ '>t>g7 38 
We7+ 'it>h6 39 'i'f8+ 'it>g5 40 h4+ leads to 
mate, and 36...'it'f8 to the loss oftwo pawns:
37 'ih8+ 'it'e7 38 'i/Vxh7+ 'it>d8 39 'ixg6.
33...gxc4 34 'i'xe1 gd5 was more tena­
cious, trying to draw with the queens and 
opposite-colour bishops. This is more like a 
middlegame, where White is the first to 
begin a victorious attack on the king: 35 
'i'h4! 'i/Vxc6 (35. ..gxc6 36 gd4+ and 'if6 ) 36
55

Garry Kasparov on Garry Kasparov: Part One
'i¥e7+ 'it>g8 37 ..id4 Af7 38 h3! etc.
33 'it>xg1 ..ixf2+ 34 'it>xf2 ..ixc4 35 bxc4
The queen endgame with the white 
pawn on c6 is completely hopeless.
35...'tWa7+ (2) 36 'it>e2 Wd4 (3) 37 'iWd5 Wf6
38 'tWe4 b3 (3) 39 cxb3 Wb2+ 40 f
Now the assistance of the king is not 
needed, and Karpov wins by hiding it in the 
corner.
40...ttcl+ 41 We1 Wf4+ 42 4>g1 Wd4+ 43 
'it>hl Wb6 44 'tWe7+ 'it>h6 45 Wf8+ 1-0
A fighting game! A comment in the 
press: ‘Garik Kasparov was very upset at 
losing to the world champion. "I had such a 
good position!" he lamented. The young 
Baku player was right. He held the initiative 
throughout almost the entire game, but he 
used it uncertainly, and in the end he made 
a fatal mistake.'
I had the following dialogue with a jour­
nalist from the Baku sports newspaper:
‘How do you explain your defeat at the 
hands of the world champion?'
‘Perhaps by the fact that I remained one 
to one with him. Just imagine, sitting 
opposite you is the best player on the 
planet. And so I overlooked his combina­
tion.'
'And what lesson did you learn from this 
meeting?'
‘You have to fight to the last, even if you 
are in a winning position.'
In the next round I played a draw with 
Gennady Kuzmin. And at the finish we met 
the home team, from Leningrad, who were 
in keen competition with Moscow for 1st 
place. In addition, their captain Viktor 
Korchnoi was fighting for the best result by 
the captains. From the very start of the 
simul' he was obviously very keyed up, 
nervously smoking one cigarette after 
another. I was angered when on the 2nd
and 4th boards after 1 e4 e6 2 d4 d5 our 
lads played 3 exdS!? against him. But I, as 
usual, chose the King's Indian.
G am e 12 
V .K o rchn o i-G .K asp aro v
To urn am e nt o f Pioneers Palaces, 
7th round, Leningrad 12.11.1975 
King's Indian D efence E8O
1 d4 tt:lf6 2 c4 g6 3 tt:lc3 Ag7 4 e4 d6 5 f3
tt:lc6
5 
...0-0 (Game Nos.51, 81) is more natural, 
but at that time against the Samisch I liked 
to save a tempo by delaying castling.
6 ..ie3 a6 7 tt:lge2 (7 Wd2 - Game No.15)
7 ...l:b8 8 tt:lc1 (8 'iWd2 - Game No.B7) 8...e5 9 
d5 tt:ld4
On seeing this move, Korchnoi looked at 
me and made a puzzled expression.
10..ixd4?!
Accepting the gambit at the cost of the 
exchange of this important bishop. I very 
much liked the idea of 10 tt:l1e2 c5 11 dxc6 
bxc6?! (11...tt:lxc6 is more tedious) 12 tt:lxd4 
exd4 13 Axd4?! .Mxb2 14 tt:lb5? tt:lxe4! 
(Platonov-Shamkovich, 39th USSR Champi­
onship, Leningrad 1971). In the semi-final 
of the Baku Cup (1975) Gazarian played 14
56

Baku Universities
S b l against me, but after 14...Sxb1 and 
...0-0 all the same he had an inferior posi­
tion. 13 'i'xd4! is correct, with the idea of 
13. ...l:xb2 14 o-o-o! l2lh5 15 e5!, when Black 
is in trouble.
But it is even better to play 10 l2Jb3!? 
(killing Black's desire for 10. . .c5 11 dxc6 
l2lxc6) 10. ..l2Jxb3 11 'tixb3 or 11 axb3 c5 12 
b4 with the initiative.
But Korchnoi always used to capture 
pawns, if he did not see a direct refutation 
(thus, in the event of 7...0-0 instead of
7 ....l:!.b8, if 10 &xd4? exd4 11 'i'xd4 there 
would have followed 11. ..tt:Jxe4! and wins). 
Nevertheless, the grandmaster's choice 
surprised me: I was sure that the power of 
the activated bishop on g7 would more 
than compensate Black for his small mate­
rial deficit.
10...exd4 11 'iVxd4 0-0 (now threatening 
...l2Jxe4!)
12 Wd2 (after 12 i.e2 there would have 
"allowed 12 ...l2lh5, and if 13 'i'f2, then
13 . ..c5! and ...b7-b5) 12...C5
Depriving the white knight of the d4- 
square and intending ...b7-b5 or ...l2Jh5 and 
.f7-f5. I was very happy with my position: 
such activity, and for just a pawn!
13 a4 (an attempt to set up a bind - after
13 i.d3 l2Jd7 14 o-o b5! 15 cxb5 axb5 16
tt:lxb5 c4 or 13 l2Jb3 ^d7 14 it.e2 b5 15 0-0 
bxc4 16 it.xc4 Sb4 Black has no reason for 
complaint) 13 ...l2lh5 (3)
13...lLld7!? was more circumspect.
14 g4! (a bold, typically Korchnoi move, 
without prejudices!) 14...'ifh4+ (4)
I did not want to retreat my knight im­
mediately...
15 'it>d1?!
But this 'playing for a win' is dubious. 15 
Wf2 
was 
more 
solid, 
although 
after
15 ...'i'xf2+ 16 'it>xf2 ^d4+ 17 'it>e1 ltJf6(f4) 
Black has good compensation for the pawn. 
15. ..ltJf6 (8)
15. ..Wf6! 16 ,&e2 ltJf4 and ...i.d7, keeping 
the queens on the board, would have been 
far more unpleasant for White.
16 'iVe1 'i'xe 1+ (now nothing would have 
been given by 16 ...'i+Yg5, for example: 17 h4 
Wf4 18 i.e2 l2ld7 19 tt:Jd3 'iVe3 20 'iW'g1, 
nevertheless exchanging the queens) 17 
'ltxe1 tbd7 18 i.e2 tbe5 (10) 19 Sg 1 f5 (3)
A crucial choice: after 19. .. g5 Black would 
have had equal chances thanks to his 
powerful knight on e5 and the dark-square 
blockade, but I preferred more complicated 
and dynamic play.
20 exf5 (or 20 gxf5 gxf5 and ...'it>h8)
20...gxf5 21 g5 (continuing to believe in the 
worth of the extra pawn) 21... &d7 (7)
57

28...etJf3 29 i.d 7
Garry Kasparov on Garry Kasparov: Part One
A 
natural 
developing 
move, 
but
21...Be8!? (not allowing f3-f4) 22 'it>d1(d2) 
t'Llg6 and only then ...i.d7 was more subtle
- this would have maintained the favour­
able tension.
22 'it>d2?! (it was sounder to play the alter­
native 22 
t'Llg4 23 .txg4 - 23 h3? i.d 4  -
23 ...fxg4 24 t'Ll1e2 or 22. ..t'Llg6 23 S f l Bfe8
24 'it>d2 with approximate equality) 22 ...b5!
(12)
A completely unexpected thrust: after 
all, White is attacking b5 with many pieces! 
From this point Korchnoi switched almost 
entirely to the game with me, and the two 
other draws which he made in the simul' 
were to some extent a result of the chronic 
problems he faced here.
23 axb5
In the event of 23 cxb5 axb5 24 a5 (24 f4 
bxa4!?) 24. ..c4 Black has an unpleasant 
initiative: 25 'it>c2 b4 26 t'Lla4 b3+! or 25 a6 
Mb6!? and ...lia8. Therefore White recon­
ciles himself to simplification, hoping to 
defend in an inferior endgame.
23...axb5 24 cxb5 i.xb5! (this was deeply 
calculated) 25 t'Llxb5 .:.xb5 26 i.xb5 t'Llxf3+
27 'it>c2 t'Llxgl 28 t'Lld3
The attempt to imprison the knight on 
g1 by 28 .:.a3 would not have succeeded 
after 28...:lb8 29 .:.b3 f4.
29...etJd4+ (6)
Nowadays, without thinking, I would 
have played 29...t'Llxg5!, obtaining a sound 
extra pawn: 30 .:.fl c4! 31 l2lc1 f4 or 30 .l:a4 
etJf3 etc.
30 'it>dl f4 31 i.e6+ (seeking practical 
chances - 31 l:ta6 f3 32 Wel t'Llc2+ 33 ^d2 
f2 34 &e6+ 'it>h8 35 i.h3 t'Lld4 was clearly 
advantageous to Black) 31...t'Llxe6 (7)
The correct reply. Nikitin's recommenda­
tion 31...<it>h8 would have left White with 
more hopes of saving the game.
32 dxe6 f3 33 la 7  l:l.e8 (11)
Safely avoiding a pitfall: 33 ... f2 34 t'Llxf2 
I!.xf2 35 e7 f
 36 e8'ilV+! Wxe8 37 Sxg7 
Hxh2 38 b3 with real prospects of a draw. 
But 33 ...c4!? 34 e7 Se8 35 t'Llf4 i.x b 2 36 
t'Lld5 'it>f7 would have retained a serious 
advantage.
34 1:,f7 c4 (2) 35 4:lf4?! (3 5 t'Llf2 l:txe6 36 Sxf3 
&xb2 
37 
ctJg4 
was 
more 
resilient)
35 ...^xb2?! (4)
The sudden exchange of rooks would 
have been decisive - 35 ... Sf8!.
36 t'Lld5 lx e 6  37 lx f3  'tg7?! (4)
This move suggests itself, but 37 ...Se4! 
was more energetic. In such situations all 
the participants in the simuls' - and I was 
no exception - dreamt, without spoiling
58

Baku Universities
anything, of reaching the time control at 
move 45, adjourning the game and having 
it adjudicated. And there a win would be 
found by the grandmasters... But to make a 
dozen normal moves in a position with 
dynamic factors was not at all easy!
38 t2Je3
38...C3? (8)
Alas, this cuts off the bishop on b2 and 
throws away the winning chances which 
would still have remained after 38...l:te4!.
39 h4 3Se5 (39...'itg6 40 tDd5 with a draw) 40 
:Jf5+ <;i;>g6 (2) 41 tLlg3! (a very strong ma­
noeuvre, creating adequate counterplay)
41 ••. l:!.e6 (4) 42 Sd3 h6 (3) 1/2-1/2
Draw agreed on Black's proposal.
Of course, I was terribly annoyed: to be 
one step away from victory over none other 
than Korchnoi - and I stumbled... My oppo­
nent was also upset: this game proved very 
difficult for him, and three draws against 
the Baku team deprived him of 1st place 
among the simul' givers.
Their 'tournament' ended as follows: 
Smyslov - 38 out of 42; Korchnoi - 371/2; 
Karpov and Polugayevsky - 37 (I should 
mention that it was rather easier for the 
first two, since the remaining captains had 
to play both of the strongest teams - Mos­
cow and Leningrad). The overall tourna­
ment was also won by the Muscovites, who 
together with Smyslov scored 54 out of 84 
and finished ahead of Leningrad with 
Korchnoi 
(491/2), 
Kuybyshev 
with 
Po­
lugayevsky and Chelyabinsk with Karpov 
(both 
42), 
Baku 
with 
Bagirov 
(39), 
Voroshilovgrad with Kuzmin (371/2) and 
Alma-Ata with Katalymov (30).
My performance, 21/2 out of 6, was 
deemed comparatively satisfactory. Despite 
the fact that in the games with Po­
lugayevsky, Karpov and Korchnoi I scored 
only one point, the character of the play 
showed that any result could have been 
possible!
Nikitin: ‘The hand of the little fighter was 
not yet firm, but in games with him grand­
masters had to endure considerable difficul­
ties. Not without reason, after the tourna­
ment Karpov, Korchnoi and Polugayevsky 
remarked on Garik's play. The world cham­
pion liked his “serious approach to the 
game", and Korchnoi - “his quite sober 
understanding of complicated positions". It 
has to be agreed that praise of this sort 
addressed to a twelve-year-old boy is an 
indication of his outstanding talent. To me it 
was evident that his first, timid steps along 
the road to top-level chess would soon be 
replaced by a leap...'
Young Cham pion
My second USSR Junior (up to 18) Champi­
onship took place in January 1976 on the 
stage of the Tbilisi Chess Palace, which from 
then on became a noteworthy place for me.
I was not expecting to win, since I was 
again the youngest player, some three to 
five years younger than my opponents. But 
in the depths of my heart there was never­
theless a glimmer of hope - and, as it 
transpired, not without reason.
59

Garry Kasparov on Garry Kasparov: Part One
I had gained experience and I no longer 
felt even slightly intimidated by my elders. I 
started confidently - 41/2 out of 5, including 
wins over Lputian and Yudasin. It appeared 
that the fight for the title would be be­
tween me and another pupil of Botvinnik's 
school - 16-year-old Rafael Gabdrakhma­
nov from Kazan, with whom I drew after a 
sharp King's Indian in the 3rd round.
In the 6th and 7th rounds I slowed down
- I made draws with 5turua and Vasilenko. 
But in the 8th, penultimate round, with 
Black I won a very complicated and tense 
Sicilian against Yurtaev, gaining revenge 
for my defeat the previous year in Vilnius. 
Thus before the finish Gabdrakhmanov and 
I had 61/2 out of 8, the 16-year-old Georgian 
adult champion Zurab 5turua was on 6, 
with Lanka, Vasilenko and a number of 
other contestants on 51/ 2.
In the concluding round, the fight for first 
place unexpectedly became much sharper! 
Sturua had White against Gabdrakhmanov, 
and I - against the new hope of Latvian 
chess, the 15-year-old Zigurds Lanka. We all 
knew that, in the event of a share of first 
place, Gabdrakhmanov would have the best 
Buchholz score, 5turua would have a good 
one, and I would most probably have the 
worst. Therefore I needed to win, but I was 
already very tired and, as ill luck would have 
it, I played dreadfully. It was a strange thing: 
for the second time in a year I floundered in 
one ofthe fashionable lines ofthe Maroczy.
G am e 13 
G .K asp aro v-Z.Lanka
USSR Ju n io r C ham pionship, 
9th round, Tb ilisi 17.01.1976 
Sicilian D efence 839
1 e4 c5 2 tt:lf3 tt:lc6 3 d4 cxd4 4 tt:Jxd4 g6 5 c4
±g7 6 ..ite3 ttJf6 7 tLlc3 tt:Jg4 8 'iVxg4 tt:lxd4 9 
'iVd1 tt:Je6 10 'iVd2 'iVa5 11 l:!:c1 b6 12 ± e2 
Ab7 13 f3 f5 14 exf5 gxf5 15 0-0 l:!:g8 16 
l:!:fd1 d6 17 a3?! (7)
17 
tLld5! 'iVxd2 18 l:!:xd2 is far better (and 
above all - safer!), and if 18...Mc8, then 19 
Mel! (Jansa-Reeh, Gausdal 1990).
17...f4! 18 ^ xf4
A repetition of my game with Yurtaev 
(Vilnius 1975).
18...'iVf5!?
A novelty, specially prepared by Lanka 
(previously he had not employed this varia­
tion). 18 ...'iVh5! 19 tt:Jd5 (19 -&e3? ^e5)
19...tt:lxf4 20 tt:Jxf4 'iVc5+ and ...&h6 is even 
better, with excellent play for the pawn.
Yurtaev preferred 18. ..&d4+?! 19 'it>h1 
'iVf5 and after 20 tLld5?! .&xd5 21 cxd5 tt:Jxf4
22 ^b5+?! (22 g4 is equal) 22...4f7 23 
'i:Yxd4?! (23 g4 Mxg4 24 'iVc2 is more resil­
ient) 
23...Mxg2 
24 
^d7? 
(24 
Md2)
24. ..l:!:xh2+! 25 'it>xh2 ^ 5 +  26 4g3 tt:le2+ he 
won. However, as later analysis showed, the 
accurate 20 &e3! could have set Black 
difficult problems.
19 -le3 (6) 19...^e5!? 20 tt:ld5? (3)
A blunder. The fearless 20 g3! was cor­
rect: 20...&xg3 
21 hxg3 Mxg3+ 22 4f2 
Itxf3+! 23 'it>e1! l:th3 24 ..tf1 etc.
20...'ifh3! 21 f
 Wxh2+
60

Baku Universities
White's hopes have been dashed. How­
ever, 
Lanka did not play energetically 
enough, and after his inaccurate 27th move 
the situation became completely unclear. 
The time control was 45 moves in 2 hours 
15 minutes, and we made the last moves in 
a wild time scramble. We each had literally 
a minute left, and on the 38th move I 
committed another blunder. ..
Meanwhile, on the neighbouring board 
Sturua beat Gabdrakhmanov in 
good 
positional style and went half a point 
ahead. Now everything depended on the 
outcome of my game with Lanka. Alas, at 
that moment I was a hair's breadth away 
from defeat: Lanka could have won imme­
diately on the 40th, 42nd and 43rd moves, 
and on the 46th he could still have retained 
serious winning 
chances. 
With fearful 
speed we passed the time control unno­
ticed, and the game was adjourned only 
after White's 49th move.
The game was resumed two hours later. I 
analysed the adjourned position with my 
Baku trainers Oleg Privorotsky and Alexan­
der Aslanov and their Yerevan colleague 
Alburt Arutyunov. The mood was not a 
cheerful one: it wasn't really believed that I 
would manage to save the game, and 
besides, everyone thought that even in the
event of a draw I would catch Sturua but 
would still finish second because of an 
inferior Buchholz score.
And although the situation with the 
Buchholz was not completely clear - not all 
of the last round games had finished - the 
home supporters were exulting in anticipa­
tion of a ‘golden double': on the same stage 
Maya Chiburdanidze had just become girls 
champion of the country, and it appeared 
that Zurab Sturua would be about to join 
her.
49...gb2?!
Not the best sealed move. If 49. ....if3 we 
were planning 50 Sc8+! 'it>h7 51 Sc7, but
49 ...b5!? 50 J:!c6 ;. e5 was better, when no 
one could see a sure way to draw.
50 .l:!.c2!
An 
excellent 
defence, 
found 
by 
Arutyunov. After 50 Hc4 .tf3 White has no 
good continuation: 51 Sc8+ 'ito>g7 52 2c7+ 
'if6  53 l:txa7 .lic3+ 54 f
 .txd5.
50...±xa3?!
Lanka was tired and he captured the 
pawn without any particular thought. 
Some chances of success were still offered 
by 50....lie5 51 'ito>d2 etc.
51 Ith2+ (1) 51...'it>g7 52 Sg2 (it turns out 
that 
Black loses one 
of his bishops)
52...±xb4+ 53 'if l!
Apparently it was this move that was 
missed by Zigurds, who was expecting to 
win after 53 'if2? .tc5+ 54 ' i f l  f
 55 
Sxg4 'it>e5. But now he does not manage to 
bring his king to e5.
53...f
 
54 Sxg4 .tc3 55 Se4 (1)
55 'ite2 was also possible. The draw is 
now obvious, but here, for no earthly rea­
son, Lanka thought for a long time.
That day, for the first time, we played on 
the stage, and while my opponent's clock 
was ticking, I looked out into the audito­
rium where all our delegation was sitting.
61

Garry Kasparov on Garry Kasparov: Part One
And suddenly I saw how Aslanov obviously 
became excited and began quickly writing 
something down. Of course, I immediately 
grasped what was going on: Aslanov had 
made a mental calculation with incredible 
accuracy (he had a phenomenal memory), 
and had unexpectedly discovered that I had 
a better Buchholz score than Sturua. Not 
believing such good luck, he decided to 
calculate it all once more - on paper. And, 
realising that he was right, he began ener­
getically gesticulating...
55 •••'it>f5 56 Se7 ^e5 57 Sxa7 'it>e4 58 l:i.b7 
(1) 58- ••.kd4 59 'it>e2 'it>xd5 6o 'it>d3 V*-1/*
Times: 2.20-2.50.
What happened in those seconds is for­
ever engraved in my memory. Hardly had 
Lanka and I shaken hands, when the tall and 
corpulent Aslanov dashed from the seventh 
row to the stage and with the cry: 'Garik, 
Garik, you're the champion!' lifted me up in 
his arms. Unable to believe what had hap­
pened, for a full hour I kept repeating to 
myself.'I'm the champion, I'm the cham­
pion... '
It transpired that during the adjournment 
session a miracle had indeed occurred. In 
this round my previous opponents played 
well, whereas Sturua's opponents did less so. 
But the last to 'let him down' was his com­
patriot Zurab Azmaiparashvili, who won his 
adjourned game against Zaid. A draw in that 
game 
would 
have 
given 
us 
identical 
Buchholz scores, and then Sturua would 
have been declared champion on the greater 
number of wins. However, the Georgian 
trainers were so confident about the older 
Zurab's score, that they overlooked the game 
of the younger, and my final Buchholz 
turned out to be half a point higher!
Thus for the first time I became junior 
champion of the Soviet Union - previously
no one had done this at the age of 12 (and 
later only Gata Kamsky achieved this in 
1987). At the closing ceremony Anatoly 
Bykhovsky, the senior trainer of the USSR 
junior team, read out the results, congratu­
lated Maya Chiburdanid.ze and all the prize­
winners on their success, and concluded his 
speech with these words: ‘What can be said 
about Garik Kasparov? When you become 
under-18 champion of the country at the age 
of 12, there is nothing more to say!'
Today I still have this famous photograph 
hanging up in my house: Maya Chibur- 
danidze and I stand happily on the stage of 
the Chess Palace... 17th January was in fact 
Maya's birthday - she was 15. And her 
trainer Eduard Gufeld invited everyone 'to 
drink to the future world champions' (and 
indeed, just two and a half years later Chi- 
burdanidze won a match for the crown 
against the great Nona Gaprindashvili!). 
After this Gufeld insisted that Maya and I 
should play a blitz match. I don't remember 
the exact score, but it was such that Maya 
burst into tears and said that she needed to 
go not to rest, but to work.. .
Results 
of 
the 
1976 
USSR 
Junior 
Championship: 1. Kasparov and 2. Sturua - 7 
out of 9; 3. Gabdrakhmanov and 4. Vasilenko
- 6V2; 5- 8. Lanka, Lputian, Kharitonov and 
Yurtaev - 6; 9. Yusupov - 5V2; 10-16. 
Azmaiparashvili, Dvoyris, Kengis... - 5. 24­
28. M.Gurevich, Magerramov, Yudasin... - 4 
etc. (altogether - 38 participants).
Nikitin: 'A pleasant surprise! I felt that 
Garik might play well, but I did not expect 
such a result. On this occasion after the end 
of the tournament it was not a boy shedding 
tears of grief, as a year earlier, but his mother 
shedding tears of happiness. After congratu­
lating the champion on his win, I immedi­
ately, so that he would not become conceited, 
reminded him of the large number of defi­
62

Baku Universities
ciencies in his "champion's" play.’
From the magazine Shakhmaty v SSSR: 
‘Only one player went through undefeated. 
Twelve-year-old 
candidate 
master 
Garik 
Kasparov demonstrated outstanding inde­
pendence in his assessments and conclusions. 
His play is interesting and aggressive, and the 
young player is improving from  tournament 
to tournament. Of course, Garik’s play is not 
without certain deficiencies, but he is very 
self-critical, and this is a guarantee of future 
successes.’
My victory in the all-union arena was 
greeted euphorically by the Baku sports 
officials: they were expecting me to make an 
immediate further surge, and thought that I 
was already capable of becoming a master. 
And, barely having celebrated my 13th 
birthday, I was included in an adult master 
tournament - a memorial to the first Azer­
baijan 
chess 
master, 
Sultan 
Khalilbeyli 
(Baku, 11-28 May 1976). The line-up com­
prised four candidate masters and ten 
masters: the Baku players Pavlenko, Morgu- 
lev, Listengarten, Shakarov, Sideif-Zade and 
Korsunsky, plus a touring quartet - Kayu- 
mov, Nikolaevsky, Murey and A.Donchenko.
Nikitin advised me not to play in this 
tournament: he felt that my nervous system 
was not yet ready for such a severe test. But I 
very much wanted to battle against masters! 
Alas, my trainer was largely right... A crisis 
came as early as the 2nd round, in my game 
with Magerramov. After equalising in the 
Open Variation of the Ruy Lopez, on the 20th 
move Elmar suddenly left a pawn en prise. By 
the 28th move I was already just a step away 
from winning, but here I 'carried out a 
spectacular combination with a piece sacri­
fice' - I made two terrible moves in a row, 
overlooked a deadly counter-blow by the 
opponent - and capitulated!
I was in fact unable to recover completely
from this heavy blow (whereas the 18-year- 
old Elmar, by contrast, quite confidently 
achieved the master norm, scoring the 
cherished 'plus four' - 81/2 out of 13). Pulling 
myself together, after a draw with Shakarov 
I even won against Aydyn Guseynov, but 
then I cracked under the fierce adult pres­
sure, ran short of time, and lost to Velibekov 
(altogether ignominiously) and Korsunsky. 
After the game with Velibekov I returned 
home feeling crushed, lay on the divan with 
my face to the wall, and burst into inconsol­
able sobbing. Then my mother made 'her' 
move: she quietly went out to a neighbour's 
house and from there phoned Botvinnik in 
Moscow. Within a few minutes the phone in 
our flat rang, and my mother called me: 
'Garinka, it's Mikhail Moiseevich, he wants 
to speak to you.' After a conversation with 
the Teacher I calmed down and said to my 
mother: 'Mikhail Moiseevich admitted that 
he lost games that were even worse!'
Realising that the chance of becoming a 
master had been lost, I stopped feeling 
nervous and finished the tournament more 
than convincingly. First I won good, fighting 
games against Kayumov (a future winner of 
the Memorial) and Murey, and after a loss to 
Nikolaevsky I overcome the experienced 
Moscow master Anatoly Donchenko in 'iron' 
positional style.
G am e 14 
G .Kasp aro v-A .D o nchenko
Khalilbeyli M em orial To urnam ent, 
11th round, Baku 25.05.1976 
Ruy Lopez C97
1 e4 es 2 t'Llf3 t'Llc6 3 ^bs a6 4 ..ia4 (2)
4...t'Llf6 5 0-0 (6)
My hesitation was due to the fact that at 
that time I also used to employ both 4 ..ixc6
63

Garry Kasparov on Garry Kasparov: Part One
(the influence of Fischer - and Shakarov!), 
and 5 d4 (Game No.1). However, Nikitin 
nevertheless insisted that I should learn to 
play the ‘normal Spanish'.
5.....te7 6 S e 1 b5 7 ..tb3 d6 8 c3 0-0 9 h3 
ttJa5 10 ..tc2 c5 11 d4 Wc7 12 d5 (6)
I always liked closing the centre, and be­
sides, I had only a vague impression of the 
variations with 12 tLlbd2.
12 ...c4?!
The master made this seemingly natural 
move almost without thinking, although
12.....td7, 12 ...tLle8 or even 12...ctJc4 is pref­
erable, as Kuzmin played against me (Game 
No.31).
13 b4! (13)
My opponent was surprised by this set­
up, which I prepared on my own for this 
game, having noted Black's problems with 
his ‘bad' queen's knight.
13...cxb3 (13 ...ctJb7 14 a4 is also depressing 
for Black) 14 axb3
At first sight, Donchenko has achieved 
quite a good position: White has a back­
ward pawn on the c-file. However, he has a 
clear plan for mobilising his forces - ..td2, 
i.d3, ctJa3 and so on, and if ...ctJb7, then b3- 
b4, preventing ...tLlcS and threatening a 
possible c3-c4. Gradually Black begins to 
suffocate due to the congestion of his
pieces and lack of space.
14...Ad7
14...ctJb7 is no better: 15 b4! tt:d7 16 j. e3 
tLlb6 17 ctJa3 ..td7 (Kayumov-Dydyshko, 
Moscow 1979) 18 '1We2! 'Da4?! 19 c4 or
18 ...l:fc8 19 l:ec1 with an enduring advan­
tage.
15 ..td2 IfcB  (or 15...'Db7 16 b4! a5 17 ^d3 
.l:i.fb8 18 'Da3 'Dd8 19 We2, Kasparov- 
Crisofari, Bastia simul' 2008) 16 ..td3 (3)
It is probable that 16 'Da3!? was slightly 
more accurate.
16.....te8 17 ..tf1 (7)
A solid, although non-essential move (I 
am not sure that the bishop stands better 
at f l  than at d3). 17 'Da3!? was more con­
sistent, or 17 ..te3!? with the ideas of Se2- 
a2(c2) and 'Dfd2.
17...'Db7?!
Here the knight's prospects are very ob­
scure. It would have been better to leave it 
at as and play, for example, 17... ..td8!? 18 
'Da3 We7(b7) with the typical idea ...il.b6, 
defending according to the principle 'stand 
and wait'. Donchenko clearly underesti­
mated the dangers of the impending 
squeeze.
18 b4! (2) 18. ..'Dd7 19 'Da3 'Db6 20 ..te3 (8)
20. ....td8 (if 20...&d7, then 21 '1Wb3! and 
Sec! is strong - here 21...CDc4?! is also
64

Baku Universities
unfavourable because of 22 gxc4! bxc4 23 
i'c2) 21.:c1!
The storm clouds are gathering over 
Black's position: there is the threat of t'Lld2 
and c3-c4.
21. ..t'Llc4?! (Black no longer knows what to 
do) 22 A xc4!
I was very proud of this unexpected ex­
change of bishop for knight. Black's replies 
are forced.
22 ... bxc4 23 t'Lld2 i£.b5 24 2a1 (3)
With the unavoidable exchange on b5 
and the seizure of the a-file. And the knight 
on b7 is still dead - White effectively has an 
extra piece. The conversion of the advan­
tage, beginning from the 18th move, makes 
this game a textbook example.
24. ..h6 (with the idea of ...gg5, but the 
exchange of the dark-square bishops does 
not bring Black any relief) 25 t'Llxb5 (2)
25...axb5 26 fLlf1 i£.g5
27 :l,e2! (2) 27... l.xe3 28 iLlxe3 1U8 29 
Sea2 :l,ab8
Conceding the a-file in the desperate 
hope of creating at least a semblance of 
counterplay on the kingside. It did not help 
to play 29...g6 30 Ha7 Hcb8 31 .l:!1a6 J:xa7
32 .Uxa7 l'tb6(f8) 33 '^a1 with a decisive 
invasion, or 29....Mxa2 30 Hxa2 l:t.a8 31 ^a1 
:.xa2 32 'li'xa2 'it>f8 33 '^a6 #d7 34 t'Llc2 and
lLla3, winning the b5-pawn, and with it the 
game.
30 Sa7 (4) 30. ...:c7 31 S 1a6 (2) 31. ..Sd7 32 
'Y/Va1 (7) 32...'1t>h7 33 g3 (2) 33...g6 34 Sc6 hS
35 h4 (2) 35...g5?! (desperation: now White 
also has an attack on this wing) 36 'Wd1 (2)
36...'it'g6 37 iLlt5 (2) 37...^f6 38 Wd2 1-0
Times: 1.24-2.12.
Two draws at the finish summed up my 
first battle with masters: 5O% - 61/2 out of
13. And although this was a comparative 
failure, I gained valuable experience. Nikitin: 
'Every cloud has a silver lining. There were 
several pleasing games by Carik, in which a 
new and strong aspect of his playing style 
was revealed - an ability to build up posi­
tional pressure move by move. This was a 
sure indication that the rise of a new star was 
notfar off.. ’
In July 1976 I went abroad for the first 
time - I took part in the World Cadet Cup 
(for juniors no older than 17), which was 
held in the small French town of Wattignies, 
outside Lille. Botvinnik was against this trip, 
but.. according to Nikitin 'it transpired that, 
alas, there were no 16-year-old players of 
comparable standard to our 13-year-old 
champion’. No other player had represented 
the USSR in the international arena at such a 
young age! But this was my sole achieve­
ment, and otherwise the trip brought me 
nothing but disappointment. 
Beginning 
with the results of this Swiss event: 1. Grin- 
berg - 71/2 out of 9; 2. Chandler - 7; 3-6. 
Rogers, Petursson, Kasparov and Groszpeter
- 6 etc., followed by a few other future 
grandmasters - van der Wiel, Nikolic, Hodg­
son, Morovic and Pia Cramling (altogether -
32 participants).
I supposedly didn't perform badly: I 
sh ared 3rd-6th (although on the tie-break 
the 'bronze' went to Rogers). This was how
65

Garry Kasparov on Garry Kasparov: Part One
the weekly chess newspaper 64 assessed my 
play: 'not bad'. But my own verdict was more 
severe. I felt that I had conducted the tour­
nament weakly and that I could have played 
much better against the leaders - this upset 
me. The main problems when facing older 
opponents were the demanding schedule 
and the unfamiliar surroundings. Of course,
I was excited and I experienced a certain 
confusion on finding myself in a capitalist 
country (to put it simply, on another 
planet!). With me was neither my mother, 
nor Nikitin - instead of one of them, the 
person the Sports Committee sent with me 
was the Lvov trainer Viktor Kart.
I was also disappointed that the tourna­
ment left hardly any time to see something 
of France. Before the trip I tried to find out 
everything about its history and customs, 
and carefully studied my grandfather's map 
of the country. And what happened? We 
simply swept past all the historical monu­
ments I had been so looking forward to 
seeing. But I couldn't help noticing that 
things were substantially different to the 
Soviet way of life, although I was too young 
to draw any conclusions from this. I simply 
accepted it as a fact of life, as a result of our 
troubled history.
At the very end of the summer, in the Or- 
lenok pioneers camp on the banks of the 
Black Sea, the next session of the Botvinnik 
School was held. Nikitin: 'The teacher strictly 
made Garik responsible fo r his oversights in 
Wattignies and as a sparring-partner he gave 
him one ofthe strongest pupils - 17-year-old 
Sergey Dolmatov, so that the latter would 
demonstrate that in the school they played 
better than in various foreign championships. 
But the "Massacre of the Innocents" did not 
take place: Garry scored 102 out of 2, demon­
strating that the concept of nervous depres­
sion after afailure was notyet known to him.'
I have already described how Mikhail Bot- 
vinnik conducted the lessons - for example, 
in Volume II of My Great Predecessors (in the 
chapter ‘My Teacher'). Here is another 
sketch, from the pen of the prominent 
journalist Viktor Khenkin:
Garik Kasparov, the 13-year-old candidate 
master from Baku, is showing his game, 
rattling off variations. One is struck by his 
erudition and general knowledge, which are 
amazing fo r his age. But when he states that 
he saw all this during the game, he is obvi­
ously making it up.
“Don't rush, Garik, give us time to think," 
Botvinnik stops him. “You can calculate 
variations so quickly, but I cannot."
Garik falls silent and gives Botvinnik a 
searching look. The analysis begins. Botvinnik 
finds a mistake in the lad's play.
“Why did you play that?"
"This move has previously occurred, and 
Black achieved a good position!“
Garik instantly gives the names of the 
players, the year and the place where they 
met. He has a wondeiful memory.
“Never take anything on trust", says Bot­
vinnik. “Always question, and seek the truth. 
There you see, a well-known move, and it 
turned out to be bad. Analyse this situation 
independently, without quoting the experts. 
Send the analysis in writing."
In the meantime Garik's mother writes 
down the homework in a notebook. Apart 
from parental duties, she also performs the 
role of “second trainer".
From our first lessons Botvinnik sensed 
my striving for a dynamic, attacking style, 
and in my homework he included an analy­
sis of Alekhine's games. And at the age of 13 
I wrote an essay on the topic 'Games of the 
early Alekhine'! But Botvinnik warned me 
against being carried away by complexity for 
its own sake, and on one occasion he said:
66

‘You’ll never become an Alekhine if the varia­
tions control you, and not the other way 
round.' This upset me, but of course the 
Teacher was right. Later he wrote about this 
episode: ‘Kasparov stood out among the 
other pupils by his ability very skilfully to 
calculate variations many moves ahead. But 
Garry was an excitable lad, and I had to insist 
that he thought about a move before making 
it on the board. And I often said to him that 
there was a danger of him becoming a new 
Larsen or Taimanov.'
In October 1976 the Trans-Caucasian 
Youth Games were held in Tbilisi. There was 
a match-tournament of four teams: Azerbai­
jani, Armenian and two from Georgia. In this 
event I was fortunate enough to gain one of 
my most brilliant King's Indian wins.
My opponent was 18-year-old Smbat Lpu- 
tian, with whom I was later on friendly 
terms. We had been competing at the board 
since the spring of 1973. when in a friendly 
Azerbaijan-Armenia match Smbat lost with 
White, but twice defeated me with Black in 
the French Defence. But those were his first 
and last victories! That same summer we 
drew in the All-Union Youth Games in 
Vilnius, and then I began beating him game 
after game (Lputian made his next draw 
with me - in 2000, when he had already long 
been a grandmaster). Of course, on that 
memorable autumn day my friend and rival 
was dreaming of revenge.
Gam e 15 
S.Lpu tian-G .K asp aro v
Trans-C aucasian Youth G am es, 
2nd round, Tbilisi 16.10.1976 
K ing’s Indian D efence E8O
1 d4 tt:lf6 2 c4 g6 3 <i:Jc3 &g7 4 e4 d6 5 f3
:Jc6 6 &e3 a6 7 'i'd2 (Korchnoi replied 7
tt:lge2 .l:i.b8 8 tt:lc1 - Game No.12) 7...1:b8 8 
S b l
Baku Universities
The usual line is 8 <i:Jge2 (Game No.87). 
But Smbat sees that for the sake of creating 
counterplay on the queenside Black is 
delaying castling, and he tries to get his 
attack in first.
8...0-0 (3) 9 b4
After 9 tt:lge2 b5 (9 .. J:te8!?) 10 cxb5 axb5
11 b4 e5 12 dxe5 (12 d5 <i:Je7 13 tt:lg3(c1) is 
more solid, with hopes of an advantage) 
12. ..<i:Jxe 5 13 t'Lld4 i.b 7  14 ^xb5 d5! 15 exd5 
t'Llxd5 16 <i:Jxd5 &xd5 Black has excellent 
compensation for the pawn (Lputian-Lanka, 
Baku 1979).
9 ...es (25)
Impatience! Later I discussed this posi­
tion with Gufeld and we came to the con­
clusion that the waiting move 9... ; d7!? was 
more subtle: 10 t'Llge2 2e8 (10...b5 ?! is 
premature in view of 11 cxb5 axb5 12 d5 
t'Lle5 13 t'Lld4) 11 a3 e6, and if the white 
knight moves from e2, then immediately 
...e6-e5 and if d4-d5 - ...tt:ld4.
10 dS t'Lld4 (2) 11 t'Llge2 (this is Lputian's 
idea: White places his knight on e2 straight 
away, without losing time on t'Llge2-c1-e2)
1 1 . ..cs!
What else? 11...l2lxe2 12 i.xe 2  would 
merely have assisted White's development.
67

Garry Kasparov on Garry Kasparov: Part One
12 dxc6 bxc6
It would appear that 12...l2Jxc6!? is also 
acceptable: 13 b5 (5tohl's recommendation
13 i.g5 is ineffective because of 13 ...h6! 14 
i.xh 6  l2Jxe4! 15 tDxe4 ^ 4 +  16 g3 'i'xh6)
13...tDa5 14 tDg3 (Crouch) 14. ..axb5 15 
tDxb5 i.e6. However, I felt that the pawn 
sacrifice was more in the spirit of this 
variation, even if it was for problematic 
compensation.
13 l2Jxd4 exd4 14 ^xd4
14. ..Ie8!? (5)
14...c5 15 bxc5 tDxe4! suggested itself, 
but I did not like the endgame arising by 
force after 16 fxe4 Exb1+! (all the commen­
tators began with 16...'i'h4+?, allowing 17 
4e2!, which is advantageous to White) 17 
l2Jxb1 'i¥h4+ 18 '>t>d1 (18 'it>e2? i.g4+)
18...fNxe4 19 i.xg7 'i'xb1+ 20 'iVc1 ^g4+ 21 
4d2 'i'xc1+ 22 4xc1 'it>xg7 23 cxd6 Id 8  24 
c5 .l:tc8 25 &xa6 l!xc5+ 26 <it>b2 - suggested 
by Gufeld in Informator and continued by 
Crouch as far as 26 ...l:tc6 27 i.b5 Sxd6 28 
4c3, when ‘the outside passed pawn pre­
sents something of a problem for Black'. 
However, one which is by no means fatal:
28...'it6(f8) 29 a4 (29 g_e1 i.e6) 29...'it>e7 30 
a5 'it>d8 31 a6 'it>c7, gaining a draw.
At any event, I decided for the moment 
to defer any blows in the centre, the ideas
of which had already taken vague shape in 
my mind.
15 i.e2?!
15 
b5?! axb5 16 cxb5 d5! is dubious for 
White (5tohl). But Lputian had two stronger 
and safer continuations:
a) 15 iLd3 (Gufeld) 15. ..d5! 16 cxd5 cxd5 
17 e5 l2Jd7 18 f4 f6 (5tohl) 19 0-0 fxe5 20 
i.a7! Hb7 21 i.f2  or 20...Sa8 21 i.xg6! 
l:!.xa7 22 i.xe8 iVxe8 23 'i'xd5+ 4h8 24 
.l:!.be1 with very complicated play, quite 
favourable for White;
b) 15 a3 a5 16 b5 cxb5 17 cxb5 d5 18 
i.xf6  'i'xf6 19 ltJxd5 Wd6 20 &c4 (after 20 
a4 f5! 21 i.c 4  'it>h8 Black has good counter­
chances) 20...'i'xa3 21 We3 Wxe3+ 22 l2Jxe3 
(Crouch) with an extra pawn and a safe 
position for White (although Black's power­
ful bishop on g7 and his passed a-pawn 
compensate for the slight material deficit).
15...C5! 16 bxc5
In the event of 16 &e3 cxb4 17 l2Jd1 (17 
ttJd5? ttJxd5 18 ifxd5 i.e 6  - 5tohl) 17...'t!Va5 
or 16 i.x f6  ^xf6 17 0-0 cxb4 (17 . ..i.e5!?) 18 
ttJd5 i.g5!? (5tohl's move 18...a5 is also 
good) 19 f4 &h6 Black has no reason for 
complaint. But now he solves his problems 
with an unusual dynamic possibility, break­
ing through at virtually the most fortified 
point in the opponent's position.
68

Baku Universities
16 ...ttJxe4!! (1)
A stunning blow, exploiting the over­
loading of the knight on c3. 'It is interesting 
that from the 10th to the 24th move Garik 
spent only 15 (!) minutes, although the 
entire lengthy combination with the transi­
tion into a won endgame was not prepared 
at home. But the ideas implemented were 
not new to him: they had become a techni­
cal weapon after his persistent independ­
ent work on the study of classic King's 
Indian games.' (Nikitin)
17 fxe4 Wh4+
18 g3?
Smbat made this move quite confidently. 
It stands to reason that, if he had seen what 
awaited him, he would have played differ­
ently. He had three other possibilities:
a) 18 4d1? 2xb1+ 19 ltJxb1 Wxe4 20 
.txg7 Wxb1+ 21 Wc1 "ixc 1+ 22 4xc1 4xg7 
23 4d2 dxc5, and Black is a sound pawn to 
the good;
b) 18 4f1?! l:txb1+ 19 ttJxb1 "ixe4 20
l,xg7 Wxb1+ and now:
b1) 21 £d1 4xg7 22 cxd6 l:te6 23 Wd4+ 
4g8! (Stohl's move 23...l:tf6+ is unclear 
because of 24 4e1!) 24 4f2 (24 c5? l:te4! 
and wins) 24. ..Wxa2+ 25 4g3 Wa3+ 26 ii.f3 
=.xd6 27 We5 l:te6 28 Wd4 We7 also with an 
extra pawn, the conversion of which, how­
ever, is not easy;
b2) 21 Wd1 Wf5+ 22 f
 4xg7 23 cxd6 
(Crouch's move 23 Wd4+(?!) is weaker in 
view of 23...4g8 24 cxd6 &b7!), and now 
not 23. ...&e6?! 24 Wd4+ 4g8 25 4f2! "ic2+
26 4g3 "ixc4 with a draw (Ouigley-Henry, 
Chicago 1987), but 23...We5 (here Stohl 
considers 24 '>t>f2(?) 'iUe3+ 25 '>t>g3 to be 
‘drawn', overlooking the deadly 25 ...l:te4!) or
23 ...'iUf4(c5) with an unpleasant initiative 
for the pawn;
c) 
18 f
 (the only move to maintain 
the balance) 18. .. .1xc3 19 &xh4 .l:Ixb1+ 20 
'>t>f2 &xd2 21 Sxb1 dxc5 22 Sb8! (this is 
rather more forceful than 
Stohl 
and 
Crouch's move 22 &d3) 22....&c3 23 ^g5 or
22....1.f4 23 fia8 J.e5 24 i.g5 i.d4+ 25 ^e3, 
and the endgame is a draw.
18....1:.xb1+ 19 'ltf2
Of course, not 19 ltJxb1? Wxe4. I remem­
ber that after this move Smbat was about 
to stand up from the board (indicating that 
everything was clear - it was time for Black 
to resign), but I did not allow him to stand 
up, instantly moving my rook one square.
19...Ib2!!
One of my trademark combinations, 
conceived thanks to very rapid calculation 
and a sharp feeling for dynamics: I used to 
see such tricks immediately! Stohl associ­
69

Garry Kasparov on Garry Kasparov: Part One
ates this finish with the brilliant win by the 
13-year-old 
Fischer over Donald Byrne 
(Game No.50 in Volume IV of My Great 
Predecessors).
During a game Lputian was normally 
imperturbable, but at that moment, on 
seeing my move, his face changed - it was 
clear to him that disaster had struck. Never­
theless 5mbat found comparatively the 
best chance, involving an exchange sacri­
fice.
20 gxh4 (of course, not 20 Wxb2? ,&xd4+ 21 
4 e l .Jtxc3+ 22 Wxc3 Wxe4 and wins)
20. .J x d 2 21 &xg7 'i£i>xg7 22 'it>e3 Sc2 (2) 
Here I realised that I would have to re­
turn the exchange: after 22 ...Sb2? 23 cxd6 
f5 24 c5 White's passed pawns are too 
strong.
23 4^3 Sxc3+! (2)
Again in the event of 23...Bb2? 24 cxd6 f5
25 ^f3 or 25 S c l fxe4+ 26 'i£i>e3 Black can­
not break through.
24 4xc3 dxc5 25 il.d3 il.b7 (2)
Although material is equal, White's 
pawn weaknesses make his position lost.
26 Se1 (26 Sbl?! ^xe4 27 Sb6 ^xd3 28 
4xd3 l:e6 - 5tohl) 26...Se5!
This accurate move is ‘the last nail in the 
coffin' 
(Nikitin). 
And 
indeed, 
Gufeld's 
suggestion 26...f5(?) 27 e5 &e4 28 &xe4 
Bxe5 after 29 'it>d3 would have led only to a 
draw: 29...'it>f6 30 h3 h6 31 Se2 fxe4+ 32 
l:txe4 4f5 33 J:xe5+ 4xe5 34 'it>e3 'it>f5 35 
Wf3 a5 36 h5! g5 37 a4'i£i>e5 38 'it>e3.
27 a4 (27 I!.e2 Bh5 28 e5 ^c8! and wins - 
5tohl) 27...f5 (12) 28 Sb1 ^xe4
5o, Black has won a pawn and White's 
counterplay on the queenside is too late, 
since the passed f-pawn advances swiftly 
towards the queening square.
29 Sb6
29 
a5 .Jtxd3 30 'it>xd3 f4, etc., was also 
hopeless for White.
29...f4! (3)
Nearly all Black's moves from the 15th to 
the end ofthe game are the first line given 
by the computer!
30 Sxa6 f3! (30...^xd3? 31 'it>xd3 f3 was 
inaccurate because of 32 fia7+ 'it>f6 33 !:l.a8
- 5tohl) 31 ;■ f1
Or 31 .l:a7+ 'it>f6! 32 ^xe4 (32 v f l i.f5)
32 ... l:xe4 33 Sa8 'it>e7 34 Sa7+ 'it>e6 35 J:la8 
Sxh4 36 .Mf8 Sh3 37 a5 'it>e7! 38 S f4  g5 39 
Bf5 g4 and ...Bxh2, winning.
31. ..if 5 ! (with the threat of ...Bel) 32 Sa7+ 
'it>h6 33 'it>d2 f2 34 .e2 il.g4 35 kd3 .l:!.e1 36 
Sf7 il.f5! 37 a5 ^xd3 (2) 38 Sxf2 S f1! 0-1
Times: 1.46-1.10.
Nikitin: ‘The complexity of the young 
player’s ideas, the accuracy of implementa­
tion and the broad range of techniques 
employed create a great impression.'
In November my Pioneers Palace team 
failed by a miracle to win the next qualifier 
for the final ‘tournament of young hopes', 
although on top board I scored 61/2 out of 7. 
Perhaps this was for the best: I was already 
facing other tasks. During the qualifying 
tournament the Lvov grandmaster Oleg 
Romanishin gave a demonstration simul’ 
against the leading young players. Against 
me he played 1 f4, but after 1...d5 2 tt:f3
70

Baku Universities
ctJf6 3 e3 ..ig4 4 b3 tt:Jbd7 5 -&b2 c6 6 &e2 
'flic7 7 0-0 .ilxf3 8 ^xf3 eS 9 d3 ii.d6 10 g3
0-0-0 11 c4 dxc4 12 bxc4 h5! 13 Wc2 h4 14 
tLlc3 hxg3 15 hxg3 exf4 16 exf4 g5! Black 
won with a direct attack on the king.
At the end of 1976 a noteworthy event 
occurred in the life of Alexander Nikitin - a 
clash with the all-powerful Anatoly Karpov 
(this is described in Volume IV of My Great 
Predecessors). At the demand of the world 
champion my Moscow trainer was dis­
missed from the chess section of the USSR 
Sports Committee. Nikitin: ‘When I left:, I 
publicly promised to dethrone Karpov! 
Everyone knew what would be done fo r that. 
From then on my training work with the 
young candidate master acquired a new, 
powerful stimulus.'
That year is also memorable for me in 
that I began individual lessons with Alex­
ander Shakarov, who, in contrast to Privo- 
rotsky, placed the emphasis on opening 
preparation. We did a great amount of 
work on expanding and renovating my 
opening repertoire. For White we thor­
oughly prepared 1 d4, for Black - the Caro- 
Kann Defence, and so on. By the end of 
December I had the feeling that I was 
moving on to some new level. The results 
were soon seen ...
Tw o-Tim es Cham pion!
In January 1977 I set off to Riga for my third 
USSR Junior Championship. It is well known 
that it is always more difficult to defend a 
title than to win it: against the champion 
everyone plays with redoubled energy. 
Especially since among the participants in 
the traditional Swiss there were, as usual, a 
number of experienced fighters, including 
masters - my rival of the previous year, 
Sturua, as well as Taborov and Yusupov, 
who had only just achieved the title.
I made my usual good start - 3V2 out of 
4. I remember my win with Black against 
the Yerevan player Eolian in what was a 
new opening for me - the Caro-Kann De­
fence. Tal: 'Soon after it had finished, I 
happened to analyse with Kasparov his 
game with Eolian. And again I was stag­
gered by the wealth of variations and ideas 
that the junior from Baku put into effect 
during this rather tense encounter.'
After four rounds I was leading the race 
together with 15-year old Evgeny Pigusov 
from Kemerovo, one of the strongest young 
players in Russia, a future grandmaster 
and, incidentally, one of my seconds in the 
match with Anand (1995). In the 5th round 
the crucial duel between the leaders took 
place.
G am e 16 
G .Kasp aro v-E.P iguso v
USSR Junior Cham pionship, 
5th round, Riga 11.01.1977 
Q ueen's G am bit 0 3 6
1 d4
This was the third time I tried this move 
in a serious game (I first played it in team 
competitions at the end of 1976 against 
Eolian and Sturua). I don't remember who 
first advised me to adopt 1 d4 - Botvinnik 
or Makogonov. But the result was that the 
closed games began to dominate in my 
repertoire, although periodically, especially 
in the 1990s, I almost exclusively played 1 
e4.
1...d5 2 c4 e6 3 tLlf3 tLlf6 4 tLlc3 tLlbd7
A surprise. After the usual 4... 1. e7 at that 
time I used to employ the variation with 5 
..if4. But now the Karlsbad Variation arises.
5 cxd5 exd5 6 &g5 ' e7 7 e3 c6 8 &d3 0-0 9 
!c 2  .l:.e8 10 0-0
71

Garry Kasparov on Garry Kasparov: Part One
10 h3 lt:lf8 11 i.f4  followed by 0-0-0 is 
also possible (Game No.42 in Volume Ill of 
My Great Predecessors).
10...lt:Jf8 11 l:!.ae1
11 l':!.abl and b2-b4-b5 is a routine and 
age-old plan. But I used to treat my favour­
ite Karlsbad Variation like Marshall and 
Botvinnik - I prepared lt:Je5, f2-f4 and an 
attack on the kingside.
11...lt:Jg6?!
The classical tabiya after 11...lt:Je4 12 
i.xe7 "i¥xe7 13 i.xe 4  dxe4 14 lt:Jd2 f5 
(I4...b6 15 Wa4!, Botvinnik-Robatsch, Am­
sterdam 1966) 15 f3! exf3 16 lt:Jxf3 i.e 6  17 
e4 fxe4 18 l':!.xe4 (Marshall-Rubinstein, 
Moscow 1925) seemed to me to be quite 
promising for White, but modern practice 
has shown that Black is close to equality.
12 lt:le5 (4) 12...lt:Jd7
One of my 1976 games went 12...lt:Jxe5
13 dxe5 lt:lg4 14 i.xe7 Wxe7 15 f4 'iVh4?! 16 
h 3 lt:Jxe3 17 Axe 3 d4 18 l:.e4! dxc3 19 f5 
with an attack. If 12. ..lt:Jg4 there would also 
have followed 13 i.xe7 "W/xe7 14 f4! (but not
14 lt:lxg4 i.xg 4  15 f3 i.d 7 16 e4 ^ 4 1 7  Wf2 
lt:Jf4 with equality, Bagirov-Zilberstein, Baku 
1972).
13 ii.xe7 "i¥xe7
In the event of 13 ... l:.xe7 14 f4 lt:lgf8 
(14 ...lt:Jdxe5?! 15 fxe5 is weaker) White
should not rush with 15 e4?! (Udovcic- 
Robatsch, Maribor 1967), in view of the 
relieving manoeuvre 15 ... dxe4 16 lt:Jxe4 
lt:Jf6. However, 15 "Wif2 is quite good, with 
the idea of 15 ...f6 16 lt:Jf3, when Black has 
an unpleasant position.
Here the theory came to an end, and we 
began creating at the board.
14 f4 (15) 14 ...lt:Jgf8?!
With the queen on e7 this is not the best 
choice, although White's chances are also 
better after 14. ..lt:Jdxe5 15 fxe5 or 14...lt:Jf6
15 h3!?.
15 e4! (9)
Now the breakthrough in the centre 
suggests itself, since both 15 ...lt:Jf6? 16 
exd5! and 15 ...dxe4?! 16 lt:Jxe4 lt:Jf6? 17 
lt:Jxc6! followed by lt:lxf6+ are bad for Black.
15...1t:Jxe5 (if 15...^ 4, then simply 16 "Wif2)
16 fxe5
The initiative would also have been re­
tained by 16 exd5!? lt:lf3+ 17 gxf3 Wd8 
(17 ...Wxe1?! 18 .l:1xe1 l':!.xe1+ 19 '>t>f2 l:.e8 20 
f5 is worse for Black) 18 f5 i.d 7 19 'it>h1 etc.
16...1.e6 17 exd5 ii.xd5 18 lt:lxd5?! (8)
A premature exchange, opening the c- 
file for Black. The bishop was nicely but 
ineffectively placed, and it could not move 
in view of the threat of lt:Je4-d6. Thus White 
should have considered 18 l:!.f4!?.
72

Baku Universities
18...cxd5
19 .!tf5
This move, taking control of the c8- 
square, was one that I was proud of at the 
time - nothing would have been given by 
either 19 ^ 3  tt:Je6! or 19 :f 3  ^ 4 ! . How­
ever, 19 l:[e3!? was sharper and more inter­
esting, with the idea of 19... 'iYh4 20 'Wia4 or
19..'ifb4 20 Wf2.
19. ..it'b4 (by attacking the d4-pawn, Black 
diverts the queen from c2 and prepares 
...':tJe6) 20 l:.d1 (6) 20...h6
20...g6 21 i.g 4  tt:Je6 was also possible. It 
is now apparent that White has delayed 
somewhere.
21 Wf2 (2) 21...Se7
A solid move, after which I stopped to 
think: what to do next? 21...lLle6 was also 
suitable, not fearing 22 i.xe 6  fxe6 23 'il'f7+ 
4h8. Here 22 .!tg4(b1) is better, still with 
hopes of an advantage.
22 Sd3 (31) 22...Sc7 (after 22...lLle6!? it 
would have been harder for me to find an 
effective plan for strengthening my posi­
tion) 23 Sb3! (7)
The start of ‘grand manoeuvres' by the 
white rook and the black queen.
23...1ke7?!
23 
...ii'a4 is more active, eyeing the a2- 
pawn and continuing to attack the d4-
pawn, although after 24 .l:tc3!? Sxc3 25 
bxc3 l:[e8 26 i.c2 "id7 27 .!tb3 or first 27 
'i'f3 White has some pressure.
24 Sg3 (3) 24...lLle6 (24...Hc6?! 25 'ild2!) 25 
'tie3 (5) 25...'it>h8 26 h3 (4)
With the intention of 'it>h2. White's 
threats on the kingside are mounting.
26. ..'iVb4? (reckless - the rook on a8 should 
have been brought up to the defence) 27 
l:[g4? (2)
27 
.!txe6 fxe6 28 Hf6! with an attack was 
very strong, but again I did not want to 
exchange my bishop...
27...'iWxb2 28 'it>h2 (7)
In the future such a ‘quiet' preparatory 
king move was to become one of my fa­
vourite devices.
28...1kb4?
An unfortunate retreat by the queen - 
here every instant is precious! 28 ....Uc3! 
would have led to sharp play: 29 'iVe1 (the 
commentators recommended 29 i.d3, but 
after 29. ..Wa3 or 29. .l:tf8 Black holds on) 
29- ..lLlg5! (with the threats of ...Sxh3+ and 
...lLlf3+!) 30 Sf2 'ib 4 ! or 30 Sgf4 Sg8.
29 .!td3? (5)
Again rejecting 29 &xe6 fxe6 30 Hf6! 
Wie7 (30... 'ih 7 31 Sh4) 31 Sxh6+ gxh6 32 
Wixh6+ 'ilh7 33 Wf6+ Sg7 34 Sh4 with a 
straightforward win.
73

Garry Kasparov on Garry Kasparov: Part One
29...We7?
The decisive mistake - Pigusov over­
looked my reply. If 29... la c8  there was the 
unpleasant 30 l:tf6! lLlg5 31 Md6 with the 
threats of fixd5 and h3-h4. But 29...Wf8 was 
more resilient.
30 I1 f6! ct:Jg5 (30. ..Wf8 was now too late in 
view of 31 ^f3! with the threats of Mxh6+ 
and Wf5) 31 J:txg5! (2) 31...hxg5 32 Wxg5 
'it>g8 33 Wh4
Or 33 ^f5(h5), also with an irresistible 
attack.
33-iVa3
The poor queen cannot find anywhere to 
go. However, things would also have been 
hopeless after 33 .g6 34 .txg6! fxg6 35 
Mxg6+, or 33. ..Wd8 34 Wh7+ 'it>f8 35 Wh8+ 
(35 l:tf3!?) 35. ..'it>e7 36 'iUxg7 Wg8 37 'iUh6!.
34 l:tf3 (more than good enough to win, 
although 34 'ifh7+ 'it>f8 35 'ifh8+ 'ie7 36 
'iUxg7 l:tf8 37 Sd6! was more forceful)
34... g6 35 g xg 6 Wxf3 36 Wh7+ '<t>f8 37 gxf3
1-0
Times: 2.05-2.13.
Despite the mistakes, this was an impor­
tant win for me, after which I sensed the 
first signs of approaching chess maturity, 
and the forming of my trademark style: 
increasing pressure and a sudden mating
finish! Nikitin: ‘This game was one of those 
that evoked happy memories in Botvinnik: 
this was roughly how he used to win during 
the years of his chess supremacy.’
After taking the sole lead, the next day I 
again employed the Caro-Kann Defence 
with Black, this time against my previous 
year's 'tormentor' Zigurds Lanka. This is 
what Tal wrote about my play in this game: 
‘A big impression was made by his queen 
manoeuvres on moves 18-19, prepared 
together with his second, the thoughtful 
master Alexander Shakarov, and then the 
elegant ‘cavalry dance'. After exchanging all 
White's active pieces, the Baku junior broke 
through with his rook into the enemy rear, 
and the loss o f material fo r White became 
inevitable.'
Game 17 
Z .Lanka-G .K asp aro v
USSR Jun io r Cham pionship, 
6th round, Riga 12.01.1977 
Caro-Kann Defence 819
1 e4 c6 2 d4 d5 3 ctJc3 dxe4 4 ctJxe4 .tf5
In my choice Tal keenly discerned the 
influence of Makogonov and Botvinnik. But 
the main point was that the Caro-Kann
74

Baku Universities
Defence was a favourite of 5hakarov, who 
had discovered several 'holes' in Bole- 
slavsky's opening analyses. It was while 
studying the complicated positions, arising 
here deep in the middlegame, that I devel­
oped a liking for long forcing variations.
5 t2lg3 i.g 6  6 h4
In the 4th round Eolian played 6 i.c 4  
against me, but after 6 ...e6 7 t2l1e2 Ct:Jf6 8 
0-0 (or 8 Ct:Jf4 i.d6, Tal-Botvinnik, 17th 
match game, Moscow 1960; 2nd match 
game, 1961) 8...i.d6 9 f4 %¥d7!? (recom­
mended by Boleslavsky; 9 ...%¥c7 10 f5!) 10 
'it>h1 ?! hs! 11 f5 exfs 12 t2lf4 '■ xf4 13 fixf4 
h4! 14 'il*'el+ 'it>f8 15 Ct:Je2 h3 he did not gain 
the desired compensation for the pawn.
6 ... h6 7 tLlf3 t2ld7 8 h5 ..ih7 9 i.d3 i.xd3 10 
'il*'xd3 e6 (2) 11 i.d 2  Ct:Jgf6 12 'iVe2
At that time a popular line, which had 
temporarily supplanted the usual 12 0-0-0 
filc7 13 %¥e2 or 13 Ct:Je4 (Game No.29).
12...%¥c7 13 c4 i.d6! (13 . ..0-0-0 14 Ct:Je5 or 14 
c5, Karpov-Hort, Ljubljana 1975) 14 t2lf5
14...0-0!? (2)
An analytical development with respect 
to the 8th game of the 5passky-Karpov 
Candidates match 
(1974), which 
went
14.....1f4 15 i.x f4  %¥xf4 16 tLle3 (Game No.62 
in Volume V of My Great Predecessors).
14...0-0-0?! is less good: 15 Ct:Jxd6+ %¥xd6 16
i.a5! Bde8 17 Ct:Je5! (Karpov-Pomar, Nice 
Olympiad 1974).
'Kasparov employed a paradoxical con­
tinuation which, to all appearances, was a 
marked improvement for Black' (Tal). For 
those times this was a rather revolutionary 
conception: Black castles into mate! How­
ever, according to our analyses, after an 
early ...b7-b5 he had adequate counter­
chances.
15 Ct:Jxd6 'i'xd6
16.l:!.h4
Black is not caused any problems by 16 
i.c3 b5! 17 cxb5 cxb5 18 'iVxb5 Ct:Jd5 19 Ct:Je5 
Ct:Jxe5 20 dxe5 Ct:Jxc3 21 bxc3 'filc7 (Beliavsky- 
Bagirov, Baku 1977; Kapengut-Kasparov, 
Daugavpils 1978).
16 
0-0-0 is more critical: 16...b5! 17 g4! 
(17 cxb5 cxb5 18 4b1 b4 19 Ct:Je5 Ct:Jd5 with 
counterplay on 
the 
queenside, 
Lukin- 
Gorshkov, 
Chelyabinsk 
1975) 
17. ..bxc4
(17 ...Ct:Jxg4!? 18 Sh g l f5 is also unclear) 18 
g5 hxg5 19 h6 g6 20 h7+ Ct:Jxh7 21 Ct:Jxg5 
Ct:Jxg5 22 i.xg5, but here too after 22 . ..c3! 
(22...f6? 23 We4 with an attack, Mnatsa- 
kanian-Bagirov, Kirovakan 1978) White has 
no more than a draw: 23 'flie5!? cxb2+ 24 
4b1 'i'xe5! 25 dxe5 f6! 26 .l:!.xd7 fxg5 27 
.Uhh7.
On encountering a new variation for the
75

Garry Kasparov on Garry Kasparov: Part One
first time, Lanka made a rather mediocre 
move with his rook. White's idea is under­
standable: avoiding 16 0-0-0 bs!, he wants 
to hide his king on f1 and play g2-g4-g5 or 
'De5. But nothing useful comes of this.
16...b5! (10) 17 'it>fl bxc4 (3) 18 Wxc4
18...Wd5! (10)
By offering to go into an endgame, Black 
emphasises White's main problem in such 
positions - the weakness of the hS-pawn. 
After some thought, Lanka decided to give 
it up immediately, but to keep the queens 
on.
19 We2?! (19 .l:ic1 was nevertheless better)
19...'i'b5?! (5)
Insisting on an endgame - that is what 
Makogonov taught! The 'Greek gift' could 
perfectly well 
have 
been 
accepted 
-
19...bxh5!, not fearing 20 g4 l'Llhf6 21 gS 
hxg5 22 ..ixg5 'iVbs(fS) or 22. .J:tfb8!? with a 
good game. But I didn't use to capture such 
pawns: why open lines for the enemy 
pieces?
20 b3 a5 (4) 21 'De5 a4 (6) 22 !!h3?!
A poor move. White could still have 
maintained equality by 22 'Dxd7 'Dxd7 23 
b4 or 22 b4! with counterplay on the c-file.
22...5.d 8l (2)
A very strong reply, excluding 23 b4? in 
view of 23...tt:lxe5 24 dxe5 Sxd2. White is
forced to exchange queens - immediately 
or after 23 ..ie1 tt:ld5.
23 'ix b 5 cxb5 (getting rid of the weakness 
on c6) 24 tt:lc6
Lanka forces a modest withdrawal by the 
black rook. But this temporary activity does 
not compensate for the defects of White's 
position: the d4- and hS-pawns are weak, 
and the dS-point is under Black's complete 
control.
24...1.re8 2 5 bxa4 bxa4?1 (2)
2S...lxa4! 26 a3 tt:ld5 or 26 Sb3 tt:lb8! was 
more accurate, driving the knight from c6 
and beginning a pursuit of the white 
pawns.
26 l:rc1 tt:lb6 (4) 27 t2le 5?l (the knight should 
not have been moved away - 27 'it>e2! was 
more sensible) 27...Sec8 (13)
Now White's position deteriorates. 
28fib1
Possibly it made sense to sacrifice the hS- 
pawn - 28 Shc3!? Sxc3 29 Sxc3 with the 
idea of 29 ...l'Llxh5 30 Sc7!, although after
29...ctJbdS! all the same Black would have 
retained the advantage.
28...tt:lc4
28. ..tt:lbd5!? 29 l  e1 Sc2 was even more 
unpleasant, but as it is White has a difficult 
position, and Lanka loses it very quickly.
29 ..ie1 tt:ld5 (8) 30 Sb7?! (solid moves such
76

Baku Universities
as 30 fid3 or 30 tt'ld7 were more resilient)
30...121d6 (Zigurds obviously overlooked this 
retreat) 31 Sb2?!
31 
Bd7 .i!.a6 32 tt'ld3! really was better, 
although after 32...tt'lf6 33 l2lc5 l2lxd7 34 
tt'lxa6 tt'lb5 White would have faced a 
difficult defence.
31..Jab8?! (missing 31 . ..Sc1! with a quick 
win ) 32 SxbB SxbB
33 l2ld7?
The decisive mistake. 33 Ba3 Ba8 was 
the only way to resist.
33....Ub1! (8) 34 Sa3 tt'lc4! (the triumph of 
the black knights!) 35 Sd3 (35 !ixa4 tt'ld2+!
36 'it>e2 tLlc3+!) 35...Sa1 (2) 36 g3 Sxa2 37 
tt'lc5 a3 0-1
Times: 1.55-1.25.
An important game, showing that my 
play was becoming more profound and 
that with Black I could successfully employ 
not only the Sicilian, but also a compara­
tively quiet positional opening. Behind this 
stood 
both 
intensive 
sessions 
with 
Shakarov, and conversations with Ma- 
kogonov... The broadening of my opening 
repertoire also did not escape the attention 
of the experts and the press.
That which happened at the finish was 
not expected by anyone: in a tense struggle
I managed to win all my remaining games
- against Kengis, Yusupov and Sturua - and 
to finish ahead of the second prize-winner 
by two points! The results of the 1977 USSR 
Junior Championship: 1. Kasparov - 81/2 out 
of 9; 2. Chernin - 61/ 2; 3. Yusupov, 4-6. 
Eolian, Lanka and Taborov - 6; 7-10. Sturua, 
Kuporosov, Pigusov and Gabdrakhmanov - 
51/2, followed by Kengis, Yurtaev, Ehlvest, 
Epishin and Rozentalis, etc. (altogether 36 
participants).
A second successive victory in the junior 
championship of the country, and with a 
record score - at the age of 13 no one had 
achieved this! Tal called it a 'a highly prom­
ising 
announcement'. 
Petrosian 
and 
Korchnoi, who did the ‘golden double' in 
1946 and 1948, were almost 17 years old. ..
Pavel Dembo, the Sovietsky sport corre­
spondent: 'Kasparov confidently retained his 
champion's title. It was not just that thefirst 
time he won it thanks to the better tie-break, 
and the second time "cleanly", conceding 
only half a point in nine rounds. It was his 
qualitatively different play: the 12-year-old 
Garik, like most of his contemporaries, saw 
before him only one target - the enemy king
- and he played fo r mate, whereas the 13- 
year-old Garik, now in contrast to most of 
his contemporaries, has a confident mastery 
of many types of chess weapon, which at the 
championship 
he 
convincingly 
demon­
strated.'
Anatoly Bykhovsky: 'Kasparov's play was 
wide-ranging: he conducted an excellent 
attack in his game with Pigusov, won in 
purely positional style against Lanka and 
Sturua, resourcefully and tenaciously de­
fended in his game with Yusupov, and 
caught Gitsyn in the opening. This wide- 
ranging and diverse arsenal of playing 
methods was demonstrated by a boy of just 
thirteen years old!'
77

Garry Kasparov on Garry Kasparov: Part One
Azerbaijan 
sports 
journalists 
unani­
mously named me the 'January laureate' in 
a competition for the best sportsmen of the 
republic. Regarding this ex-world champion 
Mikhail Tal wrote an article for the Baku 
Sport newspaper:
'Back in 1974, at the opening of the All­
Union Tournament of Pioneers Palaces, I 
noticed a likeable, bright, dark-eyed boy. I was 
told that he was the youngest participant 
and that his name was Garik. At the time I 
did not know him. But two days later, “bat­
tling" in the capacity of Riga captain against 
the young Baku players, I was able to assess 
this young talent. In the end I managed to 
beat him, but I have to admit that it was very 
pleasant to observe how at the board he 
quickly and easily found the most unexpected 
tactical blows. Some time passed. Frankly 
speaking, we, the players of the older genera­
tion, relate to our young colleagues with a 
certain degree of scepticism. This made it all 
the more unexpected when many experi­
enced Moscow masters began saying things 
like: “In Baku there is a boy - Garik Kasparov, 
who makes an excellent impression". I heard 
this from the mouths of international master 
Dvoretsky and national master Nikitin. Both 
of them, so to speak in their line of duty, have 
worked with the Baku player and have the 
right to make their judgement. I remember 
that when in Holland I was analysing an 
opening variation with Dvoretsky, he literally 
took me aback by showing a very unexpected 
move, at the same time clarifying: "This is 
Garik's idea”.
‘Now it is hard to say towards what kind 
of positions Garik has a leaning. Naturally, 
he likes to play actively, continually calculat­
ing the most intricate combinative varia­
tions. 
Together with this purely "age- 
related" leaning Kasparov has also acquired 
a taste fo r positional play. However, this is
not surprising, sincefor a long time the Baku 
player has been studying at the Botvinnik 
school... Of course, there are fears that the 
young player's head may be turned. But, as 
fa r as I know, this 7th-year pupil of the 151st 
Baku school has so many passions (music, 
theatre, books), that fo r this "illness" he 
simply does not have time.'
Yes, this was my most significant victory 
to date, one that was especially pleasant 
after my not very successful debut abroad. 
Early in April 1977 the name 'Kasparov' 
appeared for the first time in the Soviet 
rating list: against it stood the number 
'2309', and in front of it was the line ‘Kar­
pov 2709'. On 1st July these became '2320' 
and '2739' respectively. Nikitin: 'From then 
on the alphabet firm ly linked these two 
names, as if formally registering their ri­
valry. which with interest and impatience 
was anticipated in the chess world.’
Turning  Point
From 1977 FIDE began staging two official 
world junior championships: apart from 
the usual one, up to the age of 20, there 
was also a cadet championship - for play­
ers not older than 17. In connection with 
this the Soviet Chess Federation organised a 
double-round qualifying tournament of the 
eight strongest young players in the coun­
try (Leningrad, 7-25 April 1977). Anatoly 
Bykhovsky: 'Seven of them had the master 
title or had already achieved the master 
norm, and the only candidate master Kas­
parov was included as USSR junior cham­
pion of the last two years. The 18-year-old 
Dolmatov and Kharitonov, and the 19-year- 
old Zaid, Yermolinsky and Magerramov were 
fighting only fo r the one place in the "up to 
20" championship, whereas the 14-year-old 
Kasparov and the 17-year-old Lanka and 
Yusupov were, in addition, contesting the
78

Baku Universities
one place in the cadet championship.'
It is amusing that initially they wanted 
to arrange the qualification of each cham­
pionship separately, so that the young 
players would not 'get under the feet' of the 
older ones. And indeed we endeavoured not 
to do this: the three youngest players, 
changing places in turn, led throughout the 
tournament!
On this occasion I started badly: as White 
I drew with Yusupov without any particular 
fight, and as Black I left a piece en prise and 
lost from an excellent position to Khari­
tonov. In the 3rd round I was opposed by 
my long-standing bete noire Leonid Zaid, 
the 1974 USSR junior champion and al­
ready a master for three years. In the tour­
nament situation only a win would satisfy 
me, and I was in a highly determined mood.
Gom e 18 
G .Kasparo v-L.Z aid
Q ualifying  To urn am ent, 
3rd round, Leningrad 10.04.1977 
Sicilian Defence 89 7
1 e4 c5 2 tt'lf3 d6 3 d4 cxd4 4 tt'lxd4 tt:lf6 5 
8c3 a6 6 gg5 (6 ge2 - Game No.11) 6... e6 7 
f4 Wib6
Zaid accepts the challenge! Since child­
hood I liked this variation for its mind- 
boggling complexity, and I subsequently 
played it many times as Black 
8Wd2
Not even contemplating the pragmatic 8 
tt'lb3, as was played against me by Topalov 
(Novgorod 1997) and Leko (Linares 2001). 
Now the value of every move is very high, 
and if White's attack should peter out, 
without his ‘base' b2-pawn he will be in 
trouble.
8...'i!Vxb2 9 tt'lb3
The fashion of those years, following the 
Spassky-Fischer match (1972). The main 
line 9 .l:i.b1 will be described in the next 
volume.
9...Wa3 10 g xf6  gxf6 11 
e2
One of the critical positions. It occurred 
later in some of my 'White' training games 
with Magerramov, and I gained a couple of 
good wins. The experience gained unex­
pectedly came in useful in the 1990s when 
playing Black against Short.
11...tt'ld7
At that time this was a rare move (with 
the idea of ... tt:Jc5 or ... b7-b5 and ... gb7).
11...tt'lc6 12 0-0 gd7 suggests itself, with 
the idea of 13 gh5?i i.g7 (Tal-Platonov, 
Dubna 1973) or 13 f5?! tt:le5 (Tal-Portisch, 
Varese 1976; Game No.41 in Volume Ill of 
My Great Predecessors), while if 13 'it>hl 
possible is 13 ....l:!.c8 or 13 ...h5, transposing 
into the variation ll...h 5  12 0-0 tt'lc6 13 
'it>h1 gd7 14 tt:lb1 (Spassky-Fischer, 11th 
match game, Reykjavik 1972) or 14 CLJdl 
(Short-Kasparov, 4th match game, London 
1993) and at the same time avoiding the 
dangerous 13 tt'lbl!. Because of the imme­
diate knight retreat, and under the influ­
ence of my game with Zaid, after 11...h5 12
0-0 I preferred 12...tt'ld7!? (cf. the following 
note).
79

Garry Kasparov on Garry Kasparov: Part One
12 0-0 h5
13 Wd4? (36)
After encountering a surprise, I thought 
for a long time and realised that now after
13 liJb1 'ifa4 the black queen would simply 
return home via c6, but nevertheless I was 
unable to part with 5passky's tempting 
idea ctJc3-b1.
The typical 13 'it>h1 is better, although 
here too after 13 ...h4! Black feels quite 
secure: 14 jL,g4 h3!? 15 ^xh3 Bxh3 16 gxh3 
b5 with excellent compensation for the 
exchange, 14 Bad1 h3! 15 g3 b5 16 liJb1 
'iVa4 (Gashimov-Palac, Kusadasi 2006), or 14 
h3 jL,e7 (14...b6!?) 15 Sad1 (5hort-Kasparov, 
Riga 1995) 15.. .i¥b4!?.
13...b5 14 liJb1 (26)
It is hard to devise anything better. Alas,
14 jL,xb5? is incorrect: 14... axb5 15 ltJxb5 
W a416 ctJc7+ 'it>d8 17 ctJxa8 'Wxa8.
14...Wa4 15 C4 (2) 15...b4 16 f5 (15)
Trying to expose the king as soon as pos­
sible and to tie down Black's forces by the 
need to defend the weaknesses in his 
position.
16...jL,e7 (the immediate 16...'ifc6 17 fxe6 
fxe6 with the idea of 18 liJ1d2 '^ 6 !? was 
also not bad) 17 fxe6 (4) 18 ctJ1d2 'ifc6
Zaid correctly does not hurry with
18...1.Je5, to avoid making it easy for White
to break through with c4-c5. But 18...h4!? 
also came into consideration.
19 a3! (7)
The start of play over the entire board. 
Although from the opening I had not 
gained real compensation for the pawn, I 
was inspired by the insecure position of the 
black king!
19...bxa3 
20 4^1 SbB 
21 Sxa3 (10)
21. .Jj"b6 22 W all?
It turns out that in the corner the queen 
can be no less useful than in the centre.
22...1tJe5
It would appear that the powerful out­
post at e5, the two bishops and the extra 
pawn should sooner or later secure a win 
for Black But the weaknesses in his posi­
tion give White chances of confusing mat­
ters.
23 c5!? (12)
5acrificing a second pawn! From this 
point a new phase of the game com­
mences: White unexpectedly launches an 
attack, and Black begins losing his strong 
points.
23...dxc5 24 ctJc4 Wc7?
24...ltJxc4 
25 
kxc4 
'¥Wd6! 
was 
far 
stronger, with the threat of ...h5-h4-h3 (26 
jL,xa6? c4! is bad for White, while if 26 l'Id1 
Wf4).
80

Baku Universities
25 liJbd2!
Just one second-rate move by Zaid - and 
the position has suddenly become much 
sharper! White has coordinated his forces: 
now his knight will go to c4, from e2 his 
bishop is attacking the hS-pawn, and the 
rook at a3 will come into play along the 3rd 
rank. For the moment Black's extra material 
is not felt, whereas the problems with his 
king are obvious.
25...CDXC4 (2S ...h4!?) 26 CDxc4 .l:i.b4?
And this is already a serious error.
26. ..h4! was essential, although after 27 h3 
(27 e5?! is dangerous in view of 27. ..h3!)
27. . .0-0! 28 Saf3! with the idea of W el 
White has sufficient counterplay against 
the weakblack pawns.
27 e5! (5)
This breakthrough in the centre - the 
sacrifice of a third pawn! - changes the 
position in White's favour. 27 Sxf6? &xf6
28 Wxf6 did not work because of the weak­
ness of the back rank: 28....l:.b1+ 29 £ f l  .Mf8.
27...fxe5 (Black also has major problems 
after 27 ...f5 28 liJd6+ Wf8 29 ^xa6) 28 Wdl?
A virtually irresistible attack would have 
been given by 28 liJxe5 fld4! (28. .. h4 29 
...d3!) 29 liJf3! .tf8 (29 ... e5?! 30 liJxd4 exd4
31 &xa6 or 30. ..cxd4 31 S c l) 30 ^xa6, and 
if 30 ...gd7, then 31 ^e2!!.
But 28 #d1, which loses White the 
greater part of his advantage, very much 
appealed to me...
Nikitin: 'Garry, who since childhood 
loved beauty in chess, was tempted by the 
pretty geometry of the manoeuvre Wd1-d4- 
a1-d1. It is amazing how mistakes are 
sometimes repeated. In the decisive, 24th 
game of the match in Seville (1987), instead 
of a crude win by 33 'fib5! Garry was again 
tempted by a similarly spectacular and 
completely 
unexpected 
manoeuvre 
33 
Wdl??. Fortunately, in time-trouble Karpov 
did not find the refutation, which would 
have secured him the chess crown'.
28...^d7 29 Sxa6
29...h4?
There was no longer time for this! Only
29....Mf8! would have enabled Black to 
defend, although after 30 .Ma8+ .Mb8 31 
.txf8+ (31 .Mxb8+ Wxb8 32 .i. xhS+ 'it>d8 33 
&f7 rtc7 is not so clear) 31...&xf8 32 S a l! 
White would have retained a dangerous 
initiative.
30 h3 (5)
It is natural that White should want to 
make an escape square for his king, but he 
would also have won by 30 Wd3(c2) with 
the threat of liJd6+ and Wg6+, or even 30 
^hS+ 'itd8 31 CDaS!.
81

Garry Kasparov on Garry Kasparov: Part One
30....Mg8
Allowing a powerful stroke. However, 
also 30...Hf8 would no longer have helped 
in view of 31 i.h5+ 'it>d8 32 l:!.xf8+ .ixf8  33 
l:!.a8+ l:!.b8 34 'ifl(f3 ) i.e7 35 'f&'f7!. Or
30...e4 31 l:!.a8+ .l:tb8 32 'ia l!  l:!.h7 33 ltJe5 
etc.
31 Hxe6! (4) 31...'it>d8 (of course, not
31...i.xe6? 32 i.h5+) 32 flxe5 (2)
While continuing his attack, in passing 
White restores material equality.
32 ....Mxc4 (it is hard to offer Black any good 
advice: 32....l:tg6 33 l:tf7! or 32. ..l:tg7 33 I:.h5!)
33 'iVd5!
A spectacular intermediate stroke - it is 
not often that one sees such an attack by 
the queen on two rooks! In time-trouble
Zaid was counting on the saving line 33 
i.xc4? Wxe5 34 j,xg8 j,d 6. But now Black is 
lost - as, however, is also the case after 33 
l:!.xe7!? Bd4 34 ^ 3 !  l:!.e8 (34. ..l:!.g3? 35 
l:txd7+!) 35 l:!.xe8+ i.xe8 36 Wg8 Wg3 37 
'iVh8! We3 38 i.b5.
33>...Mxg2!? (a desperate sacrifice; in other 
words, a ‘psychic attack') 34 j,xc4  (2)
White would also have won with 34 
'it>xg2 l:!.d4 35 ifa8+! Wc8 36 Wa5+ or 
35. . . .)■ c8 36 i.a6!. The move in the game is 
even better, although it also looks more 
risky.
34....Mg3
35 ifa8+
Here I was also beginning to run seri­
ously short of time, and in my haste I 
missed some simpler ways to the goal - 35 
.l:!.dl!? or 35 Hf7!?.
35...Wc8 36 Wa5+!
Avoiding a naive trap - 36 Wxc8+? 'it>xc8l
37 Sxe7? .ic6+ 38 'it>h2 Sg2+ 39 'it>hl Sg7+! 
40 Wh2 .Mxe7, when it is White who has to 
fight for a draw.
36...\t>eS (now 36...Wc7 37 'irVxc7+ 'it>xc7 38 
.l:!.xe7 is hopeless for Black) 37 i.f7+ (2)
37...'it>f8 38 ; e6+?!
It is a pity that I did not give the ‘correct 
check' - 38 .id5+! 'it>e8 39 .Mf7 l:txh3+ 40 
\t>g2 .l:!.g3+ 41 'it>f2, and Black can resign
82

Baku Universities
Now, however, there is precisely only one 
way for White to win.
38...'ig7 39 Wal?
The only decisive line was 39 l:!.f7+ ^g6 
40 Wa2!! (but not 40 Sxe7? &c6+) - it is 
very hard to see this at the board, even 
when the flag is not about to fall!
Since after 38...<4’g7 I did not like any of 
White's replies, I decided to return my 
queen to the corner - to place it waiting in 
ambush. And although objectively this 
move was bad, in practice it won the game 
for me, since it threw my opponent into a 
panic: the threat of a discovered check by 
the rook on e5 seems especially terrible in 
time-trouble.
39...'ih6?
Only a series of obligatory moves would 
have saved Black - 39 . i.c 6+! 40 Sd5+ ^g6! 
(40..:it>h6? 41 2f6+!) 41 'iYh1+ 'it>h6!, and if 
42 "i!Vc1+ there is now a choice between
42 . ...l:tg5 and 42...&g5 with a draw.
40 Wcl+ i.g 5 (or 40...Sg5 41 Sxg5 &xg5 42 
:'.f6+) 41 Sxg5 'ifc6+ 42 .i.d5 .l:i.xh 3+ 43 'it>g2
1-0
Times: 2.34- 2.30.
An extremely tense encounter! Nikitin: 
‘After looking 
through this fantastically 
pretty game, one can see what a great chess
talent was possessed not only by Garry. but 
also by his opponent. Leonid Zaid lived ini­
tially in Kiev, and then in Lvov - cities with no 
less chess tradition than Baku. In those years 
the remarkable trainer Viktor Kart was 
working actively with young players in Lvov, 
and he fostered a whole group of grandmas­
ters headed by Beliavsky. Butfor some reason 
he did not "set eyes” on Zaid. I saw how the 
youngster was unsuccessfully trying to make 
progress on his own. It was a desperate 
struggle, and Leonid lost it. Not wishing to 
accept the failure of his hopes, he moved to 
Israel and tried there to break into the chess 
elite. But, alas, his time had passed... '
In the 4th round I drew with Dolmatov, 
who was on ‘plus one' thanks to a win over 
Yusupov. Then, unfortunately, Sergey fell ill 
and withdrew from the tournament, and 
the results of all his games were annulled. 
From the press: ‘Had this not happened, it is 
quite possible that the final arrangement of 
the places would have been different.' But as 
it was, after the first half the leading group 
looked as follows: Yusupov - 4 /  out of 6; 
Kasparov, Lanka and Kharitonov - 3/2.
The second half of the tournament saw 
some serious bloodshed. First Kharitonov 
fell behind, after losing to Zaid and me. But 
Lanka, by contrast, burst ahead by beating 
Magerramov and Yermolinsky. At the same 
time Yusupov suddenly came to a halt, 
losing two games - to the same opponents 
Magerramov and Yermolinsky. And, al­
though I lost with Black to Zaid, in the 12th 
round I defeated Lanka - and at last I was 
leading the race! But in the 13th, penulti­
mate round Yusupov beat Zaid and caught 
me. We each had 6/2 out of 11, with Lanka 
on 6 and Kharitonov on S/2.
In the last round Yusupov played Black 
against Kharitonov and gained a draw. 
Lanka had White against Zaid - and he lost
83

Garry Kasparov on Garry Kasparov: Part One
his third game in a row! I had White against 
Yermolinsky, who was in last place on his 
own, and I arrived with the intention of 
'giving mate' - but I also lost. Alas, the 
Vilnius catastrophe of two years earlier 
(Game No.8) repeated itself. Bykhovsky later 
said that I 'was badly prepared fo r the 
concluding game, both in the psychological 
sense, and in the choice of specific opening 
variation' (cf. Game No.25, note to White's 
15th move). I was able to get even with 
Alexey only in the second half of the 1990s, 
when he was already a well-known Ameri­
can grandmaster...
The results of the qualifying tournament 
for the junior world cham pionships:1. 
Yusupov - 7 out of 12; 2. Kasparov - 61/ 2; 3­
6. Kharitonov, Lanka, Magerramov and Zaid
- 6; 7. Yermolinsky - 41/2 (Dolmatov with­
drew, having scored 21/2 out of 4). Thus 
Yusupov won the right to play in the ‘up to 
20' championship, and I in the ‘not older 
than 17' championship.
Nikitin: 'Although all of his opponents 
were at least three years older than him, and 
all were masters of sport, Garry had no 
doubts that he would succeed, and no words 
from  me could shake his confidence. But 
there was to be no new triumph. In such a 
tournament one could not expect a guaran­
teed success, since battling against him were 
experienced lads, who were aware of his 
strength and were able to exploit his childish 
impetuosity. Garik finished just half a point 
behind the winner, his friend Artur Yusupov, 
and by the same half point he also missed 
the master norm... For the first time I was 
with him during an entire tournament and I 
saw how difficult it was to work with Garik 
when he overestimated his possibilities. It 
was here that our serious problems, con­
nected with chess psychology, began.'
Bykhovsky: 'The intensity of the play was
the cause of excessive anxiety and, as a 
consequence, bad mistakes, the percentage 
of which exceeded the usual norm. This also 
explains the uncertain play of the leaders 
towards the finish... Every appearance by 
Garik Kasparov naturally creates particular 
interest, and his result in Leningrad created 
big debates. Many, among them Kasparov 
himself, were not satisfied with the competi­
tive outcome. Others, and they include me, 
think that 2nd place was a quite honourable 
result. But if one talks about the quality of 
play, three months ago in Riga at the USSR 
Junior 
Championship, 
where 
Kasparov 
scored 802 out of 9. it looked better. Two 
days after the tournament, Botvinnik, in 
whose chess school Kasparov studies, care­
fully looked though all Garik's games with 
him. He praised him fo r his achievement, but 
at same time he severely criticised him and 
gave his diagnosis: “There is a noticeable 
desire to solve all problems by means of 
tactics alone, and an excessive fascination 
with lengthy, ill-considered opening varia­
tions." Well, every player, especially a 14- 
year-old, has the right to make mistakes. It is 
important to learn from  them and correct 
them as soon as possible.'
Four months later, early in September 
1977, I again travelled to France - this time 
to the first official World Cadet Champion­
ship. On this occasion we played in the 
picturesque resort of Cagnes-sur-Mer on 
the famous French Riviera, which with its 
boulevards resembled summer-time Baku. 
The schedule for this Swiss event was very 
demanding: a round in the evening, com­
pletion of adjourned games the following 
morning, the next round in the evening, 
and so on throughout the tournament, 
without a single free day.
I was accompanied by Anatoly Byk- 
hovsky, state trainer of the USSR Sports
84

Baku Universities
Committee. Again the sports authorities 
did not allow Nikitin to travel abroad with 
me, and he had to limit himself to a num­
ber of written instructions for the tourna­
ment, for example: 'Try and obtain points 
using your positional understanding and 
endgame technique, which have become 
much better after a year of independent 
work and study at sessions of the Botvinnik 
School. Play solidly, with a minimum of risk. 
In play based "on understanding" most of 
your opponents will create problems fo r 
themselves... ’
I made a good start - three wins, but the 
American Whitehead and the Pole Weider 
began in similar fashion. In the 4th round I 
lost an undistinguished game to an oppo­
nent who was by no means the strongest - 
Kappe from West Germany, while Weider 
suffered such a heavy defeat against 
Whitehead that he fell out of contention for 
the lead. I was able to recover quickly from 
my loss and after a draw with Whitehead I 
won a further couple of games.
However, the lead was seized by the Ice­
landic player Jon Amason, the adult cham­
pion of his country and a future grandmas­
ter - 61/2 out of 7! In the 8th round I faced a 
very difficult task: trailing Amason by a 
point and playing Black against him, I had 
to win without fail in order to retain 
chances of victory in the tournament.
G am e 19 
J.A rn aso n -G .K asp aro v
W orld Cadet C ham pionship, 
8th round, 
Cagnes-sur-M er 15.09.1977 
Sicilian D efence B85
1 e4 c5 2 C2Jf3 e6 3 d4 cxd4 4 C2Jxd4 <?Jf6 5 
-::Jc3 d6 6 &e2 a6 (6...C2Jc6 7 i.e3 - Game
No.3) 7 a4 C2Jc6 (2) 8 i.e3 &e7 9 0-0 0-0 10 
f4 1lt'c7 (10...^d7 11 C2Jb3!) 11 'it>h1
Another 
tabiya 
of 
the 
classical 
Scheveningen is the line 11 'i!Ve1 C2Jxd4 12 
&xd4 e5 (Game Nos.59, 60 in Revolution in 
the 70s).
11...1:Id8 (5)
At that time I liked this move with the 
idea of 12 ,&f3 tZJe5!, and the e8-square may 
come in useful for the knight. But later I 
exclusively played 11... .l:i.e8 and I developed 
this set-up in detail in my first two matches 
with Karpov (cf. Kasparov vs. Karpov 1975­
1985).
12 'i'e 1 C2Jxd4 13 i.xd 4  e5 14 fxe5
14 
&e3 exf4 15 i.x f4  &e6 16 'ifg3 C2Jd7 
17 i.d 3 tZJe5 is also harmless (Karpov-Ribli, 
Leningrad 1977). But that same year Geller 
demonstrated a more unpleasant plan for 
White - 14 &g1! exf4 15 a5! (Game No.61 
in Revolution in the 70s).
14...dxe5 15 &e3 i.e 6 (2) 16 'iVg3
16...'i'a5 (21)
Avoiding the bind with a4-a5, although 
there was nothing terrible about that, and
16. ..Sd7 or 16...'it>h8 would have been quite 
alright. Black's position is not bad, although 
it should not be overestimated.
17 Sad1?!
Unusual passivity for this opponent -
85

Garry Kasparov on Garry Kasparov: Part One
apparently, the burden of leading affected 
him. 17 i.g5 <;h8 18 'i'h4! was far more 
energetic, with the threat of 2xf6, which is 
by no means decisive, but promises White 
the initiative - say, 18...fig8 19 &d3 'i'b4 20 
lbd5 lbxd5 21 exd5 'i'xh4 22 i.xh 4  i.xh 4 23 
dxe6 with a favourable ending. In the final, 
11th round Santo Roman played the 
weaker 18 ..td3 against me, but I too re­
plied not very successfully - 18...Itd7 
(18. ..^ 4 !?  or 18...1d4!? was stronger), and 
after 19 lbd5! ^.xd5 20 exd5 l:txd5 21 ^xf6 
..txf6 22 'i¥h3 (22 'i'f3!?) 22. ..e4 23 ..txe4 
l:th5 24 Wf3 White gained a draw without 
any trouble. A pity: if I had won this game I 
would have finished 2nd. ..
Amason plays more simply, thinking 
only about a draw. ‘But the Sicilian Defence 
is an insidious opening, and not without 
reason is it said: White either gives mate, or 
loses in the endgame. And here, on encoun­
tering the opponent's obvious intention to 
"stifle" the play, Garry does not become 
nervous 
and does 
not endeavour to 
sharpen the game “at any price", but looks 
for ways to accumulate small gains, not 
fearing the transition into an endgame.' 
(Nikitin)
17..J:txd1 (12) 18 Jlxd1 .Ud8 19 Sxd8+ ..txd8
The exchanges have clearly been to
Black's advantage: there are many weak­
nesses in White's position - the e4-pawn 
and his entire queenside.
20 ; h6 g6 (8)
A useful move. Without the rooks White 
has no chances of an attack, whereas Black 
will soon activate his dark-square bishop, 
and when his queen goes to b4 White's 
position will come under pressure.
21 h3 ..tb6! (4) 22 &e3 .id 4 (7)
Both defending the eS-pawn, and press­
ing on the knight. As often happens in the 
Sicilian, White has ended up in a difficult 
position without making any bad mistake.
23 'iVf2 Jl.xe3 (3) 24 'i'xe3 'i'b4 25 b3
25..."id4! (2)
An unpleasant surprise for Amason: 
Black himself initiates the exchange of 
queens! ‘Wisdom, unusual for a 14-year- 
old. White unexpectedly finds himself in 
zugzwang. I flatter myself with the hope 
that during the game Garik remembered 
my instructions.' (Nikitin)
26 'iVd3 'lt>g7! 27 i.f1
Also after 27 <;h2 h5 28 il.f1 'i'f2! White 
would have had problems finding useful 
moves.
27...1Llh5! (2)
An active sortie with a tactical point. Also 
interesting was 27. ..<1Jd7!? 28 Wxd4exd4 29
86

Baku Universities
.'bb1 li:lc5 30 li:ld2 f5 31 e5 'it>f7 with the 
better endgame: 32 ctJf3 d3 33 &xd3 i.xb3!.
28 Wf3?
Amason gives in to the 'queen war' and 
he allows a decisive invasion. 28 'i'xd4? was 
bad because of the interposition 28 ...Cbg3+!, 
leading after 29 'ig1 exd4 30 li:le2 li:lxe2+
31 i.xe2 c;i>f6 32 'ltf2 'lte5 and ...^d7-c6 to a 
won bishop ending. 28 g4?! was also insuf­
ficient: 28 ... li:lf4 29 'i'xd4 exd4 30 li:ld1 (30 
.'be2 li:lxe2! 31 i.xe2 Wf6 and wins) 30. ..d3!? 
or 30. . .h5!? 31 li:lf2 (31 gxh5 f5!) 31...'it>f6 etc.
28 
'lth2 was comparatively more resil­
ient, after which Black in turn could avoid 
the queen exchange - 28 ...'i'f2! 29 li:ld1 
®f4+ 30 'it>g1 li:lg3 31 ctJf2 h5 with powerful 
pressure.
28 ...'i'd2! (2) 29 'i'd3 (not seeing any other 
way of defending the c2-pawn) 29 ...'i¥f2! (2)
30 'it>h2 (30 ^ e2 i.xh3!) 30. ..li:lf4 31 'if3  
'!Wxc2 (2)
31...li:lxh3 32 'i'xf2 li:lxf2 would also have 
won, but it is simpler to retain the active 
queen.
32 li:ld5 &xd5 (2)
A 
minor 
blemish. 
The 
immediate
32... Wd2! was more forceful, and if 33 li:lxf4 
'!Wxf4+!.
33 exd5 "Yl!Vd2 34 &c4
It would appear that Amason's will to
resist was already broken. White's last 
chance was 34 d6! 'i'xd6 35 Wxb7, although 
after 35...li:ld3! 36 g3 (36 i.xd3 e4+!) 36...a5 
Black has a technically won position.
34...f5! 35"Ylg3 h6l (2)
By depriving the queen of the g5-square, 
Black puts his opponent in zugzwang.
36 d6 'i'xd6 (the rest is agony) 37 'iNc3 li:lh5 
38 i.e 2  li:lf6 39 'iNc8 e4+ 40 Wh1 'i¥e7 (2)
After rattling off the moves to the time 
control, White resigned (0-1). Times: 2.29­
1.33.
After this important win there was now 
a trio of leaders: Kasparov, Amason and 
Whitehead on 61/2 out of 8. Bykhovsky: 'It 
appeared that Garry was now in a good 
position fo r a finishing burst, but in fact he 
had run out of steam. In the last three 
games his play was much weaker; he made 
frequent oversights and managed only three 
draws. Success went to the 16-year-old - an 
older and physically stronger player.'
Results 
of 
the 
1977 
World 
Cadet 
Championship: 1. Amason - 9 out of 11; 2. 
Whitehead - 81/ 2; 3. Kasparov - 8, followed 
by the likes of Morovic, McNab and the 12- 
year-old Short, who also weakened at the 
finish (altogether - 30 participants). It is a 
curious fact worth noting that Amason
87

Garry Kasparov on Garry Kasparov: Part One
actually became the first Icelandic world 
champion not only in chess, but also in the 
entire history of sport in that country!
Why, as the tournament favourite, did I 
obviously not play up to my potential? 
Apparently, as in Wattignies the year 
before, what told was the tiring schedule 
and the unaccustomed surroundings - 
alongside there was no one close to me, 
and I was quite unable to concentrate fully 
on my play. Three years later, after winning 
the world under-20 championship in Dort­
mund, I commented in an interview: 'In 
those cadet competitions perhaps objec­
tively I was somewhat stronger than my 
opponents, but I had an incorrect impres­
sion of tournament strategy as a whole. 
However, now I have behind me the experi­
ence of some strong adult tournaments. I 
have more strength for the finish, and I 
have become more stable psychologically.'
This comparative failure was especially 
distressing when compared with the tri­
umph of my friend and rival Artur Yusupov, 
who in those same autumn days became 
world under-20 champion. The many years 
of rivalry between me and Mark Dvoretsky's 
pupils - Yusupov and Dolmatov - contin­
ued to the end of the 1982 Interzonal 
Tournaments, although in the 1981 USSR 
Championship it was already evident that I 
had moved ahead.
Incidentally, in the mid-1970s Dvoretsky 
assisted Botvinnik with the lessons in his 
school, and he also made a valuable contri­
bution to my chess development. Nikitin: 
‘While being a player of grandmaster stan­
dard, Dvoretsky found his true calling in 
research and training - he developed inno­
vative methods fo r the teaching of chess 
strategy and the endgame, and he created a 
card index of test positions, now known to 
all professionals. The juniors who came to
the sessions of the school had to solve these 
problems. Garry always tried to get to the 
essence of the position, and this essence was 
engraved in his memory, gradually improv­
ing his technique. For his endgame knowl­
edge Garik is greatly indebted to Dvoretsky. 
Alas, the growth of his assistant's independ­
ence did not greatly please Botvinnik, and 
early in 1978 they parted. Together with 
Dvoretsky. Yusupov and Dolmatov also left 
the school...'
After the return from Cagnes-sur-Mer I 
had a lingering feeling of dissatisfaction. It 
was a critical moment, perhaps one of the 
turning points in my life.
Trips to tournaments and chess training 
sessions took up much of my time, and left 
increasingly less for contact with my con­
temporaries. This was my fate - an early 
contact with people older than me: adult 
men who as though replaced my lost fa­
ther, introducing into my upbringing a 
male basis and thereby balancing the 
strong influence of maternal love. But ever 
so, I led a rather unnatural life for my age 
and already then I sensed that I was beinc 
partly deprived of my childhood. Occupied 
with mysterious events and adult prob­
lems, for my contemporaries I was as 
though from another planet. And at times 
had a terrible desire to become a norma' 
boy, like all the others. .. Soon I would be 1S 
years old, and I thought that if in the nea- 
future I did not gain the master title, 
would be time to think about anothe- 
profession. How long could I go on beir.; 
considered promising; wasn't it time t: 
achieve 'adult' results?
Russian honoured trainer Boris Postovsk. 
recalls: ‘In October 1977 the USSR Champ - 
onship First League was held in Baku, and 
was seconding grandmasters Yuri Razuvae. 
and Boris Gulko, who, incidentally. qualife:
88

Baku Universities
fo r the Premier League and two months 
later became USSR champion. Several times 
young Carik Kasparov looked in at my room
- to discuss chess topics, and at the same 
time pass on presents from  his mother (an 
exotic jam made from feijoa berries was 
especially tasty). Watching Carik pouring 
out variations, Razuvaev was unable to 
conceal his admiration, but on one occasion 
Gulko sadly lamented: “There it is, our ruin 
in the not too distant future..." These were 
prophetic words! But it is amusing that, 
against Razuvaev and Gulko, Kasparov has 
been left with a negative score.’
In November my trainers began an in­
tensive search for a tournament where I 
could again try to achieve the master norm. 
It would have been most convenient to do 
this on my home ground, but for the mo­
ment nothing appropriate in Baku was 
anticipated. Nikitin: ‘The next such tourna­
ment was due to begin the following Janu­
ary in Minsk, but there the young Baku 
player was certainly not expected - they had 
enough of their own competitors. And here 
Botvinnik came to our aid, by writing to the 
Belorussian Chess Federation. They could not 
refuse him, and early in December the 
desired invitation was received. We began 
preparingfor the trip to Minsk.’
Right to the end of the year I worked in­
tensively, studying new opening set-ups 
and playing training games. I especially 
remember one of these, with my old friend 
and rival Elmar Magerramov, played in the 
republic chess club.
It should be said that at that time I often 
followed the opening ideas and discoveries 
made jointly with Elmar. We both played 
the Scheveningen, instilled in us by Privo­
rotsky, but Elmar also employed the Najdorf 
Variation with 7...^>6 - later I also in­
cluded it in my repertoire. Under the influ­
ence of my old friend I also began playing 
both the flexible 'Hedgehog' set-up, andthe 
sharp Modern Benoni... But that day, for 
virtually the second time in my life, in a 
serious game I decided to go in for a 
Queen's Gambit.
G am e 20 
E.M agerram o v-G .K asparo v
Train in g  G am e, 
Baku 10.12.1977 
Queen's G am bit 0 5 8
1 l2lf3 l2Jf6 2 d4 e6 3 c4 ds 4 l2lc3 .; e7 S i.g S 
0-0 6 e3 h6 7 i.h 4  b6
The only reason I chose the Tartakower- 
Makogonov-Bondarevsky 
Variation 
was 
that I had prepared an interesting novelty 
in a line employed by Elmar. But later, 
before my matches with Korchnoi (1983) 
and Karpov (1984/85), I made a genuinely 
deep study of it, paying particular attention 
to a number of model games by Spassky 
and Geller (cf. Volume Ill of My Great Prede­
cessors, pp.321-327).
8 Wb3
Polugayevsky's favourite plan. In the 
1980s I also tried 8 'i¥c2 (Came No.41) or, 
most often, 8 .i.e2.
89

Garry Kasparov on Garry Kasparov: Part One
8...11.b7 9 .: xf6 . ' xf6 10 cxds exds 11 l:tdl 
c5!?
Here is my invention - a pawn sacrifice! 
It is hard to imagine a more audacious and 
paradoxical move: after all, White has done 
everything in his powers to prevent ...c7-cS.
Later a related variation became more 
popular: 11...2e8 12 - d3 c5!? 13 dxc5 ctJd7!
14 c6 (14 cxb6?! tOc5! and ...tt:Jxd3+)
14...Axc6 IS 0-0 tOc5 (Gulko-Radashkovich, 
Rostov-on-Don 
1971; 
Kasparov-Beliavsky, 
46th USSR Championship, Tbilisi 1978). 
Things even reached the stage that White 
began anticipating ...c7-cS with 12 a3 
(Korchnoi-Kasparov, 
lOth 
match game, 
London 1983; Kramnik-Kasparov, 3rd match 
game, Moscow 2001).
12 dxcs ctJd7!
13 c6!?
A pragmatic reply. Of course, in the first 
instance I considered the variations with 13 
cxb6 tOc5 14 'ic2 (14^b>4?! 'iVd6!) and I was 
intending to play the crazy gambit 14.d4?!
IS t2Jxd4! 1Vxb6 ‘with pressure for the two 
pawns'. However, Makogonov (in contrast 
to Stohl) disapproved of this idea, and he 
was probably right: by returning one of the 
pawns - 16 &e2 &xg2 17 2 g l i.b 7 18 t2Jf5 
'it>h8 19 Md6! 'i/O (19 -.'ia5? 20 Sxf6! gxf6
21 tt:Jd6) 20 t2Jd5 gxd5 21 Sxd5, White
retains prospects of an attack - for exam­
ple, if 21 ...1Vxh2?! 22 S fl t2Je6, then 23 
t2Jxh6!.
In Stohl's opinion, 14. . .Wxb6(?!) IS t2Jxd5 
; xd5 16 £\.xd5 l:ac8 17 gc4 is insufficient 
for Black, as is 14...axb6(!) IS i.e2 - but in 
fact this is good for him: 1S. ...&xc3+! 16 
bxc3 (16 'iWxc3 Sxa2 with equality) 16 . ..1Vc7
17 0-0 t2Je4, regaining the pawn. After IS 
l2Jd4 .txd4! 16 exd4 t2Je4 White is also 
unable to retain his material advantage.
13...^xc6 14 l2Jd4?!
Again erring on the cautious side. 14 
.te2 tOc5 was also inappropriate, but 14 
t2Jxd5!? was stronger and more critical:
14 ... t2Jc5 IS t2Jxf6+ 'ixf6  16 '1Wc3! 't'Vxc3+ 17 
bxc3, reaching a perfectly safe endgame 
with 
an 
extra pawn, 
although 
after
17 ....i.xf3 18 gxf3 t2Ja4 (Stohl) Black has 
sufficient counterplay.
14... 
^ xd4!
In the 4th game of my second match 
with Karpov (198S) in a similar position I 
wrongly 
avoided this 
non-routine 
ex­
change, but here its advantages are far 
more specific and obvious.
15 Sxd4?!
A difficult choice: in the event of IS exd4 
'iVgS! 16 g3 J:fe8+ (16...WfS!?) 17 Ae2 
Wg4(hS) Black also has a dangerous initia­
90

Baku Universities
tive, although here it is more difficult for 
his c6-bishop to display its strength. Elmar 
was hoping somehow to defend, but he 
unexpectedly encountered a unique series 
of moves, consisting of eleven successive 
attacks!
15...tt:Jc5! 16 W dl tt:Je6! 17 l:td2
17...d4! (the weak isolated d-pawn has 
suddenly been transformed into a formida­
ble battering-ram) 18 exd4?!
The ‘ugly' 18 tt:Je2! was more resilient, 
when 18...Wd5 (5tohl) is good, or else
18...'iVe7!? 19 lt:Jxd4 tt:Jxd4 20 l:txd4 l1ad8 
with an attack.
18...5.8
An ambush! However, 18...lt:Jf4 came into 
consideration: 
19 d5! We7+!? 
20 &e2 
::x g 2+ 21 'iti>fl ^d7 22 Sg 1 (22 4xg2? 'iVg5+
23 'iti>fi ^ h 3+ 24 4e1 Wg2 25 l:.fl .l:tae8 and 
wins) 22. ..lt:Jf4, and White does not have the 
•esource 23 &g4 f5 24 l:.d4? because of
24 ...fxg4 (the rook comes in useful on the 
' 8-squarel).
19 f3?
A decisive mistake, as was 19 ifg4? h5!
20 'Yi'g3 h4 21 'iWg4 f5. It was essential to 
::Jlay 19 d5! lt:Jf4+ 20 &e2 tt:Jxg2+ 21 'iti>fl 
i.d7! 22 Bg 1 ! (but not 5tohl's 'cooperative' 
. ariation 22 '>t>xg2? Wg5+ 23 4 f l ^h3+ 24 
,;e 1 iVg2) and although this position is
unpleasant for White, at least he is not 
losing by force: 22 ...lt:Jf4 (22. ..lt:Jh4 is also not 
bad) 23 i.g4! f5 24 l:.d4! fxg4 25 l:.xf4 'i!Vh4 
26 Wg2 fie 5 27 '>t>h1, still somehow holding 
on.
19...i.xf3l!
To be honest, I did not even especially 
calculate the variations, since I had no 
doubts about the correctness of the piece 
sacrifice.
20 gxf3 (20 ifxf3 tt:Jg5+) 20. ..ir'h4+ 21 S f2 
tt:Jxd4+
The alternative was 21...lt:Jf4+!? 22 &e2 
lt:Jg2+ or 22 lt:Je4 f5 23 .tc4+ 4h8 24 0-0 
fxe4 etc.
22 i.e 2 (22 tt:Je4 l:.xe4+!) 22...lt:Jxf3+ 23 4 f1  
'i¥h3+ 24 .l:!.g2 lt:Jh4
First 24. ...l:tad8! was more accurate, for 
example: 25 tt:Jd5 lt:Jh4 or 25 .txf3 l:.xd1+ 26 
&xd1 f5 27 Shg1 g5 and wins.
25 l:.hg1 SadS 26 'ie 1
26 
'i1'a 4! (with the idea of 'ig 4) would 
have prolonged the resistance. After this 
there could have followed 26...lt:Jxg2 27 
.l:!.xg2 'ike3 (5tohl) or the more energetic 
26. ..tt:Jf5!? (Nikitin) 27 4e1! (27 'ir'f4 l:d4l 
and ...lt:Je3+) 27...'iW'e3 28 'ir'c2 - in Stohl's 
opinion ‘the defences still hold', but in my 
view after 28 ...Se5! Black has an irresistible 
attack.
91

Garry Kasparov on Garry Kasparov: Part One
26. ...l:!.d3! (now it all ends very quickly) 27 
'if2  (27 tt:ld1 tt:lf3) 27...tt:lf3!
I remembered this picturesque position 
for a long time: rarely do you see such a 
large number of stalemated pieces!
28 2h1
It would have been suicidal to play 28 
lDd5(bS) l:td1+!! 29 ^xd1 lDxh2 mate! or 28 
Wg3 lDd2+! 29 We1 l:txg3 30 l:txg3 ctJf3+ 31 
'it>f2 tt:lxg1 32 Sxh3 tt:lxh3+ etc.
2B....l:!.de3! 29 Ii.hg1 <;PhS
Of course, the computer demands the 
simple 29...Sxc3!, since if 30 bxc3 there 
follows 30. ..tiJxh2+ 31 We1 1Vxc3+ and mate 
in 12 moves. But I had already seen 30 ...b5. 
30.l:!.h1
30...b5!
And in view of 31 a3 a5 with the un­
avoidable ...b5-b4 White resigned (0-1). 
Times: 1.50-0.40.
This crushing win over a master played 
an important psychological role, regaining 
me my former confidence, and I now trav­
elled to Minsk full ofhope.
This game summed up the year 1977, 
concluding the first, learning stage of my 
chess career - my ‘Baku universities'. No 
one, myself included, guessed that I was on 
the threshold of a qualitative leap in my 
chess development.
92

Chapter Two
Adult Games
M aster Class
Sokolsky Memorial Tournament (Minsk, 
08.01-02.02.1978): 1. Kasparov - 13 out of 
17; 2. Kupreichik - 121/2; 3. Shereshevsky - 
11; 4- 6. Kapengut, Klovans and Mochalov - 
101/2; 7- 8. Dydyshko and Lutikov - 91/ 2; 9. 
Yuferov - 9; 10-11. Roizman and Zakharov -
81/2; 12-13. Begun and Smirnov - 8; 14-15. 
Mariasin and Litvinov - 7; 16. Kagan - 4; 17. 
Veremeichik - 31/ 2; 18. Lyuboshits - 21/2.
This tournament in memory of the well- 
known master, teacher and theoretician 
Alexey Sokolsky (1908-1969) was the main 
chess event of the year in Belorussia. From 
outside only distinguished masters were 
invited, but for me an exception was made
- not so much because I was two-times 
USSR junior champion, but out of respect 
for Botvinnik.
Early in January 1978 I flew in with my 
rnother to frosty, snowy Minsk (Shakarov 
and then Nikitin arrived later). Here every­
thing was unusual: the severe winter, the 
cold hotel on the outskirts of the city, and 
:he freezing tram in which the players 
:ravelled to the playing venue - the repub­
lic chess club. After settling in, we set off to 
look for a canteen: it was time for dinner. 
However, no sooner had I made one uncer­
tain step on the pavement, when I fell into 
a deep hole, covered by a thick layer of 
snow. I was able to get out only with my 
mother's help. I was completely soaked, and 
I had to rush back to the hotel to change. 
My mother was seriously alarmed, but later 
she laughed: ‘It's better to take a tumble 
before the start, than in the tournament 
itself!'
During the drawing of lots I looked 
round with a certain trepidation at my 
formidable opponents: Anatoly Lutikov (a 
grandmaster!), several times a finalist in 
the championship of the country, Albert 
Kapengut (an outstanding theoretician and 
trainer), Viktor Kupreichik, Yanis Klovans 
and Alexander Zakharov, and, apart from 
them, a dozen solid masters, practically the 
entire cream of Belorussian chess. I re­
member saying to my mother: 'How diffi­
cult it will be to score this "plus two" .. .' 
(that was the master norm - 91/2 out of 17). 
Our small ‘team' was also looked at with
93

Garry Kasparov on Garry Kasparov: Part One
interest: what surprises will be caused by 
this audacious youth from distant Baku? 
Nikitin: 
'All 
were 
expecting something
exotic, but that which happened was not 
anticipated by anyone'.
I prepared well, especially with regard to 
the openings: I already had my own prepa­
rations in the most seemingly well-studied 
positions, assessed by theory as equal. As a 
result I was able to create sharp, unusual 
situations, which were to my taste. Strictly 
speaking, it was only here that my battle at 
the board began.
In the first round I was paired with Black 
against the 1977 Armed Forces champion 
Sergey Yuferov, who was famed as an 
opening theoretician and who successfully 
played the King's Indian Defence with both 
colours. This was the favourite opening of 
my youth, which served me faithfully for 
almost my entire career. And I decided to 
throw down a challenge to the experienced 
master! This game opened a new page in 
my competitive biography - it signified my 
entry into the world of adult chess.
Gam e 21 
S .Y u fero v-G .K asp aro v
Sokolsky M em orial To u rn am en t, 
1st round, M insk 8.01.1978 
King's Indian Defence E99
1 d4 Cbf6 2 c4 g6 3 ctJc3 ..ig7 4 e4 d6 5 &e2 
0-0 6 ctJf3 e5 7 0-0 tt:c6 8 d5 tt:e7
One of the King’s Indian tabiyas.
9 Cbe1
This continuation was popular in those 
times, but in the late-1980s 9 ctJd2 came to 
the fore, and in the mid-1990s - 9 b4.
9...ctJd7
Impeding the typical c4-cS breakthrough.
9...Cbe8 is also acceptable, as I played
against Shirov (Olympiad, Manila 1992) and 
Korchnoi (Debrecen 1992).
10 tt:d3
The main line. Later, largely through the 
efforts of Korchnoi, the old plan with 10 
.i e3 fs 11 f3 was rehabilitated (Game 
No.39 in Volume V of My Great Predeces­
sors).
10. ..f5 11 gd2 (11 exfs has long been out of 
fashion - Game No.64 in Volume IV of My 
Great Predecessors) 11...tt:f6 (11. ..f4? 12 
&g4!) 12 f3
12. ..f4
At that time everyone made this direct 
move with the idea of a pawn storm on the 
kingside. 
Later many began to prefer 
Geller's more flexible plan with 12...'it>h8 (or
94

Adult Games
11...'it'h8), for example: 13 Sc1 cS 14 g4 a6!?
1S ltJf2 h6 with the idea of ...ltJeg8, ...ltJh7 
and ... ,&f6 (Gelfand-Kasparov, Linares 1990).
13 c5
White must act energetically! The classic 
game Najdorf-Gligoric (Mar del Plata 19S3) 
went 13 b4?! gS 14 c5 h5 1S ltJf2 ltJg6! 16 
l:c1 fif7 17 cxd6 cxd6 18 a4 &f8! (defend­
ing the ‘base' pawn on d6) 19 aS .l:tg7 20 h3 
ltJh8!? (the knight goes by a roundabout 
way to h6, to support the ... gS-g4 break­
through) 21 ltJbS (21 ,&e1!?) 21 ...g4! 22 fxg4 
hxg4 23 hxg4 a6 24 ltJa3 &d7! 2S ltJc4 l:!c8
26 ltJb6 Sxc1 27 £ x c 1 ^e8 28 .= a3 ltJf7 29 
Wc2 ltJh6, and in the end Black won with a 
direct attack on the king.
13...g5
This position is topical even today: using 
the 'Gligoric method' can Black succeed in 
creating sufficient counterplay to neutral­
ise the opponent's offensive on the queen- 
side?
14 cxd6
Now 14 l:.c1 l2lg6 1S liJbS is again fash­
ionable, delaying the exchange on d6 and 
in some cases sacrificing a piece: 1S ...a6 16 
cxd6! (16 ltJa3?! g4! Pachman-Padevsky, 
Dresden 19S6) 16 ...axbS 17 dxc7 (Shariyaz- 
danov-Klimov, 
St. 
Petersburg 
1997) 
or
1S...l'H7 16 &aS! (the point of White's idea
is to provoke weaknesses) 16 ...b6 17 cxb6 
(17 cxd6 is also possible, since 17. ..bxa5? 18 
dxc7 is bad for Black) 17...cxb6 (17...axb6 18 
&e1! Najdorf-Uhlmann, Moscow 19S6) 18 
£e1 a6 19 l2lc3 hS 20 l2lb4 - in this way 
Yuferov defeated Dydyshko (Minsk 1978), 
but the modern 19...aS! is not so clear.
14... cxd6
To the surprise of the spectators, all 
these and the next eight moves were made 
quite quickly by us.
15liJf2
Yuferov demonstrates a new plan, which 
had been successfully employed by Sosonko 
against Kavalek (Wijk aan Zee 1977). We 
had both seen this game: it was published 
in Informator Volume 23. White wants to 
play Wc2 and .Ufc1, in order to intensify his 
onslaught on the queenside, and to defend 
his kingside with minimal forces - by 
holding the g4-point. The master was 
apparently hoping that his young opponent 
would not cope with the difficult problems, 
but I had prepared, as it seemed to me, a 
lethal novelty!
The usual continuation is 1S !!c1 ltJg6 16 
ltJbS l:f7 17 Wc2, and since 17...g4?! 18 ltJc7 
gxf3 19 gxf3 &h3 (Larsen-Tal, Sth match 
game, Eersel 1969) is dubious because of 20 
ltJe6!, the black knight is forced to retreat -
95

Garry Kasparov on Garry Kasparov: Part One
17. ...Ct:e8. After 18 a4 h5 19 ctJf2 f
 20 h3 
.l:!.g7 the following continuations are all 
unclear: 21 CZJxa7 (Averkin-Kasparov, Mos­
cow 1979), 21 a5 (Polugayevsky-Tal, 7th 
match game, Alma-Ata 1980), and 21 Wb3 
ctJh4 22 .l:!.c2 (Ivanchuk-Timman, 4th match 
game, 
Hilversum 
1991; 
Ivanchuk- 
Cheparinov, 5ofia 2008). At any event, I 
always happily went in for these compli­
cated positions with Black.
15...CZJg6 16 a4
16 
'iWc2 .l:!.f7 (16 ...hs 17 ttJbs) 17 .l:!.fcl is an 
attempt to refine the move order, hoping to 
gain an advantage after 17 ...ctJe8 18 a4 h5
19 CZJcdl f
 20 Sa3i a6 21 'iWc3 ; d7 22 
'iWa5i b6 23 'iWh4 .l:!.g7 24 Sac3 ctJh4 25 h3 
&e7 26 £ e l (Aronian-Nakamura, Bursa 
2010), but 17 ...a6 18 a4 h5 19 h3 g4! 
(19...ctJh4?! 20 a5!) 20 fxg4 hxg4 21 hxg4 
h6! 22 a5 i.g5 23 ctJa4 ..1h4 gives chances 
for both sides (my old analysis!).
16. ..Hf7 17 ttJb5 h5 18 h3 ..IlL.f8
Almost completing the ‘Gligoric-style' 
regrouping. Each side carries out his own 
plan, and White, while preparing a queen- 
side invasion, must be extremely attentive 
to the opponent's threats on the king side.
19 'iWc2 a6 (2)
The first step to the side! In the afore­
mentioned 5osonko-Kavalek game Black
immediately rushed into the attack -
19...g4 20 fxg4 hxg4 21 hxg4 a6 22 ctJa3 
Sg7 23 S fc l (after Ligterink's recommenda­
tion 23 ctJc4 there follows 23...ctJh4 - cf. the 
note to White's 21st move) 23. ..ctJh4 24 Wdl 
i.xg4?! (the unclear 24... ..1d7 or 24...ctJh5!? 
was better), but after 25 CZJxg4! (not 25 
..1xg4? CZJxg4 26 CZJxg4 CZJxg2! 27 'it>xg2 ^ 4
28 'it>f1 Sxg4 29 'it>e2 .l:!.g3! or 28 Wh1 .l:!.xg4+
29 'it>f3 .l:!.g3+ 30 'it>e2 Wg4+ 31 'it>f2 ^e7! 
and wins) 
25. ..ctJxg4? 
26 &xg4 'iWg5? 
(26...CZJxg2 27 'it>f1! was more resilient) 27 
ge6+ 'it>h8 28 g4! he lost.
25...t2Jxg2 is stronger (with the idea of 26 
'it>xg2? CZJxg4 and ...Wh4), as had occurred in 
the game Carbrera-Browne (Las Palmas 
1977), which Yuferov and I did not know. 
There after 26 flc3?! CZJxg4 (26 ...ctJh4!?) 27 
i.xg 4 ctJe3 28 &xe3 Wh4 sharp, roughly 
equal play developed. But here too the cool­
headed 26 'it>fl! (5tohl) would have set Black 
difficult problems: 26...ctJh4 27 & el CZJxe4
28 Wd3 CZJc5 29 .l:!.xc5! etc.
20 ctJa3 Sg7
21.l:!.fc1?
A by no means obvious but serious mis­
take. 21 CZJc4 was correct, for example:
a) 
21...ctJh4 22 Wdl (Crouch's recom­
mendation 22 &a5 We8 23 Wdl leads to 
variation 'bl' after 23 ...g4! 24 fxg4 hxg4 25
96

Adult Games
hxg4 Wg6) 22 ...g4! (Crouch's idea 22. . J:i.b8 
23 as g4 24 fxg4 hxg4 25 hxg4 CL:lxg4 26 
CL:lxg4 Wg5 runs into 27 CL:lce3! Wg6 28 g e 1 ! 
fxe3 29 CL:lf6+ 'ih 8 30 g4! or 27 ...&e7 28 
J:i.f2! Wg6 29 .M.c1 fxe3 30 CL:lxe3 with an 
obvious advantage for White) 23 fxg4 (23 
i.a5?! CL:lxf3+! - Crouch) 23...hxg4 24 hxg4 
CL:lxg4! (Crouch gives only 24. ...l:!.b8 25 .Ma3!), 
transposing into variation 'b2';
b) 
21...g4, and White faces a choice - 
whether or not to include ga5, but in both 
cases Black has sufficient counterplay: 
b1) 22 
a5 We8 23 fxg4 hxg4 24 hxg4 
CL:lh4 25 Wd1 '¥Yg6 (25. ..CL:lxg4!?) 26 CL:lb6 
gxg4 27 CL:lxg4 (27 gxg4 Be8) 27...CL:lxg2! 
(27...CL:lxg4?! is weaker: 28 gxg4 Be8 29 
gf3! CL:lxg2 30 'if2 , Chovanec-Luhrig, corre­
spondence 2000) 28 'lt>xg2 ifxe4+ 29 'lt>g1 
t:lxg4 30 gxg4 f3 31 'it>f2 Wxg4 or 31...^e7 
with equality;
b2) 22 fxg4 hxg4 23 hxg4 CL:lh4 24 Wd1 
t;Jxg4! 25 CL:lxg4 '¥Yg5 26 CL:lce3! ge7! 27 J:i.f2 
(27 Wc2 CL:lxg2) 27 ...®g6 28 Hc1 fxe3 29 
8xe3 gd7! 30 Bc7 (30 Bc4 J:i.f8) 30. . .&g5 31 
8g4 gxg4 32 .Mxg7+ 'ixg7 33 gxg5 g xe 2
34 Wb3 (34 iVc1 gf3! - this is not possible 
with the rook on b8) 34...Wxg5! 35 Wxb7+ 
Sh6 36 'ixa 8  #'e3!, spectacularly forcing a 
draw.
21 ...CLlh4 (3)
22 if d l (now Yuferov is intending to play 
CL:lc4, ga5 and CL:lb6, but - too late!)
22... i d7?! (4)
This is my novelty (replacing 22 ...g4 23 
hxg4 hxg4 24 fxg4 gxg4?! 25 CL:lxg4! - cf. 
the note to Black's 19th move). It could have 
been regarded as an improvement, had it 
not been for a fantastic stroke found in the 
computer era - 22 ...CL:lxf3+!!.
Analysis diagram
For the piece Black has a very dangerous 
attack: 23 gxf3 g4 24 i.e2 gxh3 25 g f3 
gg4! or 23 gxf3 g4 24 fxg4 (24 hxg4 will not 
do: 24 ... hxg4 25 CL:lxg4 CL:lxg4 26 fxg4 gxg4
27 g x g 4 ^ 4 !) 24. ..hxg4 25 CL:lc4 g3! 26 CLlg4 
CL:lxg4 27 gxg4 gxg4 28 hxg4 ^ 4  29 irf3 
J:i.c8! etc. Well, there is logic in this: for an 
instant White has weakened his defences, 
and his forces are stuck on the other side of 
the board.
23 CLlc4
After the prophylactic move 23 £e1 
(Stohl) White has to reckon not only with 
23. ..g4, but also 23 ...b5.
23...g4
Now is the time! Black cannot bring him­
self to play 23. ..b6?!, while 23. ..CL:lxf3+!? 24 
gxf3 g4 no longer promises more than 
equality after 25 fxg4 hxg4 26 ga5! '¥Ye8!
97

Garry Kasparov on Garry Kasparov: Part One
(26...gxh3+? 27 ^ tn!) 27 hxg4 (27 tt:lb6 f3)
27...'ih5! 28 'Ot>f1 ^xg4 29 ^e1 ^xe2 30 
'i'xe2 f3 31 Vid3 b5 32 tt:d2 etc.
24 hxg4 (if 24 &a5 'ie7  25 tt:lb6? Crouch 
gives 
2 5.tt:Jxg2, 
although the decisive
25 ... gxh3! is simpler) 24...hxg4 25 fxg4 
Now the inclusion of the moves 25 i.a 5  ?!
'iVe7! (2S...tt:Jxf3+?! 26 i.xf3  'i'e7(e8) 27 i.e 2 
is not so clear) could have proved fatal for 
White: 26 fxg4 tt:xg4 27 tt:Jxg4 tt:xg2 28 
^xg2 &xg4 29 ^xg4 'Yih4 30 ^ 1  2xg4+ 31 
f
 l:!.g3+ 32 ^>e2 'i'g4+ 33 Wf2 i.e7! or 33 
'itd2 b5! with irresistible threats.
25. 
..tt:xg2?!
This piece sacrifice was the fruit of home 
analysis, but there was something that I 
failed to take into account. First 2S. ..tt:lxg4 
was more accurate (but not 2S...^xg4? 26 
tt:xg4 tt:xg2 27 ^ fl! - Stohl), for example:
a) 
26 tt:xg4? tt:xg2! 27 ^xg 2 1Lxg4 28 
1Lxg4 ^ 4 . An already familiar situation 
with the sacrifice of two pieces. With his 
knight on c4 White has somewhat better 
chances than before, but even so his de­
fence is extremely difficult: 29 'i'kh1 (or 29 
'itf1 l:!.xg4 30 ^ e2 2g3!) 29...1xg4+ 30 'itf3 
Bg3+ 31 We2 'ig4+ 32 ^f2 bS! (not now
32. ..i.e7 in view of 33 Sa3!) 33 tt:lxe5 (if 33 
axb5? or 33 tt:b6? there is the decisive
33 ...la7!) 33...dxe5 34 Sc7 ^g7, and 'Black
has regained the piece, and still has a 
strong attack' (Crouch);
b) 
26 ^xg4 tt:xg2 27 ^ fl! &xg4 28 tt:lxg4 
'i'g5 29 tt:f2 (29 ^xg2? ifh 4; 29 tt:b6 2e8)
29...tt:le3+ (29-..tt:h4 is also not bad) 30 
i.xe3 fxe3 31 'i'f3 exf2 32 Wxf2 (Crouch) 
32 ...^ 4+  33 ^e2 ^ 2 +  34 \\Vf2 Wxf2+ 35 
'it>xf2 1Le7 with a roughly equal ending.
26 Wxg2
Played after considerable thought; White 
was wondering whether Black would have 
been set more problems by the interposi­
tion of 26 1i.a5, and only after 26. ..'i'e7 - 27 
'itxg2 tt:xg4 28 1J.xg4 1J.xg4 29 'ixg4! 
(Crouch 
gives 
only 
29 
tt:Jxg4? 
'ih4)
29....1.xg4+ 30 tt:lxg4 Wh4 31 2g1!. Now 
Black does not have the defence 31...\\Vg3+?
32 'it>fl Wd3+ 33 ^f2 1Lg7 (as in a variation 
from the game; if 33 ...\\Vxc4? 34 tt:xeS+) 
because of the simple 34 tt:xd6, but after
31...^f7! he is able to neutralise the oppo­
nent's slight plus: 32 tt:f2 'ifg3+ 33 'it>fl 'iro3 
or 32 'it>f3 b5 33 axb5 (33 tt:b6 'Yih3+ 34 'ite2 
'Wb3! with equality) 33...axb5 34 tt:d2 ^ 3 +  
35 'it>e2 ^e7 36 tt:lf3 Sg8 37 tt:lf2 Sxg1 38 
l:!.xg1 l\Vc8 39 l^’d2 'i!Vc4 etc.
26...tt:xg4 27 &xg4 (of course, not 27 
tt:lxg4? i1.xg4 28 ,&xg4 'inl4) 27...1Lxg4
28 l\Vxg4!
An unpleasant surprise - a counter
98

Adult Games
queen sacrifice! My over-optimistic analysis 
concluded with a pursuit of the king: 28 
lt:Jxg4(?) Wh4 29 'it>fl .l:.xg4 30 'it>e2 .Ug3! or
29 'iVh1 .l:.xg4+ 30 'it>f3 l:!.g3+ 31 'it>e2 Wg4+
32 'it>f2 b5! etc. (as in the note to 25 ...lt:Jxg2). 
This is what I was aiming for, and the 
opponent's unexpected reply shocked me: 
now White has chances not only of repel­
ling the attack, but also of converting his 
material advantage!
On the preceding moves I had spent only 
23 minutes, but now for the first time I 
stopped to think: my swift attack had not 
succeeded, and I had to retune myself for a 
more complicated fight.
28....1:!.xg4+ (7)
Things 
are 
obviously 
worse 
after
2 8 ...'i4 ?  29 Wxg7+ i.xg 7 30 Sg1! (Stohl).
29 lt:Jxg4
What next?
29...Hc8? (7)
This 
seemingly 
natural, 
developing 
move, to which I previously attached an 
exclamation mark, proves simply to be a 
loss of time at a critical moment of the 
battle. The immediate 2 9 ...^ 4  would have 
enabled Black, albeit not without some 
difficulty, to solve his problems and main­
tain equality: 30 Sg1! Wg3+! 31 'it>fl! 
(Stohl's variation 31 'it>h1 'ifil3+ 32 lt:Jh2+ is
worse because of 32. . .'>t>f7!) 31...iVd3+ 32 
'it>f2 i.g 7! 33 lt:Jh6+ (33 b3 Wd4+!, but not
33...^xb3?! 34 2ac1 4 f8  35 lt:Jxd6! 'iV'b6+ 36 
lt:Je3! with a powerful attack) 33 ...'1t>f8 34 
lt:Jf5 Wxc4 (it is bad to play 34....l:.c8? 35 
.l:.xg7! .l:.xc4 36 Bh 1 or 34. ..i.f6?! 35 .l:.g6 
i.h4+ 36 lt:Jxh4 Wd4+ 37 \t>f3 ^ xc4 38 
.l:.ag1!) 35 .l:!.xg7, and after 35. . .Wc2! 36 Bh1 
iVxd2+ 37 4f3 'iVd3+ 38 'it>g4 We2+ 39 'it>g5 
Wg2+ 40 'it>f6 iVxh1 (Crouch) White has only 
perpetual check.
30 lt:Jh2?
An error in reply: Yuferov cracks under 
the pressure and, to his misfortune, decides 
to switch his knight to the blockading 
square f3 (although in principle the place 
for it is at f2 - defending the e4-pawn!). It 
was also bad to play 30 i.e1? Wg5! 31 Wf3 
'i1h5 or 30 lt:Ja5? 'iVh4! 31 lt:Jf2 Wg3+ 32 W fl 
f3, while 30 lt:Jf2 'iVg5+ 31 'it>fl iVg3 32 Ba3 
f3 33 lt:Je3 .l:.xc1+ 34 i.xc1 .fi.e7 (Stohl) 
would have given Black sufficient counter­
play.
However, with 30 'it>f3! White could have 
parried the attack and strengthened his 
position: 30. ..i.g7 (the queen on its own 
cannot do anything - 30. ..'ifil4? 31 Bg1! 
^ 3 +  32 'it>e2 with the threat of lt:Jf2+ or 
lt:Jgxe5+), when in the event of 31 .l:.c3 
(Crouch) Black drives the knight to the edge 
of the board - 31...b5! (not immediately
31...1.'h4? 32 Sg1) 32 axb5 axb5 33 lt:Ja3(a5) 
.Uxc3+ 34 ..ixc3 1i'h4 35 Sg1 'iVh3+ 36 'it>e2 
'it>f8 with equality, and therefore it is better 
to play 31 i.e1! (defending the h4-square 
and vacating d2) 31.b5 32 axb5 axb5 33 
lt:Jd2 .l:!.xc1 34 .l:.xc1 Wg5 (34. ..'1t>f7 35 'it>e2! 
and lt:Jh2-f3) 35 i.f2  and.l:.g1, with the hope 
of successfully regrouping and exploiting 
his superiority in number of pieces.
30...^h4 (9)
The picture has suddenly changed in 
Black's favour. The bishop on d2 is taking
99

Garry Kasparov on Garry Kasparov: Part One
away this square from the knight, hinder­
ing the defence of the weak e4-pawn.
31 l:Ic3?
Mistakes come in pairs... 31 &e1? (31 
l:Ia3? Wh7) is also hopeless in view of
31 .. .f3+! 3 2 tt:Jxf3 Wt'xe4 3 3 tt:Jcd2 '&'e2 + 34 
4h1 l:Ixc1 35 !Ixc1 e4 (Crouch) or 34 Wg3 
l:Ie8! etc., but the tension would have been 
retained by 31 &a5! f3+ 32 tt:Jxf3 Wxe4 33 
tt:Jcd2, although after 33 ...'ig4+! 34 'it>f2 
.l:xc1 35 .l:xc1 'tlrYxa4 Black's chances are 
clearly better.
31...1:!.c7! (8)
The decisive manoeuvre: a mating attack 
on the g-file is threatened.
32 Ag1
A sad necessity: if 32 4h1 lig7 33 .l:tf3, 
then 33 ...\'Wg5 34 Sf2 ®g3 35 l:taf1 Wd3 and 
wins (Stohl).
32...1:!.g7+ 33 4h 1 Sxgl+ 34 'ix g l Wh7!
It would appear that this ‘long' queen 
move, emphasising the undefended state 
of the e4-pawn, was not expected by Yuf- 
erov: here he thought for nearly all of his 
remaining time before the control.
35 &xf4
A practical chance - a sacrifice of the 
bishop for the sake of saving the e4- and 
d5-pawns, which would have fallen in quick 
succession after 35 tt:f3 ®xe4 36 4 f2  (36
tt:b6 #e2! and ... e5-e4) 36...'ixd5 (Stohl).
35 ...exf4 36 tt:d2 'id 7 (3)
The queen is carrying out an enormous 
amount of work: it both attacks the a4- 
pawn and keeps an eye on the c-file and the 
g4-square. However, 36 ...\'Wg7+ 37 'it>f1 'i¥d4 
(Stohl) was also not bad.
37 l:!.c4 Si.g7 (6)
An experienced master would probably 
have 
simply 
captured 
the 
pawn 
-
37 ...Wg7+!? 38 Wf1 ®xb2, but I was carried 
away by the idea of activating my bishop to 
continue the attack!
38 b3
38... k d4+! (11)
This unexpected and spectacular check 
prevents White from coordinating 
his 
pieces.
39 4 h l (39 Sxd4? 'ifg7+) 39.....tc5 40 tt:Jdf3 
(there is nothing better) 40... b5! (22)
I took my time over the last move before 
the control. Black breaks up the enemy 
fortifications on the 4th rank.
Here the game was not yet adjourned, 
since with a time control of 21/2 hours for 40 
moves I had used just 1 hour 28 minutes, 
and although I still had more than an hour 
in reserve, I continued playing very quickly.
41 l:!.c2 (if 41 axb5 ®xb5 42 tt:Jd2 ..te3 43 
tt:hf3 Black decides matters with 43 ... ..txd2
100

Adult Games
44 tt:xd2 #b6 - Stohl)
41...#e8 (8)
Trying to restrict White's potential activ­
ity, although again it would have been 
simpler to grab material: 41...bxa4 42 l:tg2+ 
'itf8 43 tt:Jg5 (43 bxa4 Wxa4) 43...\t>e8 44 
lt:Je6 'i¥h7 and wins (Stohl).
42 l:!.g2+ c.t>f8 43 tt:JgS
43...'i¥hs
43. ..We 5! 
(centralisation!) 
was 
more 
forceful: 44 l:tg4 Wa1+ 45 \t>g2 ^ 2 +  or 44 
tt:hf3 Wa1+ 45 \t>h2 'll!Yh8+ 46 ctJh3 bxa4 47 
bxa4 'ite7 48 tt:lfg5 't/Ve5! and wins. How­
ever, my plan does not greatly lengthen the 
winning procedure.
44 tt:e6+ \t>e7 45 l:!.g7+ (45 l:!.g4 f3! ?)
45...'itf6! 46 l:!.g4 bxa4 47 bxa4
There was similarly little comfort in 47 
tt:xc5 a3! or 47 .Mxf4+ We7 48 bxa4 'iYd1+.
47...i.e3 48 tt:Jxf4 i.x f4  49 l:!.xf4+ 't;e7 50 
't;g2 (50 .Mg4 a5!) SO...'iVdl (7) 51 lt:Jg4 Wxa4
52 tt:e3 as
The outside passed pawn decides the 
game.
53 tt:lfS+ Wd7 54 l:!.h4 Wc2+ (54. ..^ 4 ! was 
more accurate) 55 't;f3 a4 (10) 56 .Mh7+ \t>d8
Before the end of the five hour session 
the players also managed to reach the 
second time control!
57 l:!.a7
It would not have helped to play 57 l:th6 
#c3+ 58 \t>g4 a3 59 l:!.xd6+ 
60 Sa6 #d3
61 d6+ Wb7 or 57 tt:xd6 a3 58 tt:b7+ \t>c8!
59 tt:d6+ (59 d6 ^ 3 +  and ...'i/Vxb7) 59. ..'it>b8
60 Sh8+ Wa7 61 tt:lb5+ 't;a6 62 l:!.a8+ 'it>xb5 
63 l:txa3 Wd1+! 64 \t>f2 Wg4 65 l:!.e3 Wf4+ 66 
\t>e2 \t>c4, destroying the fortress.
57... ®d3+ S8 tt:le3 a3 59 'itf4 Wb3 (4) 60 tt:JfS 
#b2 0-1
Times: 3.18-2.30.
Not a bad win with Black, especially for 
the starting game. Of course, with a com­
puter to hand the mutual mistakes are very 
apparent, but the character itself of the 
play - with some Tal-like strokes! - made a 
great impression on the public. Later events
101

Garry Kasparov on Garry Kasparov: Part One
in the tournament should have shown 
whether this was a chance happening (the 
opponent was successfully caught by some 
opening preparation), or indeed the result 
of creative improvement.
In the second round I was tested by the 
highly experienced Abram Roizman, the 
author of some well-known collections of 
chess miniatures. In a Ruy Lopez he quickly 
diverged from the main theoretical paths 
by choosing the rare Bird Defence. However, 
this did not disturb me, and I passed this 
next test. The result was in fact almost a 
miniature, which so appealed to Botvinnik 
that he even briefly annotated it for the 
Yugoslav lnformator and a number of 
Soviet publications.
Came 22 
G.Kasparov-A.Roizman
Sokolsky Memorial Tournament, 
2nd round, Minsk 9.01.1978 
Ruy Lopez C61
1 e4 es 2 lLlf3 lLlc6 3 -&bs ltJd4
I did not have any deep knowledge of the 
Bird Defence, but here the first few moves 
for White simply suggest themselves.
4 ttJxd4 exd4 5 0-0
5....1.cS
Avoiding the variation 5...c6 6 ..ltc4 lLlf6 7 
Be1 d6 (Tsarenkov-Roizman, Moscow 1974), 
possibly because of 8 c3!. And the direct
6...d5 (instead of 6...lLlf6) 7 exd5 cxd5 8 
i  b5+ \ d7 9 Ite1+ lDe7 is very risky in view 
of 10 c4! a6 (it is already hard to offer Black 
any good advice) 11 ^ xd7+ Wxd7 12 d3 
0-0-0?! 13 ctJd2 'it>b8 14 b4! with a winning 
attack 
(Kasparov-Khalifman, 
Moscow 
(rapid) 2002).
6 d3
Against Kupreichik (Daugavpils 1978) I 
tried the immediate 6 ..ltc4 (with the threat 
of i xf7+) and after 6...d6 - 7 b4!? (instead 
of the usual 7 d3) 7 .....tb6 (somewhat 
sounder than 7 ...gxb4 8 Wh5 Wd7 9 
..txf7+!) 8 a4 a6 (8...a5!?) 9 d3 ctJe7 10 ^ 5  
0-0 11 ..tg5 ..te6 12 lDd2 with slightly the 
better game for White, but that was at the 
finish of the tournament and I was satisfied 
with a draw.
6...c6 7 ^c4 (7)
7 ..ta4! is considered more unpleasant 
for Black, and if 7 ...lDe7, then 8 f4! (with the 
threat of f4-f5; the more modest 8 ctJd2 d5 
was played in Karpov-Kupreichik, 44th 
USSR Championship, Moscow 1976) 8...f5 9 
.i.b3! d5 10 exd5 ttJxd5 11 He1+, beginning 
a direct attack on the king (Kamsky- 
Ivanchuk, Tilburg 1990). Therefore 7...d6 8 
f4 f5 ! became topical, when it is not clear 
how White can gain an advantage (Novik- 
Meister, 48th USSR Championship, Moscow 
1991).
But I withdrew my bishop to c4 without 
particular hesitation, since I had already 
played this, and - more importantly - I 
remembered a game recently published in 
the 
Riga magazine Shakhmaty, where 
White quickly advanced e4-e5. This idea 
was imprinted in my mind, and I decided to 
employ it.
102

Adult Games
7...d6
Black solves his opening problems with
7...d5!? (this has been played several times 
by Kupreichik and Tseshkovsky, and back in 
1876 - by Henry Bird himself!). However, as 
I anticipated, in a game with a junior 
Roizman was aiming for more complicated
play.
8 f4 (3)
‘Typical of Kasparov's style: he begins 
active play at the first opportunity' (Botvin­
nik). It would appear that the master was 
expecting 8 c3 ctJf6, as in my game with 
Gorelov (Vilnius 1975), where White did not 
achieve anything from the opening. Lothar 
Schmid's move 8 Wh5!? is objectively 
stronger, but I was aiming for 'the position 
from the magazine'.
8... 
tt:lf6 9 es (2)
This breakthrough, rather than 9 f5, 
when 9... d5! 10 exd5 cxd5 is good. Even so, 
more chances of an advantage are prom­
ised by the developing 9 tt:ld2 (a move of 
1998).
9 ...dxes?!
Of course, '9...ctJd5 was more cautious, 
’lot allowing the opening of the f-file' 
;Botvinnik). After 10 &xd5 cxd5 Black has a 
solid 
position 
(Barle-Stoica, 
Bucharest 
1976).
The sharper 9.ctJg4 is also interesting:
10 h3 (it is bad to play 10 ..txf7+? 4xf7 11 
e6+ &xe6 12 f5 'ih4! 13 fxe6+ 4e7 14 h3 
tt:le3 and wins, 
Bashkov-Meister, Taby 
1991), and now 10 ...tt:le3?! 11 &xe3 dxe3 12 
d4 &b6 13 c3 or 10...d5 11 hxg4 dxc4 12 
ctJd2 (12...h 5 13 f5 !) is better for White, but
10 ...ctJh6 (Stohl) 11 exd6 (otherwise ...d6-d5)
1 1 ...0-0 12 ctJd2 (12 g4!?) 12 ....ltxd6 13 tt:le4 
ctJf5 is not so clear.
10 .1i.xf7+1?
I could not resist the temptation to land 
a spectacular blow at this weak point. 
However, 10 fxe5! ctJdS (10. .. i.g4? 11 
..txf7+) 11 tt:ld2 (Stohl) was stronger, with 
rapid development and excellent attacking 
prospects, for example: 11...0-0 (11...tt:le3?
12 .1i.xf7+) 12 tt:le4 &e7 13 'ifh5 ..te6 14 .1i.g5 
'it>h8 15 .l:.ae1, and if 15. .'iVc7?, then 16 
jLf6!. This is why Black should not have 
opened the f-file.
10.A ixf7 11 fxes
'Now Black is deprived of the right to cas­
tle, and White will have the superior pawn 
formation, but most importantly - great 
complications begin. However, Roizman 
succeeds in repelling the first onslaught.' 
(Botvinnik)
11...WdS!
After this Black practically equalises (in 
contrast to Stohl's variation 11...: e7?! 12 
exf6 .1i.xf6 13 i.g5), and it is comparatively 
easy for him to defend.
12 exf6 gxf6 13 tt:d2 Sg8
'Black demonstrates that he has his own 
play - on the g-file' (Botvinnik). Roizman 
was apparently relying on this and on his 
two bishops, assuming that these factors 
would fully compensate for the defects of 
his pawn structure.
14 tt:le4 .1i.e7 15 ..lif4 (6) 15...Sg6 16 'ie 2
(13)
16 Wd2!? was slightly more accurate -
103

Garry Kasparov on Garry Kasparov: Part One
White could have gained a tempo for his 
development, since 16 ...i.g4 would not 
have attacked anything.
I6.....ig4 17 ' i f 2
17..J:a g 8
'Black himself plays for an attack, but he 
leaves his king in a dangerous position.
17...'1t>g7 followed by ...'it>h8 suggests itself' 
(Botvinnik). Or 17 ... 'it'g8 18 Ii.ael i.e6 and 
...Ii.e8.
18 Ii.ael
Also completing his development. ‘White 
displays enviable coolness: he does not fear 
an attack on the g2-pawn, since he can 
block the g-file with a minor piece. There­
fore Black includes his h7-pawn in the play.' 
(Botvinnik)
18...hs?!
Overestimating his attacking possibili­
ties, Roizman forgets about the weakness 
of his own king! ‘After 18...'it>g7 Black must 
reckon with the unpleasant 19 c4 or 19 c3!?. 
However, 18 ...i.e6! is more in keeping with 
the previous move; then 19 i.g3 h5 20 't!Vf4 
f5 gives chances for both sides' (Stohl). Say,
21 h4 (21 Wc7 'it>e8!) 21 ...Ii.8g7 (with the 
idea of ...'it>g8) 22 li!Vb8 Ii.g8 23 't!Vc7 't!Vd7 
with equality (but not now 23...'it'e8? 24 
tt:lg5!). The game is also roughly equal after
20 fie2 h4 21 i.x h 4 lx g 2 +  22 %xg2 lxg2+
23 Ii.xg2 f5 24 ..ixe7 'it>xe7 25 Ii.g7+ &d8 26 
Ii.xb7 Wxa2.
It seemed to Roizman that Black had no 
serious problems and that he would be able 
to play ...i.e6 a move later, but my reply 
threw him into confusion.
19 i.g5! (9)
Blocking the g-file and piling up on the 
weak f6-point. ‘Just when the opponent 
was beginning to feel confident, White 
lands an unexpected blow - 19 ...Ii.xg5? fails 
to 20 tt:lxf6! (or 19... 
20 tDxf6! - G.K.),
when Black's position collapses. The inse­
cure position of his king begins to tell.' 
(Botvinnik)
The tempting 19 i.d6?! would have been 
much weaker in view of 19...i.e6! 20 i.xe7 
Ii.xg2+ 21 Wxg2 Ii.xg2+ 22 'it>xg2 'it>xe7 23 
Ii.xf6 (23 'it>g1 &d8!) 23...\i!Vxa2 24 Ii.h6 4>d8, 
when Black is alright.
Here my opponent sank for a long time 
into agonising thought...
19...'iVd8 (67)
A psychologically difficult decision - 
withdrawing the queen from the centre to 
the rear. The commentators recommended
19.....1e6 as the lesser evil, but then 20 'it>h1! 
is strong, for example: 20...Ah3 21 Wf3 i.e6
22 i.h 4  or 20. ..'t!Vd8 21 h4 i.g 4  22 tt:lg3 :;¥;>g7
23 i.d 2 with the threat of ti:Jf5+ (and if
104

Adult Games
23...'i'd7, then 24 Se4!), and Black has a 
difficult position.
20 # f4  (5)
Audaciously leaving the bishop on g5 
(from where it can no longer retreat!). What 
told was childish euphoria after my previ­
ous day's win over Yuferov - absolute 
recklessness... 20 gh4! (Stohl) 20 ...ge6 21 
tt:Jg3 l:tg4 22 Se4! was better, with a clear 
advantage: by exchanging a pair of rooks 
White relieves the pressure on g2, whereas 
the f6- and h5-pawns are chronically weak.
20...Ji.e6
After 20...\t>g7?! I would have probably 
‘thought better of it' and played 21 gh4.
21 h4!? (37)
'Burning his boats behind him - the 
bishop will have nowhere to go. But what 
happens next?' (Botvinnik). The no less 
garish 21 'i'e5!? also came into considera­
tion - but after 21...gd5 (21...'iM5? 22 
±xf6!) 22 h4! \t>g7! 23 #xd4 \t>h7 Black 
somehow holds on.
Therefore the strongest was 21 g3!, kill­
ing the counterplay on the g-file and retain­
ing a loophole for the bishop at h4 (al­
though here White's advantage is not so 
obvious as after 20 gh4!).
21...j(_d5
Moving 
the 
bishop 
out 
of 
range
(21...'i£tg7? 22 tt:Jxf6). 'Black evidently sus­
pected that there was only one danger: 22 
gxf6 Sxf6 23 ^ 6 !  with irresistible threats. 
But there now follows a new blow! The only 
possibility of continuing the fight was
21...gg4' (Botvinnik). And indeed, after 22 
tLlf2 (22 &h6 Se8!) 22...&d6 (22 ... }. e6? 23 
l:re5!) 23 ®d2 gf5 24 tt:Je4 White's advan­
tage, although enduring, is not so great. 
However, 21...j(_d5 is also not a bad move.
22 g4!? (5)
This pawn thrust, immediately following 
h2-h4, shook both Roizman and those 
present in the auditorium: is it really possi­
ble to play like this?! 'A move, shocking in 
its audacity, and at the same time logical 
and highly 
effective' 
(Nikitin). 
'Played 
contrary to routine positional dogmas - 
White himself opens up the position of his 
king. But what is important is that the rook 
on g6 turns out to be in danger, and this 
decides the game' (Botvinnik).
Alas, here my Teacher was exaggerating: 
after the correct reply by the opponent, 
White would have had nothing decisive. 
And, perhaps, 22 #e5 should have been 
tried - although after 22...Wg7! 23 'ir'xd4 
'it>h7 Black could still have defended (as 
after 21 'i'e5) and happily avoided the 
crushing defeat which he soon suffers.
105

Garry Kasparov on Garry Kasparov: Part One
I think that after 22 g4 my opponent lit­
erally fell into a stupor and was no longer 
in a condition to fight, especially with time- 
trouble approaching.
22...<&g7?
A fatal mistake. ‘A belated retreat. If
22...hxg4? there would have followed 23
h5!. Black could hardly have prolonged the 
resistance by 22...&xe4 on account of 23 
gxh5 :!:t6g7 24 Se4' (Botvinnik). It was also 
bad to play 23. ..Sh6 24 Sxe4 Sxh5 25 'iVg4 
etc. (Stohl), but 23...Sxg5+! was far more 
resilient: 
24 
hxg5 
'it'd5! 
(threatening
...Hxg5+!) 25 g6+ gxg6 26 Sxe7+ <4xe7 27 
'i/Vxf6+ &d7 28 hxg6 'i¥e6 29 'iYf7+! (29 
'iWxd4+ ^ c7 with equality) 29...'i¥xf7 30 
lixf7+ 4>e6 31 .l:xb7 Sxg6+ with drawing 
chances in the rook endgame a pawn down. 
True, if 22... ; xe4, then 23 Sxe4!? hxg4 24 
®e5(f5) looks strong.
But it is something else that is impor­
tant: Black could simply have defended his 
attacked h5-pawn by 22...l:h8!. Against this 
I had prepared 23 i.xf6  gxf6 (23...:Ixg4+?
24 'iWxg4 hxg4 25 i.xe7+ Wxe7 26 CDc5+!) 24 
g5 gxe4 25 Sxe4 Wg7(?) 26 ^h2! (but not
26 lie6? Se8!) 26 ...Sf8 27 Se6, and White is 
on the verge of winning. However - oh 
horrors! - the computer move 25. ..Sf8!, 
pointed out by Stohl in the 21st Century,
would have refuted my idea and led to 
equality:
a) 26 .:.xd4 (26 &h2? Wg8 and wins)
26...'tt,e8! 27 4>h2 (also nothing is given by
27 .:.d6 &g7 or 27 .Ue4 'i'd8!) 27.Wg7 (or
27 ...4>g8) 28 gxf6+ Sfxf6 29 1Yc7+ &h6 30 
lie4 Wxe4 31 d xe 4 l:xfl;
b) 26 'i'f5 Wg7 27 Se6 "i'd5! 28 'Yi'xd5 
cxd5 29 ^h1 l'If7 30 gxf6+ Hgxf6.
It is also not possible to find an advan­
tage for White after 23 gxh5 (23 'i¥e5 hxg4!)
23....Mxh5 24 'i¥g4 Shh6 25 tLlg3 Sh7 26 h5 
Bgg7 27 'iVf4 &g8! 28 .Uxe7 .Uxg5 29 .Uxh7 
&xh7 or 24 ctJg3, when here 24. ..gd6 25 
1Vxf6+! Sxf6 26 4Jxh5 &h2+! 27 &xh2 
#b8+ 28 tt:lf4 Sf5 is unclear, and 24. ...l:h7
25 h5 (a variation by Stohl) is highly dubi­
ous, since Black does not have the resource
25 . ..l:xg5? 26 #xg5 .Ug7 on account of 27 
lixe7+! 'W/xe7 28 'i¥xg7+ Wxg7 29 CDf5+ and 
tt:lxe7, but on the other hand 24...Uh8! is 
quite suitable - if now 25 h5, then
25 . ...l:i.xg5! 26 'i¥xg5 Sg8 27 ' i 4  gd6 28 lf 4  
i.x f4  29 Wxf4 'i¥d7 with equality.
23 gxh5 (2) 23...fxg5 24 'it'e5+ Wh6 (24....l:!.f6
25 tt:lxf6 &xf6 26 h6+!) 25 hxg6 gxh4 26 
Hf5!
The most accurate solution.
26...&xg6
This leads to instant death, but Black
106

Adult Games
would not have saved the game with
26 ....i:xg6+ 27 ^h2(f2) or 26 ....ixe4 27 Sxe4 
.:xg6+ 28 <it>h2 i.f6  29 !txh4+! 'ig7 30 .:xf6 
Wxf6 31 Wc7+. picking up with checks the 
pawns on b7 and a7, and then also on d4.
27 'ot>h2
My favourite ‘Spanish' move, in this case 
vacating a square for the rook. In view of 
unavoidable mate, Black resigned (1-0). 
Times: 1.45-2.16. 'A dynamic game!' (Bot- 
vinnik).
This second crushing win conclusively 
stifled the gossip on the topic 'why has a 
boy been allowed into this strong tourna­
ment?' Everyone was intrigued - did I have 
sufficient powder in my keg ?!
In the 3rd round I played Mikhail 
Shereshevsky, a subtle positional master, 
later a well-known trainer, and the author 
of some interesting books on the endgame. 
He treated our game more seriously than 
my two previous opponents, and he de­
cided to altogether avoid theoretical de­
bates, trying to outplay his comparatively 
inexperienced opponent in a rare opening 
scheme. This plan almost succeeded, but at 
the decisive opponent, when a direct clash 
ensued, the master flinched...
Game 23 
M.Shereshevsky-G.Kaspa rov
Sokolsky Memorial Tournament, 
3rd round, Minsk 11.01.1978 
Queen’s Pawn Opening A48
1 d4 C2Jf6 2 ctJf3 g6 3 i.f4
One of Shereshevsky's two favourite 
schemes (the other was 2 i.g5), where 
subsequently he did not employ the stan­
dard c2-c3 and C2Jbd2, but the unusual C2Jc3 
-w ith his pawn on c2!
3... jLg7
Against Kagan in the 12 th round I played 
more originally and again 'in Gligoric style'
- 3...d6 4 e3 C2Jh5 5 i.g5 h6 6 i.h 4  g5 7 C2Jfd2 
C2Jg7! 8 &g3 C2Jf5. nevertheless exchanging 
knight for bishop.
4 e3 d6 5 jLe2 0-0 6 0-0
6 
h3 would have led to a position from 
the game Sturua-Kasparov (Riga 1977). 
where after 6...b6 7 0-0 c5 8 C2Jbd2 i.a6!? 
Black achieved good play. However, the 
master has a different idea.
6...cS (4) 7 C2JC3
This move somewhat embarrassed me - 
everyone almost exclusively played 7 h3 or 
immediately 7 c3. The position of the pawn 
at c2 looks strange, but at least the knight 
is developed at an active position.
7 ...b6 (2) 8 h3 (here I stopped to think: how 
does Black best complete his development?)
8...C2Ja6 (13)
A more committing move than the sim­
ple 8...&b7 (hindering d4-d5) and then 
...lt:Jbd7 or ... tt:c6 (this is what I would 
probably play now).
9 Se1?!
Over-modest, but this 'non-contact bat­
tle' was the point of Shereshevsky's play. 
'White chose a waiting opening strategy, 
denying his energetic opponent specific
107

Garry Kasparov on Garry Kasparov: Part One
targets to attack' (Nikitin).
White 
should 
have 
considered 
the 
cramping 9 d5!? ti'Jc7 10 a4! (but not 10 e4 
b5! 11 e5 dxe5 12 ..l.xe5 b4), although all 
the same Black has a normal 'Indian' set-up 
(White has lost a tempo on e2-e3), and in 
order to avoid e3-e4 even 10...ti'Jh5 11 ..lh2 
f5 is possible.
9...ti'Jc7 (9)
10 ..lf1
Having said ‘A', White must also say ‘B', 
especially as it is now too late for 10 d5 
because of 10...b5!.
10.....1b7
As a result Black has very comfortable 
development and the more flexible posi­
tion, giving him chances of seizing the 
initiative. It is now up to White to devise 
something.
u ..lh 2 ? !
Taking into account the further devel­
opments in the game, 11 &g3 was more 
accurate, and if 11...ti'Jd7, then 12 a4! ..ltxf3 
13 Wxf3 cxd4 14 exd4 )  xd4 15 Sad1 ti'Je6
16 ti'Jd5 ..l.xb2 17 c3 with sharp play. How­
ever, Black would have had the good reply
11 ...cxd4!? 12 exd4 ti'Je6.
11...ti'Jd7 (13)
Here too 11. ..cxd4!? 12 exd4 ti'Je6 came 
into consideration. But 11 . ..ti'Jd7 seemed far
more energetic to me, since it immediately 
creates a threat to the d4-pawn.
12 a4!
A clever and provocative reply, the 
strength of which I underestimated. After 
sacrificing the d4-pawn, White obtains 
appreciable 
pressure 
in 
return. 
Shereshevsky's psychological reckoning was 
correct: it was far more unpleasant for me 
to suppress the opponent's initiative than 
for me myself to attack. Besides, 12 ..ie2 
Sc8 or the ‘Sicilian-like' 12 e4 cxd4 13 ti'Jxd4 
2c8 would have been altogether tedious for 
White.
12...11.xf3
Perhaps the waiting 
move 
12 ...a6!? 
should have been preferred - to see what 
White will do next (which is not very clear). 
But I played, and quite quickly, as ordained 
by the classics: if no immediate danger is 
apparent, you should capture a pawn! And 
the more so if it is a central one. ..
13 Wxf3 cxd4 14 exd4 ..ixd4 15 .l:tad1 ti'Je6
(7) 16 
g3!
Both defending the f2-pawn, and possi­
bly including the bishop in the attack via 
h4. The position turned out to be very 
complicated, and it was unclear to me what 
Black should play here.
16..J:tc8 (13)
108

Adult Games
Also in the event of 16...li:Jdc5 17 Jl.h4 or
17 li:ld5! White has excellent compensation 
for the pawn.
17 li:lds! (the sacrifice of a second infantry­
man!) 17...Jl.xb2!? (45)
Of course, not 17.Sxc2? 18 We4. But 
also after the cautious 17 ... ; g7 18 c3 or
17 ...li:Jf6 18 c3 tLlxd5 19 cxd4 li:Jb4 20 d5 
-!Jc5 21 We2! .:e8 22 fl'd2 a5 23 &b5 2f8 24 
if 4  Black has a rather unpleasant position 
and his extra pawn is not felt. Therefore 
after a long think - a record one for me in 
those years - I decided to take a risk.
18 c3
Now the bishop is cut off and White's 
threats are genuinely dangerous.
18. ..li:les?
For a long time I considered this to be an 
excellent move (a queen sacrifice!) and my 
trainer Nikitin, annotating the game for 
ChessBase and his book, awarded it an 
exclamation mark. But in fact after it Black 
is on the verge of defeat!
The unsophisticated 18 ... iLa3 was cor­
rect, and although after the energetic 19 
ih 4  li:le5 20 Wg3 g5 21 f4! White retains 
the initiative, the situation remains double­
edged: 21 ...Wh8 22 fxe5 2g8 23 &a6 _l:Ib8 24 
S>h1 l:!.g7 25 li:Je3 "*"g8 26 li:lf5 gxh4 27 
®xh4 dxe5 28 li:lxg7 'i"xg7 - Black has two
pawns for the exchange and his pieces are 
active.
19 ^xes dxes
20 .S.xes?
It stands to reason that 20 li:Jf6+? is weak 
in view of 20...exf6 21 Sxd8 Sfxd8 22 fkxf6 
&xc3 23 J:!c1 &d4, when White's f2-point 
begins to ‘creak'. 20 Se2 (20 Sd2? :  xc3!) is 
also unfavourable: 20. ..i.a3 21 lt:Jf6+ exf6
22 Hxd8 Hfxd8 23 fkxf6 i.f8(d6) with 
equality.
However, the unexpected, typically com­
puter-like 'backwards leap' 20 lt:Je3! would 
have led to the trapping of the misplaced 
bishop: 20. ..1'kc7 (20...'i'e8? 21 i.b5) 21 lt:Jc4 
i xc3 (21. ..e4 22 'i!Ve3) 22 'i!Vxc3, and the 
three black pawns are inadequate compen­
sation for the piece. It would appear that 
White has a technically won position.
20. .. 'it>g7 (5)
After making this prophylactic move, I 
promptly offered my opponent a draw, 
which surprised many people. With time- 
trouble imminent (I had about 30 minutes 
left for 20 moves) I decided that White's 
activity fully compensated for the sacrificed 
pawn and that a draw with Black after two 
wins would be an excellent result.
But, to all appearances, Shereshevsky 
interpreted my draw offer as an indication
109

Garry Kasparov on Garry Kasparov: Part One
of uncertainty or even weakness: he imme­
diately launched into an attack - and 
miscalculated somewhere.
21 ctJf4?
21 
tt:le3? Wc7 22 tt:lc4 no longer works be­
cause of 22. ..i.a3 - the rook at e5 is attacked. 
The best continuation was probably 21 ..ta6 
flc5 (it is also possible to avoid cutting off 
the bishop's retreat from b2 - 21..Jc6 22 
tt:lxe7 Sxc3) 22 Se2 ctJc7! 23 tt:le3 (23 i.b7?! 
tt:lxd5 24 J:1xb2 e6!) 23. ..We8 24i.b5 tt:lxb5 25 
axb5 &xc3 26 tt:ld5, regaining the material 
with a draw: 26...Wc8 27 l!xe7 Wf5! or
26...Wa8 27 Sxe7 'Et>h8! 28 Sxf7 1 g7.
21...5.c3! (5)
An interposition, which changes the 
situation in Black's favour: he wins a pawn 
and seizes the initiative. Whereas 21...#e8? 
would have lost a piece: 22 i.b5! fixc3 23 
We2 lt:Jxf4 24 Wxb2 (a pin on the long 
diagonal!) 24. ..Wa8 25 f3 .l:fc8 (25...tt:lxh3+
26 'it>h2!) 26 Se3 ctJd5 27 Sdd3 etc.
22 lt:Jxe6+
If 22 Wg4, then 
22 ...#c8! (but not
22...Wc7? 23 fixe6!). The exchanging opera­
tion 22 fixd8 Sxf3 23 tt:lxe6+ fxe6 24 .l:xf8 
Sxf8 25 .l:xe6 would have led after 25. ..i.a3
26 ..tb5 ..ic5 27 .l:e2 .l:d8 to a difficult (but 
perhaps not lost) endgame where White is 
a pawn down.
22. ..fxe6 23 We2?
If not 23 l:!.xd8!? l:.cxf3 (cf. above), then
23 Wg4 
was 
correct, 
although 
after
23. ..Wc7(c8) all the same White is a pawn 
down and can only pin his hopes on the 
opposite-colour bishops.
23...Wc7! 
24 
J:i.xe6 
ga3! 
(beforehand
Shereshevsky overlooked this simple de­
fence: it is not just that White is a pawn 
down - his f2-point is also catastrophically 
weak) 25 Vd2
Other moves are no better.
2S. ..l:i.f4?! (5)
A seemingly logical move. ‘The black 
heavy pieces have suddenly become amaz­
ingly coordinated and effective' (Nikitin). 
But later I came to the conclusion that
25....l:c6 would have been simpler, with an 
extra pawn and an obvious advantage (26 
'YWd4+ Sf6). And only when I was preparing 
this book, now with the help of a computer. 
did I discover a staggering trick - 25. ..Sxf2!?
26 'i!fxf2 (26 'it>xf2? .l:c2) 26...i.c5 27 .l:d4 
.l:a3!! (after the a-pawn!) 28 'it>h1 (28 a5 
fia4!) 28 ... l:txa4 29 
c4 S a 1+ 30 f
 a5 ! 
followed by 31....l:xf1+ 32 \l!Yxfl &xd4 with 
three pawns for the exchange and real 
winning chances.
26J:i.del?
Strangely enough, the ‘logical' rook lunge
110

Adult Games
to f4 brought me a quick win: my opponent 
simply cracked. 26 g3! was necessary, and if
26...fixa4(?), then 27 litdel!. It is not so easy 
to see such a quiet move in time-trouble in 
the fifth hour of play. White has every 
chance of saving the game: 27...a6 28 'iWg5 
'it>h8 29 Sxg6 or 27...!l:c6 28 Wdl! !l:c2 29 
'i'a1+ 'it>g8 30 lit6e3!. Therefore Black would 
have had to retreat - 26...litf7!, nevertheless 
retaining the advantage.
But 5hereshevsky played the immediate
26 .Mdel, which seemingly looks natural: 
why waste time on g2-g3?
26...1:!.c2! 
(2)
This was overlooked by White. Inciden­
tally, here too after 26...l:.xa4(?) he would 
have been saved by 27 g3! (27 'fig5? 'iff4!), 
as in the previous note, although it remains 
an open question how 5hereshevsky would 
have played.
27 'i'd l (2 7 'fid3 iLd6!) 27.. .Wc5? (5
Again a spectacular, but second-rate 
move and, alas, not a ‘fearful blow, shatter­
ing White's defences' (Nikitin). Later we 
discovered some far more convincing ways 
to win - 27...iLd6! or 27 ...litcxf2! (but not
27 ...fifxf2? 28 'ilfa1+) 28 'fia1+ ..ib2! 29 
.Mxe7+ iYxe7 30 Sxe7+ 'it>h6(f6), and there is 
no way of saving the game.
28 .Mxe7+ Wh6
29 l:!.7e2
29 'iYd7!? (launching a desperate attack)
29...^ xf2+ 30 Wh2 iLxe7 31 l:txe7 came into 
consideration, although after 31 . ..Wd4! 32 
.Mxh7+ 'i.t>g5 33 Wxd4 (33 'ie7+? litf6)
3 3 .J :d 4  34 litxa7 :Eldd2 White has a diffi­
cult ending.
29....1:txf2 30 'it>h1?
The final mistake. The only chance was
30 l:!.xc2 l:txc2+ 31 Whl, when Black would 
have had to overcome considerable techni­
cal difficulties: the attack peters out, and 
left on the board are opposite-colour bish­
ops with their drawing tendencies.
30...5fxe2i (2) 31 jl_xe2
31 
l:!.xe2 Sc1 32 'i'd2+ ifg5 33 'fixg5+ 
'it>xg5 34 l:!.f2 J.c5 35 l:.f7 !l:a1 36 'it>h2 h5! 
was also hopeless. 'White does not want to 
go down on his knees and he dies standing 
up' (Nikitin). By allowing a genuine knock­
out blow...
31...#f2! 32 'i!ih2 #f4+ 0-1 
Times: 2.20-2.23.
My third successive win made an even 
greater impression. Unexpectedly I became 
the tournament leader! I remember how on 
the tram on the way back from the game I 
was discussing variations with my oppo­
nent, and 5hereshevsky asked me in sur­
111

Garry Kasparov on Garry Kasparov: Part One
prise: 'Listen, but how did you contrive not 
to win the world under-17 championship?!'
But in the 4th round I lost with Black to 
Dydyshko, and I was immediately caught by 
five players, including Lutikov. However, the 
grandmaster was not in the lead for long: 
soon he fell away, after losing in the 7th 
round to the second favourite - Kupreichik 
(who had started sluggishly with four 
draws). Whereas I scored another three 
successive wins - over Kapengut, Vere- 
meichik and Begun, reached 6 out of 7 and 
again assumed the sole lead, this time to 
the end of the tournament.
From the press: ‘After Kasparov won yet 
another game, one of the spectators said 
despairingly: "Somehow in Belorussia we've 
forgotten how to play. Our masters are 
losing to a boy." Standing alongside, the 
normally taciturn Latvian master Yanis 
Klovans could not refrain from  responding: 
"There's no need fo r you to be upset. You'll 
very soon be hearing about this boy”.'
In the 8th round I made a short draw 
with Black against Zakharov. But in the 9th, 
against the local candidate master Valery 
Smirnov, in the most vexing fashion I let my 
opponent off the hook, and for a long time I 
could not forgive myself. A few moves 
before the time control I had a completely 
won endgame, but while I was strolling 
about on the stage, Albert Kapengut ami­
cably whispered in my ear that awaiting 
me in the hotel was the second volume of 
The Count of Monte Cristo (the book had 
been brought by a relative of Kapengut - 
Tamara Golovey). I was so overjoyed that I 
immediately began 
to 
'flounder', 
and 
instead of an elementary win the result was 
a draw.
True, the following day I won against 
Lyuboshits and, with 8 points out of 10, I 
was able to maintain the high tempo
adopted at the start. Of great importance 
for the outcome of the tournament was the 
result of the 11th round game with my 
main pursuer - Kupreichik, who had now 
warmed up. It was adjourned in an ending 
with some advantage for my eminent 
opponent, but I managed to gain a draw. 
Then in the 12th round I defeated Kagan 
and five rounds before the finish I had 
achieved the cherished master norm - 9V2 
points!
This greatly exceeded our initial plan. 
Alexander Nikitin recalls:
‘Before the tournament I suggested to 
Garry the following "optimal" spread of 
results, which would take him slightly over 
the master norm:
1) A cautious start (31/2 out of 6} - he 
needed to become accustomed to the com­
pletely new atmosphere of a fierce, purely 
adult event;
2) A vigorous middlegame, which would 
determine overall success;
3) A restrained finish (21/2 out of 5) - it 
was not known how Garry would stand up 
to the rigours of 17games.
‘However, his very first games staggered 
everyone - the fans, trainers and, above all, 
the players themselves. The tournament 
immediately became a notable event in the 
sporting life of the city. Spectators came 
along to see Kasparov. The play of the young 
man from  Baku was distinguished by its 
unusual freshness and a kind of mysterious 
strength. The clever manoeuvres of his pieces 
literally caused the heads of his opponents 
to spin. He conducted the event in inspired 
fashion...'
In the 13th round I made a quick draw 
with Klovans, and then I won against 
Mariasin and Litvinov - 12 out of 15! The 
second-placed Kupreichik was 1V2 points 
behind. But in the 16th, penultimate round
112

Adult Games
he defeated Smirnov, whereas I lost igno­
miniously to Mochalov (what evidently told 
was the accumulated psychological fa­
tigue). 
And the 
competitive 
situation 
suddenly sharpened: now the leaders were 
separated by just half a point.
Everything was decided by the last 
round. There was no doubt that Kupreichik 
would beat the outsider Lyuboshits - and 
he won. Thus in order to occupy sole first 
place I needed to win 'to order' against 
Lutikov - my first one-to-one game with a 
grandmaster! His best chess years may 
have been behind him, but his enormous 
experience made him a very dangerous 
opponent... I didn't know exactly what I 
would do, and I simply went along to play 
'good' chess: I had already become a mas­
ter, and now I wanted to win the tourna­
ment. It is hardly surprising that this far 
from faultless game is one that I have 
remembered all my life.
Game 24 
G.Kaspa rov-A.Lutikov
Sokolsky Memorial Tournament, 
17th round, Minsk 2.02.1978 
Queen’s Pawn Opening A41
1 d4 ltJf6 2 ctJf3 d6
The King's Indian move 2...g6 is more 
flexible, since the d7-pawn retains freedom 
of choice (3 ctJc3 d5!), whereas now White 
acquires an additional opportunity to fight 
for the centre with e2-e4. But the 'sideways' 
move chosen by Lutikov is not really so bad: 
Black wants in the first instance to solve the 
problem of developing his queen's bishop.
3 LDc3 ..lig4
Subtlety against subtlety: Black avoids 
the Pirc-Ufimtsev Defence (3 . .. g6 4 e4 &g7) 
or the Philidor Defence (3...ttJbd7 4 e4 e5),
against which I did not object. 3 .....1f5 4 
ltJh4 ..lfi.d7 is also interesting (Azmaiparash- 
vili-Lutikov, Kutaisi 1978).
4 e4
Already a turning-point in the game!
4../t:Jbd7?
Either carelessness, or provocation: after 
all, to try and refute the opponent's risky 
idea I was obliged to decide on the sharp 
advance of my e-pawn, in a situation where
I could not afford to lose.
Meanwhile, as has been known since the 
start of the last century, Black has two 
comparatively sound continuations:
a) 4...c6 (a compatriot of Lutikov, the 
Moldovan master Chebanenko, was a great 
expert on this variation) 5 h3 &h5 (Petro­
sian upheld 5...^xf3 6 'i'xf3 ltJbd7 7 &e3 e6 
and ... d6-d5) 6 ; d3 e6 7 'ie2 d5, and Black 
has 
an 
acceptable game 
(Deep Blue- 
Kasparov, 4th match game, New York 
1997);
b) 4 . .. e6 5 ..lfi.e2 :. e7 6 0-0 0-0 7 &e3 (7 h3 
..lfi.h5 8 ..lfi.e3 c6 and ...d6-d5 leads to varia­
tion 'a', Ponomariov-Grischuk, 2nd match 
game, Khanty-Mansiysk 2005) 7. .tt:Jbd7 8 
etJd2 &xe2 9 Wxe2 c5 with a solid position 
(Kasparov-Short, 5th rapid match game, 
London 1987) or 5 h3 ;  h5 6 iVe2!? a6!? 7 g4 
..lfi.g6 8 h4 h5 9 g5 tt:fd7 with sharp play
113

Garry Kasparov on Garry Kasparov: Part One
(Su.Polgar-Anand, Amsterdam 1990).
This rare, somewhat passive set-up still 
attracts Black, since it enables him to avoid 
the well-studied main opening lines. How­
ever, the move 4.. ./2Jbd7?, which was quickly 
made by Lutikov, allows a very dangerous 
breakthrough in the centre. Initially I even 
did not believe my eyes! But, after calculat­
ing some simple variations, I accepted the 
challenge.
5 e5! (2) 5...lLlg8
Black is forced to retreat, since 5 ... dxe5 6 
dxe5 ..txf3 7 'i¥xf3 lLlxe5 8 'i'xb7 is unac­
ceptable for him.
6 h3 ..txf3
If 6 ... ..ih5 both 7 g4 &g6 8 h4 with the 
idea of 8...h5 9 e6! and the immediate 8 e6! 
fxe6 9 lLlg5 are good, when Black's position 
is unenviable.
7 'Wixf3 c6
It is apparent that White has already 
achieved much, but what next?
8 ..tf4 (6)
With the intention of provoking ...d6-d5 
and only then carrying out the impeding 
pawn sacrifice e5-e6, although now it is no 
longer so effective - Black has gained a 
respite. Therefore serious consideration 
should have been given to opening up the 
game by 8 exd6!? exd6 (8...e6 9 ..if4 - cf. the
following note) 9 d5 or 9 &f4 and 0-0-0 
with a powerful initiative.
5...d5
Falling in with my idea. After both
8...dxe5 9 dxe5 e6 10 o-o-o and 8...e6 9 exd6 
tt:gf6 (9...tt:df6?! 10 d5!) 10 &e2 tt:b6 11 
'Wig3 'Wid7 12 0-0 0-0-0 13 ^e5 (13...&xd6 14 
11Yxg7) or 11...tt:Jfd5 12 lLlxd5 lLlxd5 13 &e5 
f6 14 c4! White also has an obvious advan­
tage.
9 e61 (otherwise ...e7-e6) 9...fxe6 10 ^d3 (3)
10...1.lgf6
11 'Wie2 (2)
For the moment Black's extra pawn is 
only hindering his development, and it is 
obviously doomed.
11...g6
A sensible move. The attempt 11...'iVb6
12 0-0-0 0-0-0(?) 13 'tixe61Vxd4(?) would be 
refuted by the pretty but routine stroke 14 
'W/xc6+! bxc6 15 &a6 mate.
12 'ikxe6 ..tg7 13 0-0?l (2)
A questionable and rather flippant deci­
sion - White thinks that all roads lead to 
Rome. I judged that the opponent's de­
fences would not be cracked by crude 
pressure on the e-file, I was outlining a 
pawn offensive on the queenside, and 
therefore I hid my king on the opposite 
wing. However, 13 0-0-0! was both more
114

Adult Games
logical, and stronger - after 13 .. /t:Jh5 14
il.g5(h2) White would have retained an 
obvious advantage.
13...Ct:Jh5 14 
g5? (5)
When I played 13 o-o I was intending this 
active bishop move, assuming, mainly on 
general grounds, that it would be difficult 
for Black to decide on 14...^xd4. Of course, 
the pawn should have been defended - 14 
g,e3, still with the better chances.
14...ctJf8?
Lutikov took me ‘at my word' and played 
this without calculating the variations. But 
this is a serious mistake, leading to a diffi­
cult position.
After the cool-headed 14. ..^xd4! Black 
could have repelled the attack. At the board 
I was naively hoping that in the variation
15 CtJxd5(?) cxd5 16 il.b5 lt:Jf6(?) 17 Hadl the 
white rooks would find suitable employ­
ment on the central files, but in home 
analysis I found 16...a6!? 17 Hael axb5 18 
h e 7  'Wib6 19 'Wixd5 ^e5!, when it is now 
White who has to display exceptional 
resourcefulness: 20 Hxe5 Ct:Jxe5 21 il.c5! 
iiVc6 22 'Wixe5+ f
 23 'Wie7+ &g8 24 H dl 
i'e8! 25 'il’xb7 with a mass of pawns for the 
rook and an unclear game. But later it 
transpired that after 16....if6! White does 
’lot have compensation for the piece.
Obviously, instead of 15 lt:Jxd5? the sim­
ple 15 H fel is correct, for example: 15...^f6
16 ^xf6 lt:Jhxf6 (16.lt:Jdxf6? 17 g4) 17 ctJa4 
with quite good play for the pawn, but - 
within the bounds of equality (17. ..Hf8 18 
c4 Hf7 etc.).
15 'Wig4 lt:Jf6 (or 15... f6 16 H ael) 16 #e2
#d6 17 Sae1 (4)
Black's forces are still scattered, his de­
velopment is incomplete, and the threat of 
trouble along the e-file has by no means 
disappeared. The problem of deploying the 
rooks was solved very simply by White: 
after the pawn advance f2-f4-f5 the open­
ing of the f-file is very much a reality, and 
therefore the rooks stand best at e l and fl.
17...e6
Black prevents the advance of the white 
f-pawn, but at the same time he condemns 
himself to passive defence, by denying 
himself the resource 
.lt:Je6. 
However,
17...^f7 18 ; h4! lt:Je6 (if 18...He8 with the 
idea of 19 ^g3 ^ 4 , then 19 We3!) 19 -^g3 
#'d7 (19 .lt:Jxd4? 20 'Wie3 'Wib4 21 a3) 20 &e5 
looks dangerous for him - f2-f4-f5 is 
threatened.
18 lt:Ja4 (5)
In this way White opens a second front 
on the queenside, trying also there to 
create targets to attack. 18 'Wie3!? was also
115

Garry Kasparov on Garry Kasparov: Part One
good, retaining various possibilities.
I8 ...'if7  19 b4 b6 (not 19... 'iVxb4? 20 tt'lc5)
20 'iVd2 (3) 20...:!.e8
In the event of 20...tt'l8d7 21 &f4 'ifle7 22 
fie3 l:Ihe8 23 l:Ife1 White would have com­
bined pressure on the e-file with the threat 
of opening the game on the queenside.
21 f
To where should the queen move?
21...'iVe7
In the event of 21. ..'ifld7, apart from my 
earlier recommendation 22 c4, White also 
has two other strong possibilities: the 
prophylactic 22 &h2!? with the idea of
22. ..c5 23 tt'lc3!, and the combinative 22 
b5!? cxb5 23 tt'lc3 a6 24 a4! b4 25 tt'le2 a5 26 
&b5, winning the exchange, and then, 
most probably, also the game.
22 bs (22 .l:.e3!? also suggests itself)
22..."iVa3
A difficult choice: at e7 the queen was 
preventing the other black pieces from 
regrouping. After 22 ...c5 I was planning 23 
dxc5 bxc5 24 c4, and if24. . .d4, then 25 Se2 
and Bfe1, increasing the pressure.
23 CLlC3 c5 24 CLlbl! (2)
The return home ofthe knight is perhaps 
the strongest move in its career (a similar 
manoeuvre was familiar to me from the 
Sicilian). It transpires that the black queen's
sortie to a3 has not prevented the opening 
of the centre.
2 4 ...ia 4
If 24. ..'ifb4, then 25 c3! is good (but not
25 #xb4?! cxb4 26 i.d6, as given in The Test 
of Time, because of 26 ...tt'l6d7! 27 &xb4 
&xd4) 25 ...Wa5 26 ^ 2 , and the black 
queen suffers a sad fate (while after
24 ...#xa2? 25 tt'lc3 it is altogether trapped).
25 dxc5 bxc5 26 c4l (of course!) 26...tt'l8d7
26. ..dxc4? is not possible because of 27
tt'lc3, while after 26. ..d4 27 ®e2 or 27 ^ c7 
Black's queen is again incarcerated and his 
position is very difficult.
27 tt'lc3 (4) 27...Wa5
28 'iVc2
The flamboyant 28 tt'le4!? 'iVxd2 29 tt'lg5+ 
'it>g8 30 &xd2 would have given an over­
whelming advantage, but I did not want to 
exchange the queens. White's problem is 
that he has many tempting moves, but he 
still has to win the game, i.e. overcome 
certain difficulties.
28...'i!/d8
There is not now anything for the queen 
to do on its own wing. 28 ...e5? or 28 ...tt'lb6? 
was bad because of 29 .i.d2!, but 28 ....l:.d8 
and ....l:.he8 deserved some consideration.
29 j_g5 (13) 29-.tt'lb6 30 a4! (4)
The threat of the a-pawn's further ad­
116

Adult Games
vance does not allow Black time to regroup, 
e.g. 30...iVc7 31 cxd5 exd5 32 a5 lLlbd7 33 
tt:lxd5 
ltJxd5 
34 
gc4 
or 
31. . tt:Jfxd5 
(31...tt:lbxd5? 32 gc4!) 32 tt:le4 c4 33 a5 cxd3
34 flixc7 tt:lxc7 35 tt:ld6+ etc.
30... dxc4 31 ge4 Ie 7
If 31 ..J:!hf8 the most decisive was proba­
bly 32 ' c6!? 'i'd3 33 'tiVcl! l:ld8 34 a5 lLlbd5
35 tt:Jxd5 with the ideas of Se3-f3 and b5- 
b6.
32 as (4)
Here too 32 gc6!? (32...it'd3 33 'ifc1!) was 
good, as well as 32 Bd1 Sd7 33 gc6 or 32
l:!.e3.
32...tt:lbd7 33 gc6 (8)
The solid 33 'it'a4 was also possible, but I 
was already looking for decisive continua­
tions.
33...tt:lb8
The pawn capture 33. ..'it'xa5 would have 
been suicidal in view of 34 tt:le4 (34 Se3! ?)
34...tt:Jxe4 35 gxe7 (35 "ifxe4 is also not bad)
35...1.ld2 36 gg5! tt:lxfl 37 'Vi'd1! with crush­
ing threats.
34 I d l  (7)
Although 34 Se3 'it'xa5?! 35 Sf3 or 34 
tt:le4 'i'xa5?! 35 tt:ld6+ would also have been 
decisive, I continued playing in my usual 
style. The pawn sacrifice was not essential, 
but it appealed to me!
34..."iYxaS 3S lLle4 If8
At last the h8-rook has come into play, 
making way for the king to go to g8. Black 
has acquired a real prospect of consolidat­
ing his position, while White is restoring 
the material balance. But here I noticed a 
drawback to the placing of the black rooks.
36 &f4! (11)
Like a pendulum, the white bishop has 
been 
oscillating throughout the game 
between f4 and g5, each time further 
disrupting the opponent's defences. This 
last oscillation 
makes 
Black's 
position 
critical. Since 36...e5? is not possible be­
cause of 37 iVxc4+, he is forced to allow the 
invasion of the white pieces.
Even now I am proud of the elegant 
bishop 
move, 
although 
the 
computer 
suggests the 'inflexible' 36 tt:ld6+ 'it>g8 37 
lLlxc4 Wc7 38 1:i.d6 tt:Jxc6 39 bxc6 or 
38. ..tt:lbd7 39 S fd l tt:lb6 40 ge3 and wins. 
The winning method chosen by me is more 
human: there is no reason to drive the black 
king into a safe shelter.
36...lLlxc6 37 bxc6 tt:le8?1
In defending the d6-square, Black allows 
a tactical stroke. 37..t2Jxe4 38 Wxe4 Sc8 
(not 38...gd4 39 gd6) was somewhat more 
resilient, but here White would have con­
cluded the fight by 39 .i.g5! .i.f6 (39 ...See8
117

Garry Kasparov on Garry Kasparov: Part One
40 .l:i.d7+ 'it>g8 41 ..l¥.d2! with the threat of 
.l:!.xg7+) 40 ;■ xf6 'it>xf6 41 iVh4+ 'it>f7 42 
'Wixh7+ 'it>f6 43 iVh4+ 'it>f7 44 l:td6 or 44 
.l:!.fe1, and the heavy piece attack is irresisti­
ble.
38 l:d7! (5) 38. ..l:xd7 39 cxd7 ct:Jf6 40 ct:Jd6+ 
(40 ct:Jg5+ and 'iVxc4 was more energetic)
40...'it>e7 (40...'it>g8 41 ct:Jb7!) 41 ct:Jxc4 'iVa6 
42 ; d6+ 'it>xd7 43 ; xf8
43 
'iVe2! (threatening ctJe5+) 43...'iVa4(b7) 
44 &xf8 &xf8 45 l:e1 would have won 
more quickly.
43...^xf8
Despite the nominal material equality 
(two pawns for the exchange), Black's 
position is lost: it is impossible for him to 
defend his king and preserve all his weak 
pawns.
44 'iVd3+ (44 l:d 1+!?) 44. ..'it>e7 (44...ctJd5? 45 
ctJe5+; 44. ..\t>e8(c7) 45 .l:!.b1 etc. is also insuf­
ficient) 45 l:d1 (45 l:b1!?) 4S ...ct:Jd5 46 'iVe4 
'it>f7 (46...C2Jc3? 47 iVh4+) 47 ct:Je5+ 'it>g8 48 
ctJd7!
An accurate move to decide proceedings.
48...C4 
49 l:b1 (with an unavoidable inva­
sion) 49...'iVd6
Black parries the threat of .l:!.b8, and in 
passing he sets the ‘trap' 50 ct:Jxf8 ctJc3!? 
(50. . .&xf8 51 'iVxc4 is hopeless), into which 
White could well have fallen - 51 'iVa8!
ct:Jxb1 52 ct:Jxe6+ 'it>f7 53 ctJg5+ 'it>e7 54 'iVb7+ 
and Wxb1, winning. But since, in the heat 
of the battle, we had rushed past the time 
control, and neither of us was taking the 
initiative in adjourning the game, I fol­
lowed another path, planned beforehand, 
where it was the activity of the rook that 
nevertheless decided matters.
50 J:tb7 (2) 50...C3 51 ctJxf8 'it>xf8 52 J:xh7 
'iVf4
By the threat of perpetual check Black 
exchanges the queens and saves himself 
from a mating attack, but not from defeat. 
53 'iVxf4+ (53 'iVb1 ct:Jb4 54 g3 c2 55 'iVxc2! 
was also good) 53...ct:Jxf4 54 'it>f1 a5 55 l:ta7 
ct:Jd5 56l:txa5 'it>f7
With a final trap - 57 'it>e2 ct:Jf4+ 58 'it>f3 ?? 
c2 59 l:c5 ctJd3! 60 l:txc2 ctJe1+, and it is 
Black who wins, but...
57 g3 1-0
Times: 2.07-2.29.
This first tournament win over a grand­
master also brought me my first triumph in 
adult chess. By confidently taking first place 
in a strong field and surpassing the master 
norm by 3V2 points, I also reached a new 
level in public perception. As Botvinnik 
commented, this was the greatest success 
ever achieved by such a young player in the 
Soviet 
Union! 
The 
newspapers 
began 
writing about me, many chess fans took an 
interest in my play, and I acquired an army 
of supporters. Not for nothing did the 
chairman of the Belorussian Chess Federa­
tion state at the closing ceremony: ‘We 
hope that Kasparov will return here, in order 
to get even with Mochalov and Dydyshko!'
From the newspaper Sovietsky sport: ‘The 
eighth Sokolsky Memorial was a particular 
success. Thefighting intensity was unusually 
high: out o f 153 games, only 60 ended in a 
draw. The hero o f the tournament was the
118

Adult Games
USSR junior champion Garik Kasparov from 
Baku. As it turned out, it was not the mas­
ters who tested the schoolboy, but the 
schoolboy who gave lessons to the masters! 
In his play one senses the influence of ex­
champion Botvinnik, who alreadyfor several 
years has been advising the young player 
from Baku.'
At that same time, on the eve of the Kar­
pov- Korchnoi world championship match 
(Baguio 1978), the newspaper Sotsialis- 
ticheskaya industriya [Socialist Industry] 
wrote:
‘Karpov has every reason to hope fo r a 
favourable outcome to this encounter. But 
some time will pass, and he will have to 
battle against new challengers. Who are 
they? It is probable that the dangerous rivals 
to the present world champion are among 
those who today are 15-16 years old... Some 
three years ago a talented young player 
from Baku, Garry Kasparov, first drew atten­
tion. Two years running he won the title of 
USSR junior champion. “In the hands of such 
youths is the future of chess", Botvinnik 
spoke about his pupil. Very recently an 
important landmark in Kasparov's career 
was reached - he became a master. In the 
tournament table he had 13 points! The 
quality of his games is also staggering.'
Botvinnik: 'The fact that Garik may de­
velop into a world-class player is something I 
have been convinced about fo r a long time. 
But the skill is to steer him towards this 
cautiously, by degrees. When we were sure 
that he was capable of withstanding great 
stress, we decided to test his capabilities in 
more serious tournaments. In Minsk he 
performed simply excellently, demonstrat­
ing by his victory that he is quite ready to be 
elevated to the master rank. He also had the 
moral right to this earlier, when fo r the 
second successive time he won the junior
championship of the country. Now he has 
also gained the juridical right to this.'
Valery Asriyan: 'In January 1978 I began 
working fo r the Azerbaijan Information 
Agency and in the performance of my duties 
I had Jar more frequent contact with Kas­
parov than before. Precisely at that time the 
Sokolsky Memorial took place in Minsk. 
Garik played brilliantly... I regularly phoned 
Minsk and, as soon as news of Kasparov's 
success became known, I passed on the 
information to TASS under the heading "The 
youngest master", since Garik had become 
theyoungest chess master in the world'.
That is how this unforgettable tourna­
ment concluded, for me a genuinely mo­
mentous one. Directly from Minsk I has­
tened to the Botvinnik School, where my 
strict mentor offered words not only of 
congratulation. At that same session Mik­
hail Moiseevich for the first time invited me 
to be his assistant. I was filled with a feeling 
of pride - it meant that I was already able 
in some way to help the great Botvinnik.
Nikitin: 'Garry reported back on his ac­
complishment, and at the same time, in 
place of Dvoretsky, who had left the school, 
he performed the duties of assistant - at a 
session where half of the pupils were older 
than him. I am not sure that this was a 
pedagogically correct move by the ex­
champion. To push the self-assertion of the 
newly-fledged master was risky. However, 
the teacher had conclusively broken off with 
his previous assistant and he decided to 
show that he could also conduct lessons 
without him. Which he did. One session, 
which, as it turned out, was the last one.'
Unfortunately, the school closed due to 
the removal of financial support, and its 
work was renewed only eight years later, 
when I became world champion, now as the 
'Botvinnik-Kasparov School'.
119

Garry Kasparov on Garry Kasparov: Part One
Smile of Fortune
All-union Qualifying Tournament (Daugav­
pils, 27th June - 16th July 1978): 1. Kasparov 
and 2. l.lvanov - 9 out of 13; 3-7. Kupreichik, 
Mikhalchishin, Kapengut and Tseshkovsky - 
8%; 8-13. Alburt, Makarychev, Dolmatov, 
Rashkovsky, Lerner and Palatnik - 8 etc. 
(altogether - 64 participants, including 7 
grandmasters, 9 international masters and 
42 masters).
After my victory in Minsk, some said that 
the tournament was not a significant one, 
whereas coming up in the summer was the 
all-union qualifier for the next men's USSR 
Championship - that would indeed be a 
serious test! I gained the right to play in it 
thanks to my successes in junior events. 
The tournament was held on the currently 
fashionable Swiss system, then very rare in 
high-level 
competitions, 
which 
allows 
qualifiers to be quickly selected from a 
large number of contestants. Here there 
were 64, and only the winner would go 
through directly into the Premier League, 
while the next six would have to play again 
in the First League. So that for everyone 
there were seven qualifying places, plus 
one or two reserve places, and no cash 
prizes!
Botvinnik very much disliked Swiss tour­
naments and thought that it was harmful 
for me to play in such 'lotteries': it is diffi­
cult to prepare beforehand (it is not known 
who you will be paired against), and ex­
press preparation before games is chaotic. 
The maestro said to Nikitin: 'Neither I, nor 
your beloved Fischer played in such tourna­
ments, but this did not prevent us becoming 
world champions'. Botvinnik even sug­
gested to the Sports Committee that they 
should make a ‘castling' move - send me 
instead of Artur Yusupov to the Amsterdam 
IBM ‘B' Tournament with a grandmaster
norm, and, by contrast, include Yusupov in 
the all-union qualifying tournament (al­
though Artur, as world junior champion, 
already had the right to play in the First 
League!). Fortunately, this did not happen...
In the end Botvinnik reconciled himself 
to my participation in the unusually strong 
Swiss tournament, which was to start at 
the end of June in the Latvian town of 
Daugavpils. It was my mother who per­
suaded him to ‘forgo his principles'; in the 
words of Nikitin, ‘her diplomatic skill had an 
irresistible effect on Mikhail Moiseevich'. 
After this the Teacher severely asked me 
whether I was hoping to finish among the 
leading places in Daugavpils. I gave a vague 
reply. Then he said that with such a mood 
there was no point in going to the tourna­
ment, which was to be held on the Swiss 
system and would be ineffective as a train­
ing event.
Well, the audacious thought of qualify­
ing for the First League did occur to me, of 
course. I prepared very thoroughly with 
Nikitin and Shakarov: we worked a great 
deal on both the opening and the endgame, 
we studied the origin of my mistakes, and 
we also tried to solve psychological prob­
lems. Before the tournament I was in a 
fighting mood and I sensed that I was 
capable of a new qualitative leap. Now I 
was no longer a ‘dark horse', as in Minsk, 
and the other players were rather wary of 
me, but the line-up of the qualifying tour­
nament in Daugavpils was far more im­
pressive: the most promising young players 
and some fifteen chess die-hards, battle- 
hardened in high-level battles. Therefore 
initially my trainers set me a comparatively 
modest objective - to score 'plus two', and 
in the first half of the tournament I played 
quietly.
At the start I was paired against the tal­
120

Adult Games
ented 24-year old Chelyabinsk player Alex­
ander Panchenko, the USSR young masters 
champion, who was soon to become a 
grandmaster 
and 
later 
a 
well-known 
trainer and the author of some substantial 
chess books.
Game 25 
G.Kasparov-A.Panchenko
All-Union Qualifying Tournament, 
1st round, Daugavpils 28.06.1978 
Sicilian Defence B67
1 e4 (at that time this was my main move -
I was only just becoming accustomed to 1 
d4) 1... c5 2 <'Llf3 <'Llc6 3 d4 cxd4 4 <'Llxd4 <'Llf6
5 <'Llc3 d6
One of Panchenko's favourite set-ups, 
along with the Chelyabinsk Variation (5 ...e5).
6 .il.g5 e6 7 'i'd2 a6 8 0-0-0 gd7 9 f4 (9 f3 
was also fashionable, but I didn't play that)
9...b5 10 tt:lxc6 (7)
Nowadays the main line is 10 .!txf6 gxf6.
10...51.xc6 11 .ltd3 (6)
Natural 
development, 
although 
11 
'i'e3(e1) has also been employed.
11.....!te7 12 e5
12 
'ie1 <'Lld7! is ineffective for White 
(Browne-Tukmakov, 
Hastings 
1972/73; 
Mecking-Polugayevsky, 6th match game, 
Lucerne 1977). while after 12 .l:he1 0-0 13 
e5 dxe5 14 'i'f2 there is an interesting 
queen sacrifice - 14. ..h6!? (Karpov-Tal, 44th 
USSR Championship, Moscow 1976).
12...dxe5 13 fxe5 <'Lld7 (White has more 
chances after 13...<'2ld5 14 gxe7 'i'xe7 15 
^e4, J.Polgar-Dreev, Linares 1997) 14 ..ltxe7 
I\!Vxe7 15 ..lte4!?
An old sacrifice of the central pawn. 15 
I\!Vf4 <'Llc5 16 <'Lle4 .!txe4 17 gxe4 .l:c8 is too 
harmless 
(Mecking-Polugayevsky, 
8th 
match game, Lucerne 1977).
Both players had aimed for this position, 
having 
in 
mind the 
game 
Kasparov- 
Yermolinsky (Leningrad 1977), where after 
the cautious 15...'i'c5!? 16 lihe1 l:!a7?! 
(16. .l:tc8! has also been analysed) 17 i.xc6?! 
'i!Vxc6 Black easily solved his opening prob­
lems. But in a 'debriefing' at home I had 
found an improvement - 17 b4!. This looks 
risky (the king is exposed), but it creates 
unpleasant pressure: 17...'Wb6 (17. ..'i*'c4? 18 
'ie3) 18 'i'd6 or 18 'tit'f4 (but not 18 'ifg5?! 
o-o 19 l:td6 Vi'f2! with equality, Salov- 
Yermolinsky, Yurmala 1983) 18...0-0 19 Sd6 
etc.
This novelty was still awaiting its hour, 
but Panchenko had also prepared some­
thing: he decided to 'treat himself' to the 
e5-pawn, relying on his resourcefulness in 
defence.
15.....1.xe4
15 
...l:tc8?! 16 i.xc6 Sxc6 17 <'Lle4 <'Llxe5 is 
weaker because of 18 <'Lld6+ 'itf8 19 S h e ll 
with an enduring initiative for White:
19...f6 
(if 19...<'2lg6? 20 <'Llf5!, while if
19...<'2lc4, then 20 tt:lxc4 bxc4 21 'i'd8+ 'ife8
22 l:td6!?) 20 <'Llxb5! axb5 21 :txe5! fxe5 22 
'i:Vd8+ #xd8 23 .l:xd8+ <^7 24 .l:xh8 \t>g6 (or
24. ..l:td6 25 l:txh7 e4 26 Sh4!) 25 .l:b8 Sc5 
26 'it>d2 (Sax-Kozul, Radenci 1998).
But the pawn could have been taken
121

Garry Kasparov on Garry Kasparov: Part One
immediately - 15...l2lxe5. After this there 
would not have followed 16 i xc6+? .:Uxc6 
17 tZ:ld5 'iWb7! (Khasin-Taimanov, 23rd USSR 
Championship, Leningrad 1956), and not 16 
Wf4 &xe4! 17 Wxe5 ; g6 18 Wxg7 Wg5+ 
(18...#f8 has also been played) 19 l:td2 c!;e7
20 h4 We3 21 l:th3 Wf4 (21...Wg1+? 22 .l:!.d1, 
Solak-lvanesevic, Petrovac 2004) 22 l:tf3 
.l:!.hg8! with equality, but most probably 16 
'i:Vd4! - since 16...Wg5+? 17 c!;b1 .l:!.d8 18 
Wc5 (Gligoric), 16...Wc7? 17 ^xc6+ tZ:lxc6 18 
'i:Vxg7 and 16. ..f6? 17 Wxe5! fxe5 18 ^xc6+ 
c!;f7 19 l:td7 are all bad for Black, all that 
remains for him is 16 ...^xe4 17 lLlxe4, 
transposing into a position from the game.
16 .:Uxe4 .:Uxe5
Here I thought for a long time - this line 
was unknown to me. It is clear that White 
has excellent compensation for the pawn: 
the black king will be prevented from 
castling and for a long time the rook at h8 
will be shut in the corner. However, it is 
necessary to act energetically.
17 'iYd4 (22)
17 
Wc3 is also interesting: 17. ..f6 18 
.:Ud6+ c!;f8 19 fid4 g6 (weakening the f6- 
point; according to Stohl, 19...h6 20 .:Uc8 
We8 21 tZ:ld6 We7 or 19...h5!? is safer) 20 
tZ:lc8 (Sutovsky-Blehm, Ohrid 2001), but 
after Gofshtein's suggestion 2 0 ...^ 7 ! 21
l:tf4 Sg7 22 flxf6 .:Ud3+! 23 Wxd3 Wxg2 
Black holds on.
17 ...f6 18 lLld6+ c!;f8 19 l:thfl (6)
After 19 l:the1 Black has time to make a 
‘vent hole' for his rook - 19...h5! 20 a4 h4 21 
h3 l:th5 with good play (Aseev-Yermolinsky, 
Vilnius 1984).
19...c!;g8
One does not want to move the knight 
from its strong position at e5, but neverthe­
less 19. . . f
 20 Wb6 (20 We4?! Sd8; 20 ctJe4 
Bc8!) 20....:Uxd6 (20 ...Bd8? 21 l2le4!) 21 Bxd6 
c!;f7 was playable, releasing the rook at h8 
from imprisonment: 22 l:tfd1 Bhb8 23 Wd4 
.l:!.b7 or 22 l:te1 e5 (bolder than 22 ...l:thb8?!
23 Bdxe6 Wd7, Ad.Horvath-Gonda, Buda­
pest 2002), and here in Informator Gufeld 
recommended 23 Wc6(?!) with a '±’ sign, 
but after 23...l:thc8! 24 Wd5+ c!;f8 it is White 
who has problems. 23 .l:!.ed1 .l:!.hb8 24 Wc6 
c!;g8 25 l:td7 'YWb4 26 b3 is correct, with 
approximate equality.
After the game continuation White’s 
compensation for the sacrificed pawn is 
also sufficient only to maintain a dynamic 
equilibrium.
20 g4! (15)
Beginning a direct attack on the king - 
g4-g5 
is threatened (undermining the 
support of the knight at e5!), and at the
122

Adult Games
same time the freeing move ...h7-h5 is 
prevented. 
However, 
for 
the 
moment 
Black's difficulties are largely of a psycho­
logical nature (the unresolved problem of 
the rook on h8 is unnerving).
20. ..h6
Panchenko halts the g4-pawn and pre­
pares the evacuation of his king, believing 
in the soundness of his defences. If 20. ..lt:lf7 
there is the resource 21 'Wie4! l:tb8 (after
21...l:td8? 22 ltJf5! Black's lack of an escape 
square is felt) 22 CiJf5!, and although after
22 ...#e8 nothing terrible is yet apparent, 
White retains the initiative.
21 h4 (4)
Insisting on the further advance of the g- 
pawn. Meanwhile, this menacing pawn 
storm also has an important drawback: in 
the event of g4-g5 and ...h6xg5 the h-file is 
opened and the imprisoned rook at h8 
breaks free!
21. ..ctJf7?!
Perturbed by the bold aggression of his 
young opponent, Panchenko decided to 
play 'solidly' - to get rid of the annoying 
knight on d6. 21.. ..l:1.d8?! was insufficient in 
view of 22 CiJf5! l:txd4 23 l2Jxe7+ 4f7  24 
J:xd4 'itlxe7 25 h5 etc. But Black had better 
ways of defending:
a) 21...Wc7, and if 22 g5, then 22...hxg5
23 hxg5 l:th2! 24 c3 'Wic6!? (24. ..b4 will also 
do) 25 'Wig1! (but not 25 gxf6? 'Wig2! 26 'Wid2 
CtJd3+! or 25 l:tg1 'Wif3! 26 l2Je4 - 26 gxf6? 
'Wie2! - 26 . ..f5) 25 . ..I:tg2 26 'Wie3 l:txg5, and 
after 27 ^ 3  White still has to demonstrate 
that his attack compensates for the mate­
rial given up. He can also play for a bind by 
22 l:tfe1 l:td8 23 h5 and if 23 ...'Wic6 sacrifice 
the exchange - 24 Bxe5 fxe5 25 'Wixe5, but, 
although the rook at h8 is offside, he does 
not have the forces for a successful offen­
sive;
b) 21....l:If8, when 22 h5 'Wic7 23 l:tfe1 (23 
l:tf2 ®c6! and ...4h7) 23. ..CtJf3 24 'Wie3 ctJxe1
25 'iHxe6+ 'it>h7 26 'Wif5+ gives only perpet­
ual check, while in the event of the cautious 
22 g5 hxg5 23 hxg5 l:th5! (Gufeld's move
23. ..ctJg6 is weaker because of 24 gxf6 l:txf6
2 5 'it>b1) 24 CtJe4 (24 gxf6 Sxf6!) 24...ctJg4 2 5 
gxf6 l2Jxf6 Black escapes from all his prob­
lems.
22 We4! (8)
This strong interposition, creating the 
threat of CiJf5, was probably overlooked by 
Panchenko - at any event, he became 
rattled and was unable to find the correct 
reply.
22 ...Hf8?
A serious mistake, if not the decisive one. 
Paradoxically, just a move ago Black would
123

Garry Kasparov on Garry Kasparov: Part One
have equalised with this move, whereas 
now it puts him in a very difficult position. 
The defence could still have been held by 
exchanging a pair of rooks and returning 
the extra pawn: 22...Sd8! 23 lLlf5 2xd1+ 24 
J:xd1 'ir'c7! (24...We8 is less good in view of
2 5 lt:ld4) 25 'i'xe6 'it>h7 26 fid4 Sd8 27 "i'i'e4 
J:rxd4 28 lt:lxd4+ 'it>g8 29 lt:lc6 'it>f8, and 
White's advantage has almost evaporated.
23 ctJfSl (23) 23...'i'e8
Now it is bad to play 23 ...Wc7? 24 1/Vxe6 
1\Ve5 (24...'it>h7 25 lt:lxg7!) 25 'i'xa6 'it>h7 26 
l:tde1 and wins.
24 ctJd4! (3)
The white pieces have suddenly devel­
oped such activity that it is difficult for the 
opponent to avoid the creation of new 
weaknesses in his pawn formation. It is 
already hard to offer Black any good advice
- both his rooks are miserably placed.
24...e5?!
An irreparable weakening of the f5- 
point. But what instead? Black's defence is 
very difficult after 24...lLle5 25 g5 hxg5 26 
hxg5 - 26...flh7? 27 gxf6! gxf6 28 J:g1+ or 
26 ...Sh5?! 27 gxf6 l:.xf6 28 Sxf6 gxf6 29 
#b7! is bad for him, while after 26. ..'i'g6 27 
"ifxg6 lt:lxg6 28 lt:lxe6 2e8 29 gxf6!? (Gufeld)
29...fixe6 30 f7+ 'it>h7 31 Sh1+ ctJh4 32 
J:xh4+ Sh6 33 l:.f4 Sf8 34 Sf2 or 29 2d6!
fxg5 30 lLlxg5 lLle5 31 Sxa6 White has an 
endgame with an extra pawn and winning 
prospects.
26... Wa8! is more resilient, although here 
too White can transpose into a better 
ending - 27 'i'xa8 Ixa8  28 gxf6 Sh6!? 29 
fxg7 'it>xg7 30 Hdel! (with the idea of 
30 ....l:.d8 31 lt:lxb5 lt:ld3+ 32 cxd3 axb5 33 
l:te5, etc.) or continue the attack - 27 "ife2 
'i/Vc8 28 gxf6 gxf6 29 "iVe4, which, however, 
after 29 ...l:!h7 (29...'i'a8? 30 'i'e3) 30 lg1+ 
l:!.g7 31 .l:.xg7+ 'it>xg7 32 Sg 1+ f
 33 ^ 7 +  
'it>e8 34 l:tg7 lLlf7 35 'i'e4 'i*'c4 36 b3 'iVd5 37 
"i:Vxe6+ 'i'xe6 38 lt:lxe6 Sh8 39 lt:lc7+ 'it>f8 40 
.l:.g2 and lt:lxa6 also leads to an endgame 
with an extra pawn.
'24...lt:ld8 was perhaps preferable' (Abr. 
Khasin). However, it is unclear how Black 
can extricate himself from the vice after 2 5 
h5: if 25 ...l:1f7?! there is the decisive 26 ctJf5! 
l:td7 27 ctJh4 and lt:lg6.
25ctJf5
Now, although Black has retained his 
extra pawn, he will die from suffocation.
25...h5?!
A desperate attempt, which could have 
proved successful only in the event of an 
obvious mistake by White. 25 ...g6?? 26 
lt:le7+! 'W/xe7 27 #xg6 would have led to a 
pretty epaulette mate, but the patient
124

Adult Games
25 ... 'iYe6 also offered little chance of saving 
the game: 26 b3 :!:i.h7 (26 ...Ite8 27 l:f3!) 27 
"i!Vb7 'it>h8 28 h5 ii'c8 29 'i'a7 or 27...g6 28 
tt:Je7+ 'it>g7 29 h5 gxh5 30 gxh5 l:e8 31 tt:Jd5 
and wins.
26 l:.g1?! (5)
Intending to attack along the g-file. 
However, I had two forcing ways to win 
immediately:
a) 26 g5! fxg5 27 hxg5 tt:Jxg5 (after
27...g6?? 28 'De7+ it is again mate) 28 l:tg1! 
(28 #e3!?) 28...Ci'Je6 29 'i'xe5 Sxf5 (there is 
nothing else) 30 'i!Vxf5 'YlVf7 31 'i!Ve5 'YiKf4+ 32 
'i'xf4 Ci'Jxf4 33 l:d8+ 'it>h7 34 l:xh8+ 'it>xh8
35 'it>d2, and the rook quickly deals with the 
knight;
b) 26 "YWb7! (with the threats of 'De7+ and 
:d 7 ) 26...'iYa8 (26...<it>h7 27 gxh5!) 27 'i'd7 
:d 8  28 'De7+ 'it>f8 29 'YlVO l:h6 30 Ci'Jc6(f5), 
and Black has no defence.
26....Uh7 (26...Ci'Jh6? 27 Ci'Jxg7!) 27 'i!Vb7? (12) 
Alas, if 27 g5 fxg5 28 hxg5 there is now
28 . ..g6 29 'Dh4 Ci'Jh8! (Gufeld) 30 Sd6 l:thf7. 
and Black defends. But a strong attack 
would have been retained by both 27 'Wb4!? 
g5 28 gxh5 Sxh5 29 'it>b1, and 27 gxh5!? 
£ih6 28 Ci'Jd6 'YiKxh5 29 l:.dfl 'Df7 30 'Df5 etc.
27...'it>h8? (but this loses - 27 ...Ci'Jd8 was 
essential, with the ideas of 28 'i!Vxa6 hxg4 or
28 'Wid5+ ..t>h8) 28 gxhs (5) 2B...'YlVe6
Of course, not 28...Ci'Jd8? 29 l:xd8! 'YJVxd8
30 l:.xg7 2xh5 31 l:g5! and wins (Abr. 
Khasin).
29 Ci'Jxg7! (6)
This is what Panchenko overlooked! He 
was probably expecting 29 'De7 l:e8 30 
Ci'Jg6+ 'it>g8, although here too after 31 'it>b1! 
White has a big advantage.
29...'Wixa2?!
Desperation. True, a more resilient de­
fence would also not have saved Black:
a) 29..."ii'c4 30 'Wie7! (this is more forceful 
than Gufeld's suggestion 30 'it>bl) 30 ...Bc8
31 'it>b1! 'YJVxc2+ (31...l:.xg7?! 32 'Wixf6 'Wixc2+
33 ..t>a1 1i'h7 34 Sg6!) 32 'it>a1 'i!Vc7 33 'Df5! 
'i!Vxe7 34 Ci'Jxe7 l:e8 35 Ci'Jg6+ 'it>g8 (com­
paratively best) 36 Ci'Jxe5+ Sg7 37 'Dd7 I:te6 
38 Hgfl with a won endgame;
b) 29...!t.xg7 30 l:.xg7 'it>xg7 31 'Wig2+! (but 
not 31 2g1+? 'it>h7!, when after 32 'ilr'g2 'Dg5
33 hxg5 fxg5 34 'Wixg5 Black has 34. .."iVh6!)
31...Ci'Jg5 
(31...'it>h7? 32 'Wig6+ and Sg1) 32 
hxg5 fxg5 33 iVxg5+ 'it>h7 34 'Wig2 or 34 'it>b1
- thanks to his extra pawn and the open 
position of the enemy king, White must 
win.
30 'i!Ve7l SgB 31 'i!Vxf6 Wa1+ (31...l:gxg7 32 
Ixg 7  Ixg 7  33 h6) 32 'it>d2 WaS+ 33 'it>e2 
l:.gxg7 34 Ix g 7  Sxg7 35 lirg1 1-0
Times: 2.20-2.29
125

Garry Kasparov on Garry Kasparov: Part One
This crushing win over a high-class op­
ponent inspired me, but the very next day 
there followed a cold shower: in my favour­
ite Caro-Kann I was unable to make a draw 
with Ratmir Kholmov - the experienced 
grandmaster gave me an excellent lesson in 
positional play. However, I was not too 
upset and in the 3rd round I again moved 
onto a plus score by defeating Rostislav 
Korsunsky in a crucial 'Baku duel'.
Now I had to hold out with Black, espe­
cially since in the 4th round I encountered 
an opponent to whom two years earlier I 
had lost ignominiously in Baku - the Kiev 
player 
Yuri 
Nikolaevsky, 
a 
three-time 
Ukrainian champion and a finalist in three 
U55R Championships.
Game 26 
Yu.Nikolaevsky-G.Kasparov
All-Union Qualifying Tournament, 
4th round, Daugavpils 01.07.1978 
King's Indian Defence E6o
1 'Llf3 lt:Jf6 2 b3
Our previous game (Baku 1976) went 2 
g3 g6 3 .tg 2 :  g7 4 0-0 0-0 5 d4 d6 6 b3 c5 7 
.tb2 li:Jc6 8 d5. On this occasion Nikolaevsky 
began with 2 b3, but I was now aiming not 
for ...c7-c5, but for a thematic King's Indian 
set-up with ...'Llbd7 and ...e7-e5.
2...g6 3 .1. b2 . g7 4 c4
The usual 4 g3 o-o (4. . c5 - Game No.44) 5 
.tg2 d6 6 d4 is nevertheless more accurate, 
and in the event of 6...'Llbd7 7 o-o e5 8 dxe5 
Black has to play 8...lt:Jg4, after which it is 
no longer favourable for him to capture on 
e5 with the pawn, while after the capture 
with a piece White retains some pressure in 
the centre.
4... 
0-0 5 g3 d6 6 d4 li:Jbd7 7 ..tg2 e5
5olving Black's opening problems.
8 e3
If 8 dxe5, then simply 8...dxe5! 9 o-o (the 
pawn is taboo: 9 li:Jxe5? 'Llg4 10 'Lld3? .txb2
11 li:Jxb2 'i'f6! and wins) 9 .e4  10 'Lle1 'ife7 
and ....l:!.d8 with an excellent game (Elis- 
kases-Pachman, Mar del Plata 1962). And if
8 o-o, then both 8 ...exd4 and 8...e4 9 li:Jel 
d5!? 10 li:Jc3 li:Jb6 (Petrovs-Boleslavsky, 
Moscow 1940) are good. Therefore for the 
moment White chooses to reinforce his d4- 
pawn.
8...Se8 (6) 9 0-0 e4
Aggression in the spirit of the then fash­
ionable King's Indian Attack (cf. Game 
No.9), which demands precise follow-up 
action. To maintain the balance it was quite 
sufficient to play 9.lt:Je4 or 9...exd4!? 10 
exd4 (after 10 li:Jxd4 li:Jc5 the move e2-e3 is 
depreciated) 10...lt:Je4! 
11 lt:Jbd2 'Lldf6, 
analogous to the way that I earlier played in 
a clock simultaneous against Katalymov 
(Leningrad 1975).
10 lt:Jfd2 lt:Jf8
A typical manoeuvre with the attacking 
idea ...&f5, ...h7-h5, ...li:J8h7-g5 and so on. 
However, 10...c6! was more natural - after 
reinforcing his e4-pawn by ...d6-d5, Black 
would have retained a solid and comfort­
able position.
11 lt:Jc3 .tf5
126

Adult Games
12 f3!
I 
underestimated 
this 
undermining 
move. The experienced master immediately 
eliminates the threatened bind on the 
kingside. After 12 'i'c2 "fie7 or 12 ...c6 this 
can no longer be played!
12...exf3?1 (2)
Black couldstill have retained more or less 
equal chances, if he had found the by no 
means obvious tactic 12...gh6!, exploiting 
the momentary weakness of the e3-pawn:
13 ltJdxe4 (13 f4 ; g7!) 13. ..&xe3+ 14 'it>h1 
£)8d7 15 l:Ie1 (15 g4 .txe4 16 fxe4 c6!)
15... 
\ h6 16 f4 ltJxe4 17 ltJxe4 .tg7 18 'id 2 
d5!, and no advantage is given by either 19 
^c3 l:txe1+ 20 Sxe1 dxc4 21 tt:d5 ..te6!, or 19 
cxd5 ..txe4 20 ..txe4 (20 Sxe4 Sxe4 and 
...£>f6) 20 ... tt:f6 21 .tf3 Sxe1+ 22 Sxe1 tt:xd5. 
13 'iWxf3 c6 14 e4
After his modestly played opening White 
has unexpectedly made a strong claim to 
an advantage - he has seized space, created 
a powerful pawn centre, and opened the f- 
file, along which he can press on the f7- 
pawn. Black still has sufficient defensive 
resources, but the sharp change of situa­
tion on the board almost led me to disaster.
14.....tg4! (with gain of tempo: 14. ....te6 15 
2ae1 or 14....td7 15 tt:a4 'fke7 16 Sae1 
would have been worse) 15 'i'f2
15...'iWaS? (23)
This queen sortie, which has the psycho­
logical intention of frightening the oppo­
nent with the variation 16 h3 'i'h5, proves 
to be a losing move. The knight should have 
been urgently activated - 15..tt:e6!, for 
example: 16 h3 ctJg5! 17 hxg4 tt:xg4 18 Wie2 
gxd4+ 19 Wh 1 tt:e 3 or 16 tt:a4 tt:Jg5 17 d5 
lt:lfxe4!? (17...tt:d7 is also not bad) 18 lt:Jxe4 
.l:xe4 19 ..txg7 'it>xg7 with double-edged 
play.
16 cs?
My reckoning proves justified! In fact 
after 16 h3! Black did not have the reply
1 6 ...^ 5 ? because of the sudden blow 17 
e5! 
dxe5 
18 tt:ce4, winning 
a piece.
16.....td7(c8) 17 c5! or 16.....te6 17 d5! would 
also have been fatal, while after 16...'¥i'c7 
again 17 d5! is strong, and if 17.....tc8(h5), 
then 18 ctJb5! and ..txf6.
Nikolaevsky (following me) did not notice 
the refutation of 16. ..#h5 and was relying 
on a rapid breakthrough in the centre. But 
he did not take account of all the tactical 
nuances! Whereas from the 10th to the 
15th move I played uncertainly, here I 
literally gained a new lease of life, and I 
suddenly saw one of the longest combina­
tions in my career.
1 6 ...6 .6 ! 
(5)

Garry Kasparov on Garry Kasparov: Part One
Strictly the only move, which was clearly 
underestimated by my opponent. Black 
defends the f7-pawn in good time and 
creates the threat of ... ctJg4, not allowing 
White to capture the d6-pawn.
17 h3
White is forced to waste a tempo. The 
attempt 17 ctJc4 ..\txc4 18 bxc4 dxc5 19 e5 is 
no better on account of 19...ctJg4! 20 'Wixf7+ 
Wh8 21 l2le4 cxd4 22 
xd4 ..\txe5 23 ..\txe5+ 
Wxe5 with equality.
17... dxc5 (8) 18 e5
18 
d5 ?! is risky in view of 18...ctJg4! 19 
Wf4 (19 hxg4 t d4) 19 .....\td4+ 20 'it>h1 tt:Je5!
21 dxe6 tt:Jxe6 22 Wf6 Sad8 with excellent 
compensation for the piece.
After playing 18 e5, Nikolaevsky looked 
very happy with his position. But within 
five moves the expression on his face 
changed. ..
18. ..cxd4! (16)
It is interesting that this entire chain of 
moves by Black, from the 16th to the end of 
the game, came to my mind somehow 
immediately, without any particular effort. 
18. ..tt:Jd5 (or 18 ...ctJ6d7) was also acceptable, 
but I wanted to demonstrate the elegant 
way to draw that I had found.
19 exf6 ..\th6! (of course, not 19 ...dxc3? 20 
fxg7 ctJd7 21 ctJc4) 20 'Wixd4 Bad8 21 ctJc4l
This move was also made with obvious 
pleasure by Nikolaevsky ('the young mar 
has probably missed something'), but 
replied equally confidently and quickly.
21... ..\txc4 22 Wxc4 'Wib6+ (3)
22. ..fld2 is also highly rated by the com­
puter, but humans don't play that way.
23 'it>h1
23...Sd4!
The crux of the entire idea. To save his 
queen, White has to allow the invasion of 
the 2nd rank by both enemy rooks. By his 
own admission, my opponent was stag­
gered, when it transpired that in the com­
plicated middlegame position after 16 c5 
there was a forced draw!
24 tt:Ja4 (24 tt:Jd5 Sxc4 would have come to
128

Adult Games
the same thing) 24... l:!.xc4 25 4Jxb6 l:!.c2 26 
lbc4 l:!.ee2 (4) 27 ..if3 l:!.h2+ 28 'it>g1 bS 29 
..ie4 (or 29 ..ic l l:!.xh3 30 ..ixh6 l:!.xg3+ 31 
'i£th1 l:!.h3+) 29. ..l:!.ce2 30 ..if3 l:!.c2 31 ..ie4 
Vz-Vz
Draw agreed in view of 'perpetual check' 
to the rook.
Times: 2.05-2.07.
A fairy-tale combination! The tourna­
ment spectators and contestants, who 
observed the kaleidoscopic finish to the 
game, merely nodded their heads: 'This 
youth is indeed very dangerous'. The most 
important result of this sharp tactical 
skirmish was that I gained complete confi­
dence in myself.
Nikitin: ‘Before Daugavpils it was not dif­
ficult to convince Garik that during the 
tournament he should play, rather than sit 
reading reference books and wisdom-filled 
notebooks. And our preparation fo r games 
took 
place 
in 
unhurried 
conversations 
during strolls through parks or streets, while 
the specific opening system to be adopted 
was decided during dinner, a couple of 
hours before the start of play. Naturally, 
such a method was effective only after 
thorough preparatory work. .. '
In the 5th round I defeated Smbat Lpu-
tian, an old opponent in junior battles, and 
in the 6th round, with Black in a Caro-Kann,
I beat the experienced Mark Tseitlin, a 
genuine chess filibuster: over-rating his 
chances, he avoided a three-fold repetition 
of the position and in time-trouble went 
down in flames. Regarding this it was 
written that ‘the 15-year-old schoolboy 
managed to win a very interesting psycho­
logical duel'.
Rather unexpectedly I found myself 
among the leaders: Palatnik - 5 out of 6, 
Kasparov, Alburt and Faibisovich - 41/ 2. And 
I became nervous when for the first time I 
saw my result highlighted in red in the 
tournament table. The original 'plus two' 
target would have brought me somewhere 
in the region of 15-20th place, but now 
Nikitin corrected his initial plan: I had to try 
and cling on to a place in the top seven and 
qualify for the First League!
In the 7th round I was paired with White 
against the player half a point ahead of me, 
Semion Palatnik from Odessa, who that 
year became a grandmaster. Before the 
game with me he had scored four succes­
sive wins, but here, as they say, he met his 
match. This competitively important game 
was judged to be one ofthe best in the 26th 
volume of Informator.
Game 27 
G.Kasparov-S.Palatnik
All-Union Qualifying Tournament, 
7th round, Daugavpils 5.07.1978 
Alekhine Defence 804
1 e4 lbf6 2 e5 tt:Jd5 3 d4 d6 4 lbf3 g6 (4...
..ig4 - Game No.8) 5 ..ic4 lbb6 6 ..ib3 aS 
This set-up was often employed by 
Odessa players, and it was not hard for me 
and Nikitin to prepare a good continuation.
129

Garry Kasparov on Garry Kasparov: Part One
After 6....Jlg7 they usually played (and still 
play) 7 tt:lg5 e6 8 'Wif3, but 7 a4 a5 has also 
occurred, i.e. the inclusion of these moves 
was initiated by White!
7 a4
Although theory judged 7 e6 .Jlxe6 8 
.Jlxe6 fxe6 9 tt:lg5 tt:lc6 10 tt:lxe6 'Wid7 11 "iVe2 
to be in White's favour, after 11 ...tt:ld8 12 
tt:lxf8 Bxf8 Black achieves a viable position 
(Kapengut-Palatnik and Lukin-Alburt, Beltsy
1977).
7....Jlg7
I would have been only too pleased with
7 ... d5 8 0-0 (the source game: Kavalek- 
Larsen, Manila 1973).
8 tt:lg5
Too little is promised by 8 exd6 cxd6 
(Ree-Palatnik, Kiev 1978).
B...e6
This move, which had not occurred pre­
viously, was made by Palatnik without any 
particular thought, which somewhat threw 
me into confusion.
8...d5 would have led to a well-known 
position with the inclusion of the moves a2- 
a4 and ...a7-a5. In the main variation with 9 
f4 the weakening of the b4-square (after 
the exchange of c-pawns) may give Black 
counterplay. However, I was planning 9 0-0 
0-0 10 5e1 tt:lc6 11 c3 f6 12 exf6 exf6 13
tt:le6 'with a slight advantage', which, alas, 
evaporates after 13 . ...txe6 14 Oxe6 'i¥d7 
and ...fiae8. More chances are given by 10 
tt:lc3!? with the idea of 10. ..f6?! 11 tt:lge4, 
activating the knight, or 10...tt:lc6 11 tt:lb5, 
but Black can reply 10...c6 and then ...tt:la6- 
c7-e6.
9 f4 (20)
A sensible plan of action - there was not 
a lot of choice. I quickly realised that it was 
not possible to refute Black's idea immedi­
ately by 9 'Wif3 'iJ/e7 10 tt:le4 dxe5 (10...d5!?)
11 .Jlg5 because of 11...^4+! - the inclu­
sion of the moves a2-a4 and ...a7-a5 has 
denied White the possibility of 12 c3.
Later it seemed to me that 12 tt:lbd2 
would nevertheless give White a dangerous 
initiative: 12 ...'i1Nxd4? 13 tt:lf6+ 4 f8  14 0-0-0 
or 12. ..exd4?! 13 c3!. But after 12. ..tt:l8d7! 
Black succeeds in consolidating - 13 tt:lf6+ 
tt:lxf6 14 &xf6 &xf6 15 'Wixf6 0-0 16 'Wixe5 
(16 c3 tt:ld7!) 16...tt:ld7 17 'Wie3 c5 18 dxc5 
'Wixc5 with rapid equality.
9 ••• dxe5 10 fxe5 (14) 10...C5
11 0-0!
The strongest and most natural move, 
although in earlier commentaries, fearing 
the reply 11...Wxd4 I consided castling to be 
an inaccuracy and, since 11 dxc5 'Wixd1+ 12 
4xd1 tt:l6d7 is harmless, I recommended
130

Adult Games
the ‘simple' 11 c3 cxd4 12 0-0! - after
12 ... 0-0 13 cxd4 tt:c6 the position is slightly 
better for White, and could have occurred 
in the game (cf. the notes to Black's 12th). 
11. ..0-0
Palatnik was right! In The Test of Time I 
wrote that after 11 ...#xd4+(?) 12 'ixd 4 
cxd4 13 tt:xf7 0-0 14 tt:d6 (14 tt:h6+!?)
14....l:!.xf1+ 15 'it>xfl ..id7 16 tt:xb7 tt:a6! or
13 .l:!.xf7(!) ..ixe5 14 .l:!.fl(?!) tt:c6 'Black would 
have escaped from all his difficulties', but 
in the second variation 14 i.f4 ! is far better, 
with an obvious advantage:14...tt:c6 15 
..txe5 tt:Jxe5 16 Sc7 t2ld5 17 ..txd5 exd5 18 
tt:a3 0-0 19 l:!.el etc.
12 C3
Here 12 dxc5 #xd1 13 .l:!.xdl was slightly 
more attractive than on the previous move, 
but I did not even consider exchanging the 
queens 
so 
early, 
especially 
as 
after
13 ...tt:6d7 14 &e3 tt:Jxe5 15 tt:c3 tt:a6 or 14 
tt:e4 (Stohl) 14...tt:Jxe5 15 h3 tt:a6 16 ..te3 
..td7 White would have been in danger of 
selling his advantage too cheaply.
12 •..tt:c6?
A positional blunder, after which White's 
initiative becomes threatening. 12...cxd4!
13 cxd4 was essential and only now
13...tt:c6. I was intending to continue 14 
tt:f3 f6 15 tt:c3! fxe5 (15...t2ld5 16 exf6!) 16
..tg5 with good compensation for the pawn; 
moreover, I did not especially calculate the 
variations and I was sure that White was 
risking far less than Black. Thus 16...ir'e8(?)
17 dxe5 tt:Jxe5 18 tt:Jxe5 Sxfl+  19 'ix f l 
..txe5 is bad because of 20 B d l! ..td7 21 
&f6 or 20...tt:d7 21 tt:e4 andwins.
16..."it'd7 17 dxe5 tt:xe5 18 tt:xe5 is more 
acceptable for Black - here many have 
played 18 ...Sxf1+(?) 19 W xfl 'id4+ 20 'it>hl 
"it'xe5, although after 21 ..td8! White has a 
powerful attack: 21...#c5 (21... Ba6 22 Bdl!) 
22 tt:e4 Wc6 (22..."i4? 23 t2lg5! 'it>h8 24 Wf7 
and wins, Grischuk-Ponomariov, Torshavn 
2000) 23 t2lg5 t2ld5, and now not 24 #f7+(?) 
'it>h8 25 .l:!.fl (Berelowitsch-Gerzhoy, Cauls- 
don 2008) 25...tt:e3! 26 tt:e4 (26 S g l t2ld5) 
26. ....td7! 27 ^f6 Sg8 with equality, but the 
forceful 24 B cl! #e8 25 ..txd5 exd5 26 B el! 
or 24..."it'd7 25 tt:Jxe6! 'i¥xe6 26 l:tel ..te5 27 
..tc7, demolishing Black's defences.
Therefore Black has to go into the end­
game - 
18 ...'ir'xd1 
19 
S a xd l l:txfl+!?
(19. ...txe5 20 B fel! Korneev-Janev, Cutro 
2002) 20 'it>xfl ..txe5 with an extra pawn for 
Black, although after 21 ..te3! (21 &d8 
..ixc3! 22 bxc3 t2ld5 is not so clear) he faces 
a struggle for a draw.
13 tt:e4! (3)
An unpleasant surprise, which wrecks 
Black's plans. To avert a conflagration on 
the f6-square, he is forced to make an 
awkward move, forgetting about counter­
play in the centre.
13...tt:d7
Alas! The capture on d4 would have lost 
quickly: 13 ... cxd4? 14 ..tg5 "id7 (14...'ic7 15 
cxd4) 15 tt:f6+ .txf6 16 .txf6 h5 (16. ..dxc3
17 Wcl! and "ih6) 17 W cl 'it>h7 18 Sf3! with 
the murderous threat of Bh3xh5+.
14 £e3 (17)
Reinforcing the centre and preparing 
tt:a3-b5(c4). The attempt to take the black
131

Garry Kasparov on Garry Kasparov: Part One
position by storm could have ended in 
failure - 14 gg5?! 'i!Vb6 15 tt:Jf6+? (15 dxc5 
tt:Jxc5 16 i.e3 Wxb3 17 .txc5 really is better)
15...1.xf6! 16 exf6 cxd4 17 Wh1 l2Jc5 18 i.c4  
e5 or 18 l2Jd2 e5 etc.
14...12Je7
If 14...'ilfb6?!, then 15 tt:Ja3 cxd4 16 l2Jc4 is 
strong, or if 14. ..cxd4 15 cxd4 W 6?! - 16 
.l:!.f3!. Black is hoping to overcome his diffi­
culties by covering his weakened kingside 
with the knight and fianchettoing the light- 
square bishop.
15 j_g5! (21)
This unexpected reply disrupts Black's 
plans. To get rid of the pin on his knight at 
e7 he is forced to go in for a further weak­
ening of his kingside.
15...cxd4
It never rains but it pours! It turns out 
that the bishop cannot be driven away 
without first freeing the best square c3 for 
the white knight: if 15...h6 16 gh4 g5? 
White has the decisive 17 .ixg5! cxd4 
(17 ...hxg5 18 ^ 5 )  18 ii.xe7 Wixe7 19 cxd4 
f6 20 tt:Jbc3 fxe5 21 d5!, whereas the ex­
change in the centre eliminates this dan­
ger.
16 cxd4 h6 17 j.,h4 gS 18 f
 (3)
Not now 18 gxg5? hxg5 19 'i'h5 tt:Jxe5!
20 dxe5 Wid4+ 21 lt:Jf2 ifxb2 22 li.a3 tt:Jg6 or
22. .. #xe5.
18 ... tt:Jg6 19 ttJbc3 'W/e7 (Black tries to free 
himself by ... f7-f5; understandably, White 
prevents this) 20 i c2! (9)
Aiming at the g6-knight.
20...b6 (if 20...f5 there is not only 21 tt:Jd6, 
but also 21 exf6 ttJxf6 22 l2\xg5!) 21 .ie 3 (6)
Thanks to the efforts of this bishop 
Black's position has an unattractive ap­
pearance, and one senses that the decisive 
blow is not far off.
21 ...j_a6 (alas, belated development) 22 
f
 (3)
22 tLlb5!? was a worthy alternative.
22...ctJh8?
Both a delay, and an ugly 'corner' move. 
Palatnik is consistent in his desire to free 
himself - Black again prepares .. .f7-f5, and 
therefore he removes his knight from the 
oppressive glare of the bishop on c2. But 
White already has everything prepared.
Good or bad, the immediate 22 ... f5! was 
esential, since 23 exf6 ttJxf6 24 ttJxg5 is not 
so clear in view of 24...CDd5 (Stohl) or even
24...ctJh4. However, after 23 ttJd6 White 
would retain an overwhelming positional 
advantage.
23 j.,xg5!? (17)
In the period of my chess youth I rarely 
refrained from such spectacular blows. And
132

Adult Games
for a long time, under the impression of the 
rout which followed, I considered this move 
to be the shortest way to the goal. Indeed, 
the subsequent events develop by force, 
and in all variations the sacrifices are 
correct. But I couldn't help thinking that it 
was possible to manage without ‘bril­
liance'.
When, on my return to Baku, I showed 
this game to Vladimir Andreevich Ma- 
kogonov, he suddenly asked: 'But wouldn't 
it have been simpler to play h2-h4?' Thus 
another solution to the position was found, 
one not involving any sacrifices: 23 h4! f5
24 exf6 lt:Jxf6 25 hxg5 or 23..gxh4 24 ' i 5 !  
f5 25 exf6 tt:Jxf6 26 tt:Jxf6+ 2xf6 27 tt:Jd5! 
exd5 28 'Wixd5+ and 'i!Vxa8.
This continuation is undoubtedly more 
practical, but then there would not have 
been the fireworks with the sacrifice of 
both bishops, and an attack in which all (!) 
the white pieces participated. Later, the 
experience 
acquired from 
tournament 
battles would have suggested to me 23 h4. 
But, in any case, the vigorous, 'emotional' 
implementation of this game afforded me 
a great deal of pleasure. And not only me. ..
23...hxg5 24 'Wih5
24...f5
It is not possible to withstand the on­
slaught after 24...f6 25 tt:'lxg5 or 24..l:Hc8 25 
tt:Jxg5 :l.a7 (25...tt:Jf8 26 tt:Jce4) 26 r!e1.
25 tt:'lxg5 Sf7
The most resilient defence. Black would 
have lost more quickly after both 25 . ...i.xe5
26 dxe5 tt:Jxe5 27 Se1 tLlhg6 28 .i.b3 i.c8 29 
tt:Jd5! (Stohl), and 25...Sfc8(d8) 26 .txf5! 
exf5 27 tt:Jd5 or 25 ...tt:'lf6 26 lLld5!!.
After making this move, Palatnik unex­
pectedly offered a draw! I was very sur­
prised: it is patently obvious just how 
strong White's attack is. Perhaps the tour­
nament leader, realising that his position 
was hopeless, was trying a last chance? At 
any event, my silent reply was a new sacri­
fice.
26 .txf5! (4)
The crux of the combination. The sacri­
fice of the second bishop conclusively 
destroys the black king's defences. 26 d5!? 
&xe5 27 tt:'lxf7 would also have won, but 
the move in the game is both prettier, and 
better.
26...5xf5 (if 26...exf5, then 27 tt:Jd5 'Wie8 28 
lbc7 is decisive) 27 Sxf5 exf5 28 tt:Jd5
Things have unexpectedly become tight 
for the black queen. There remains only one 
square where, not for long, it finds salva­
tion.
28...We8 29 'Wih7+ 'itf8 30 #xfS+ 'itg8 (or
133

Garry Kasparov on Garry Kasparov: Part One
30. ..tt'lf7 31 tt'le6+ 'it>g8 32 'ifg6) 31 'ifh7+ 
Wf8 32 .l:!.a3 (2)
Aiming to conclude the game by a direct 
attack. 32 tt'lf4!? i  c4 33 H fl! (Stohl) was 
also good.
32. ...l:!.c8
Or 32...Wg6 33 Sf3+ *e 8  34 Wg8+ f
 
(34. ..tt'lf8 35 Bxf8+! ..ixf8 36 tt'lf6+) 35 tt'lc7+ 
4>e7 (35 ...^d8 36 tt:Jge6+) 36 Bf7+! 'ifxf7 37 
tt'lxf7 etc.
33 Sf3+ (4) 33...tt'lf6
A time-trouble gesture of despair: after
33 ...tt'lf7 34 .l:!.xf7+ 'ifxf7 35 tt'lxf7 &xf7 36 
#f5+ or 35...1c1+ 36 f
 Bf1+ 37 <4g3 fixf7 
38 ^
4! Black would have lost material.
34 h3 (the immediate 34 .l:!.xf6+ &xf6 35 
tt'lxf6 was also possible) 34...'ifg6 35 Hxf6+ 
..ixf6 36 tt'le6+ 'it>e8 37 tt:Jxf6+
Here Palatnik froze for an instant, made 
a despairing gesture as if to show that 
there was nowhere further to go, and 
stopped the clocks (1-0). Times: 2.15-2.28.
Around the table where we were playing, 
as usual there was a crowd of many experi­
enced 
spectators, 
including 
the other 
contestants. There were even more of them 
during analysis after the game . .. From the 
press: ‘A crushing defeat. The methods of 
conducting an attack in Kasparov’s games
are apparently evoked by the wonderful 
creative heritage ofthe great Alekhine'.
After this inspirational win I reached 51/2 
out of 7 and I was leading the tournament 
together 
with 
Alburt, 
who 
on 
the 
neighbouring board defeated Faibisovich. 
Then Nikitin, seeing my condition, decided 
again to make a correction to the 'obliga­
tions undertaken': perhaps the idea of 
qualifying for the Premier League should 
not be dismissed?!
But in the next round I faced a very dan­
gerous opponent, Lev Alburt, the winner of 
the same tournament the previous year. 
Like Palatnik, he was from Odessa, but now 
both of them have long been Americans. It 
is noteworthy that this fighting game was 
published both in the weekly 64 (with notes 
by Alburt) and in the magazine Shakhmaty 
v SSSR (with my commentary), but it was 
removed from the book The Test of Time: in 
the summer of 1979, following Korchnoi's 
example, my opponent defected. ..
Came 28 
L.AIburt-G.Kasparov
All-Union Qualifying Tournament, 
8th round, Daugavpils 6.07.1978 
King’s Indian Defence E74
1 c4 tt'lf6 2 tt'lc3 g6 3 d4 -&g7 4 e4 d6 5 -&e2 
0-0 6 ^g5
Although Alburt constantly employed 
the Averbakh Variation with White, I had a 
rather vague impression of its subtleties, 
since I had only just risen to that level of 
competition where genuinely professional 
preparation, including that in the opening, 
was needed. I knew about a comparatively 
fresh idea 12...Wa5, which had briefly 
appeared in the chess press - this was the 
extent of my knowledge before the game.
134

Adult Games
6...C5
According to Geller, the most critical con­
tinuation (an immediate attack on the 
centre), but at the same time a strategically 
risky one. Later I played 6 ...tt:Jbd7 (Game 
No. 76), but when I had matured as a King's 
Indian player I arrived at 6...tt:Ja6 (Bareev- 
Kasparov, Linares 1992).
7 dS h6 (I have also played 7.bs?! 8 cxb5 a6 
-Game Nos.58, 67) 8 .if4
An attempt to hinder the undermining 
move ...e7-e6. 8 .ie3 e6 9 'iWd2 exd5 10 exd5 
is more harmless - here Black can play in 
various ways, for example: 10. . . it>h7 11 h3 
ie 8  12 tiJf3 ; f5 with equality (Dydyshko- 
Kasparov, Minsk 1978).
8 ...e6
Nevertheless! Another try is 8...'ib6 9 
j'd2 e6 10 dxe6 &xe6, excluding 11 &xd6?! 
in view of 11....:td8 12 e5 tt:Je8, but allowing
11 kxh6 or 11 0-0-0.
9 dxe6 ^xe6 10 .&xd6
Now if 10 '>i'd2 not only 10. ..'i'b6 is possi­
ble, but also 10. ..'i'as!?.
10....:eS 11 CDf3 tt:c6 (from the early 1980s
11...'iVb6!? became popular: 12 e5 tt:Jfd7 or
12 kxb8 l:taxb8 13 '*'c2 tt:Jh5 with double­
edged play) 12 0-0 Wa5?!
We played all this at lightning speed, and 
I ‘rattled out' the prepared queen move,
which at the time appealed to me more 
than the frequently-played 
12 ...tt:Jd4. 
I 
thought that the d-file was needed for a 
black rook, to emphasise the drawbacks to 
the placing of the white pieces on this file.
Besides, one of the recent games on the 
'12 . .tt:Jd4' theme - 13 e5 tt:Jd7 14 tt:xd4 cxd4
15 Wxd4 tt:Jxe5 16 &xe5 Wxd4 17 i. xd4
i. xd4 18 Sac1 .l:ad8 19 b3 &xc3 20 Sxc3 
Sd2 21 &f3 l:txa2 22 jt,xb7 !!.b8 had pro­
ceeded and concluded favourably for White 
(Alburt-Timoshchenko, Beltsy 1977). How­
ever, subsequent games showed that Black 
has quite adequate compensation for the 
pawn - here I myself gained a draw against 
Polugayevsky (Bugojno 1982), while later I 
spent a long time analysing this compli­
cated endgame and I found, as it seemed to 
me, an accurate way to maintain the bal­
ance.
As for the queen sortie, I never repeated 
it again, since it transpired that it was 
dubious and perhaps even deserving of a 
question mark.
13 tt:d2!
A novelty from a 1977 game that was 
unknown to us. The grandmaster made the 
knight move with unconcealed pleasure - 
he 'had analysed it a great deal and come 
to the conclusion that White should gain an
135

Garry Kasparov on Garry Kasparov: Part One
advantage' (Alburt).
At the board I now had to solve a difficult 
problem. At home I had made a quite 
detailed analysis of the variations 13 e5 
.!Dd7 14 .!Dd5 &xd5 (L.Popov-Cebalo, Zagreb 
1973) and 13 a3 l:ted8! (13 ...la.ad8 14 b4!) 14 
b4 cxb4 15 axb4 "1/Nxa1 16 'Wixa1 .!Dxe4 with 
good compensation for the queen (Azmai- 
parashvili-Lanka, Sochi 1978). This helped 
me to quickly find the correct arrangement 
of the pieces (although initially, on seeing 
the dangers present, I felt sad - but I did 
not let on!).
13....l:ed8 (10)
Only this rook! The e8-square must be 
free for the retreat of the knight. After
13 ...Bad8?! 14 e5 tt:ld7 15 f4 White achieves 
everything: both an extra pawn, and a 
positional advantage. 13. ..tt:ld4?! is also 
insufficient: 14 .&d3 (14 e5!?) 14. . ..Uad8 15 
tt:lb3 .!Dxb3 16 axb3 'iVb6 17 &f4 g5 18 ^c1 
tt:lg4 (Farago-Perenyi, Budapest 1977) 19 
.!Dd5! ..Wd6 20 f4! etc.
After this and right up to the 25th move 
my opponent continued playing at high 
speed, as though demonstrating his knowl­
edge to me.
14 tt:lb3?!
In the event of 14 e5 tt:le8! 15 tt:lb3 'ilb6 
Black escapes from his difficulties: 16 tt:ld5?!
^xd5 17 ^xc5 ^e6! (17..."1/NO?! 18 cxd5 
&xe5 19 g3 and &f3) 18 &xb6 Sxd1 19 
.l:fxd1 axb6 20 f4 f6! or 16 tt:la4 'it'b4 17 
.!Dbxc5 &xc4! (of course, not 17...&xe5? 18 
a3) 18 a3 ^xe2 19 "ixe2 (19 axb4 ^xd1 20 
J:fxd1 b5 is equal) 19...'Wif4 20 Sad1 b6 21 
g3 'iWf5 with a good game.
But a year later Uhlmann improved 
White's play by 14 &f4! with the idea of
14....!2Jd4 15 tt:ld5!, as in his games with 
Ghitescu, 
Peev 
(Bucharest 
1979) 
and 
Sznapik (Berlin 1979), or 14...4Je8 15 tt:ld5! 
(Ivkov-Torre, 
Rio de Janeiro Interzonal
1979). It is possible that 14..'i!Vb6 is better, 
but this is a largely theoretical question, 
since the variation with 12...'t1Va5 has al­
most gone out of use.
14..J\Vb6 (forcing events - the threat is 
...tt:Je8) 15 tt:Ja4
The undefended pawn cannot be taken 
immediately - 15 tt:Jxc5? l:txd6! 16 '1xd6 
tt:Je8, but it needs to be taken, as otherwise 
Black will soon make short work of the 
bishop on d6.
1S ...'ib 4
16 tt:Jbxc5
Despite the approximate material equal­
ity, the position in the variation 16 tt:Jaxc5 
tt:Je8 17 a3 "ib6 18 .!Da4 .Uxd6! 19 tt:Jxb6 
Bxd1 20 tt:Jxa8 Sd8 21 tt:Jc5 tt:Jd4 is advan­
136

Adult Games
tageous to Black in view of the activity of 
his pieces. ‘He traps the errant knight, and 
White has no advantage' (Alburt).
16...Jl.xc4 (9) 17 gxc4
Nothing was given by including the 
moves 17 a3 Wb5, for example: 18 lt:Jc3 
gxe2 19 lbxb5 g xd 1 20 l:tfxd1 b6 21 'Db7 
l:!.d7 22 .l:.ac1 .l:i.xb7 23 Sxc6 lt:Jxe4, or 18 
gxc4 Wxc4 19 l:!c1 (19 lt:Jxb7 lt:Jxe4)
19 . ..^ 5  20 lt:Jc3 'Wb6 21 b4 tt:Je5!, forcing 
22 gxe5 l:txd1 23 l:tfxd1 Sd8, in each case 
with equality.
17...'iVxc4 18 lt:Jxb7 'Dxe4 (2)
The first result of the white knight's leap 
to a4 - a valuable pawn has fallen. There 
now begins the concluding stage of the 
complications, which Black had to foresee 
when he made his 13th move. Moreover, as 
in the game with Nikolaevsky, the picture 
of the final position (after the 24th move) 
formed in my mind almost immediately, 
and this gave me confidence that there 
should not be any unpleasantness for Black.
19 l:!.c1 'ilb5 (2)
20 'DxdB?!
The most obvious move, but nevertheless
20 lbac5 was safer, after which there would 
have followed 20...lt:Jd4!. Now 21 lbxe4 
'i&'xb7 (suggested by Gufeld in Informator)
22 l:!.e1 tt:Jf5 causes White some problems,
but the preparatory 21 a4! (safeguarding 
the pawn in advance) leads after 21...iVb6
22 Cbxe4 (or first 22 a5 Wb5, if White does 
not like the questionable 22 lt:Jxd8 tt:Jxd6 23 
lt:Jxf7 'Dxf7 24 lt:Jd3 ltd8 2 5 Se1 with a rook 
and a couple of pawns for two minor 
pieces) 22 ...'i¥xb7 23 l:te1 to approximate 
equality - Black easily regains the pawn, 
but he can hardly hope for more (23...lt:Jf5
24 l:c2 etc.).
20..J x d 8 21 'YWc2! lt:Jd4! (two forced moves)
22 \'/Vxe4 lt:Je2+ 23 'it'h1 'Dxc1 24 l:!xc1 Sxd6
After a short battle the ranks of the two 
sides' forces have been greatly thinned. The 
opening balance - extra pawn for White, 
activity for Black - has remained.
Alburt: ‘On these 24 moves I spent about
15 minutes, and my opponent - about an 
hour. Everything seemed to be alright. The 
resulting position was well known to me - I 
had analysed it a few years earlier and had 
come to the conclusion that White has the 
advantage - he is a pawn up and there 
does not appear to be any danger... To all 
appearances it seemed that the young 
player was not familiar with the subtleties 
of the variation, and he was having to solve 
the problems at the board. In short, I had 
been given a start: a time advantage in a 
very familiar position.'
But Lev had assessed incorrectly the 
prospects of the two sides - there is some 
danger for White: his knight is obviously 
inferior in mobility to the bishop (and it is 
also stuck on the edge of the board!), and 
his king has no escape square. I was happy 
with my position, reckoning that Black had 
full compensation for the pawn, but at that 
moment I would not have objected to a 
draw.
2S'fWc2
This, the last move of White's home 
preparation (as my opponent informed me
137

Garry Kasparov on Garry Kasparov: Part One
after the game), is not altogether accurate
- he would have done better to free his 
queen of minor concerns and play 25 b3!? 
(but, of course, not 25 'iUa8+?! 'it'h7 26 
'iUxa7? fia6) 25. ..l:!.d2 26 'iUa8+ 4h7 27 
#xa7, when Black's activity is insufficient 
for a win:
a) 27...'iUf5 28 'iUc5 .i.e5 29 'it>g1! #d3 30 
'i/Vxe5! .Md1+ 31 'i¥e1 .Mxe1+ 32 fixe1 'iUc2 33 
g3 'iUxa2 34 .Me3, creating a fortress;
b) 27...'i¥d5 28 .Mfl 
d4 29 'iUO(a6) 'iUf5
30 'iUc4 2xf2 (30. ..h5 31 b4! h4 32 h3) 31 
.Mxf2 'i!Vxf2 32 'iUc1 'i!Vxa2 (32. ..h5 33 b4) 33 
'i!Vd1 'i!Vf2 34 b4! and tt:Jc5, when White 
gains a draw by activating his knight (it is 
important that he has succeeded in picking 
up the a7-pawn).
25...'i!Vg5! (5)
Playing on the weakness ofthe 1st rank. 
From the reaction of my opponent I realised 
that he had not considered this at home. 
Alburt: 'I underestimated the queen move - 
....Md2 is threatened.'
26 .l:!.d1?
A tactical oversight, and essentially the 
decisive mistake. Earlier I advised 'seeking a 
draw' with 26 'iUc5(?!), but after 26 ...'iUxc5 
(26. ..'iUd2 27 f if l 'iUe2 28 'iUc1 Hd2 and 
....i.d4 is also interesting) 27 tZ:lxc5 .\txb2 28 
.Mel .Md5! 29 tt:b3 a5 it is not easy to find.
However, 26 g3 would have enabled 
White, with accurate defence, to hold this 
slightly inferior position: 26. ...l:!.d2 27 'iUc5 
.l:!.xf2 28 i\il'xg5 hxg5 29 l'!.c8+ 'it>h7 30 .:i.c7 
and fid7!, or 26....l:!.d4 27 b3 'iUd5+ (27 ....Md2 
is no better: 28 'i't'c5 'YWxc5 29 tZ:lxc5 l'!.xa2 30 
f4 or 29... lx f2  30 a4) 28 'it>g1 .Md2 29 ®c5 
'YWf3 (29 .. . '§d4 30 a3) 30 'YWe3! 'YWxe3 31 fxe3 
fixa2 3 2 Bc7 etc.
26...'YWf5!
Eliminating 
the 
important 
f2-pawn. 
Later I remembered for a long time this 
hard-working queen, which in the end 
demolished the opponent's defences.
27 Wc1 .l:!.xd1+ 28 'YWxd1 «W 2
Material equality has been restored, and 
the difference in the activity of the pieces 
has become dangerously threatening for 
White.
29 'YWg1?
In his distress my opponent makes an­
other, final mistake. It is amusing that in 64 
and then also in Informator a different 
move order was given, one that would have 
led to a position from the game, but a move 
earlier: 29 b3 (Alburt: 'I decided to give up a 
pawn immediately, in order to drag back 
the knight from its offside position at a4')
29...'YWxa2 30 tZ:lc5 f
 31 tLld3 §e3 32 'YWfl 
.\td4 33 ifd1 h5 34 !Db4 h4 etc.
138

Adult Games
It was more resilient to try and preserve 
the queenside pawns by 29 'Wic1 (after 29 
^ 1  ke5 Black is threatening ...'it'f4), and 
although after 29 ....ie5 30 h3 h5 31 t'Llc3 (if
31 'id l there is also 31...g5 !? 32 'Wicl 'it>h7 
with the idea of ...g5-g4) 31 ...h4 White's 
position is unenviable, I would still have 
had to work pretty hard.
29..Jlfc2 (2) 30 b3 (of course, not 30 'it'xa7? 
'ifd1+ 31 'Wig! 'Wixa4 and wins) 30...Wxa2 (2)
It is now Black who is a pawn up, and 
this is by no means all.
31 t'Llc5 (again White cannot play 31 'ifxa7? 
'Wixb3 32 g3 'Wid5+ and ... .id 4 or 32 h3 .ie5)
31...'id2?1 (2)
‘31. ..ifc2 was simpler, not releasing the 
knight at all', I wrote in 1978. More than 
that - 31...Wa3! would have led to the quick 
win of a piece or the b-pawn.
32 # b 1 kd4 (5) 33 CLld3 ..We3 (5) 34 tt'lb4 hS (3) 
It was possible to pursue the knight -
34...a5!? 35 tt'ld3 (35 tt'lc6 i.b 6; 35 t'Llc2 'Wid3) 
35 ... '\i'e2 36 tLlf4 'tWd2 37 lZ:lh3 g5 etc. But I 
had already planned the advance of the h- 
pawn, and I was ready not only for an 
attack, but also for mass exchanges.
35 ifd 1 h4 (35 . ..a5!?) 36 t'Llc2?!
Falling in with my wishes. Alburt appar­
ently sensed that I had missed the strongest 
continuation, and he visibly revived on
seeing a ‘saving chance'. 36 h3 would have 
delayed 
the 
end, 
but 
after 
36 ... .ic5 
(36...ii.e5 37 tt'lc6 is not so clear) 37 lZ:ld3
ii.b6 38 Wb1 (38 b4 .ic7! with the threat of 
.. .'iVg3) 38. ..a5 White would have lost be­
cause of zugzwang: 39 'Wid1 'iVd4 40 'itb1 
'it>h7! (40...ii.c7 41 tt'le1!) 41 Wf1 Wg7 42 
^ 1  (42 lZ:le1 'Wid1 !) 42 ...'it>g8 43 'Yi'f1 .i.c7!
44 tt:Jc1 'tWd6 45 &g1 Wh2+ 46 'it>f2 'Wie5 47 
'it>g1 'ifd6, soon winning the b3-pawn.
36 ...'ifxb3 37 Wxd4 'Yi'b1+1
'Garik drives the enemy queen from the 
centre - this is useful!' (Alburt). It was not 
yet too late to throw away the win:
37 ...'ixc2? 38 'iVd8+ 'it>g7 39 'Wid4+ f6 40 
'ifxa7+ 'it>h6 41 h3.
38 'ifg1 'i'xc2 39 'tWxa7 ^ d 1+ 40 'iVg1 
'ifxg1+ 41 'it>xg1
'The pawn endgame is won for Black, but 
he has to play accurately' (Alburt). In prepa­
rations for one of the sessions of the Bot- 
vinnik school I had done some thorough 
work on pawn endings, and therefore I 
knew the winning method here.
The time control was reached, but the 
game was not adjourned, because the end 
of the playing session was still a long way 
off: both of us, and I especially, had played 
quickly and accumulated an enormous 
time ‘surplus'.
139

Garry Kasparov on Garry Kasparov: Part One
41...Wg7 42 f
 ^ 6  (3) 43 'it>e3 'ie5 (3) 44 
'it>f3 f5 45 'ie 3  g5 46 h3
46 'it>f3 was bad because of 46. ..g4+ fol­
lowed by ...f5-f4. ...g4-g3 and if hxg3 the 
symmetric ...hxg3!. ‘Alas, 46 h3 also does 
not save White: Black employs an outflank­
ing manoeuvre' (Alburt).
4 6 ...6 .5 !
‘The masters tightly surrounding the 
board had time to calculate the variation
46...g4? 47 hxg4 fxg4 48 ' i f 2 'ie4 (48...it>f4
49 g3+!) 49 'ie 2 g3 50 f
 'ie3 51 'it>g1 'it>e2 
52 <it>h1 h3 53 'ig1! with a draw, but Garik 
interrupted their searches by continuing 
his series ofmoves.' (Nikitin)
47 'it>d3 'it>c5
47...f4 48 'id 2 'id 4  49 'ie 2 'it>e4 50 'it>f2 
f3 51 gxf3+ 'if4  would also have won. 
However, I went my own way.
48 'it>c3 g4 49 'id3 gxh3 (or 49.g3 50 'it>e3 
'it>c4 51 'it>f4 'lt>d3 and wins) 50 gxh3 'it>d5 51 
'it>e3 'it>e5 52 f
 f4 53 ^ 2  'ie 4  54 'ie 2 f3+ 
55 'it>fl
And here to all those present I had the 
pleasure of demonstrating the famous 
'triangulation' - a way of giving the oppo­
nent the move.
55 ...'it>f5! (only not 55 ...<it>e3 56 'ie1 f2+? 57 
'itfl 'itf3 - stalemate!) 56 'ig 1  'ie5
It is not especially difficult to find the last
two moves, ifyou know the principle of the 
distant opposition or the ending of the old 
game Fahrni-Alapin, which is given in 
books on the endgame.
White resigned (0-1): After 57 ^ 1  'ie4!
58 'it>f2 'it>f4 59 ' i f l  'ig3 the h3-pawn is lost. 
Times: 1.52-1.10.
Alburt: ‘Garik's play in this game created 
a strong impression on me. At the board he 
easily figured out the tactical subtleties of 
the variation, accurately assessed the posi­
tion, 
and 
then 
demonstrated excellent 
technique in converting his advantage.'
Suddenly, after winning four successive 
games, I became the sole leader of the 
tournament - 61/2 out of 8! The last two 
wins over the 
Odessa duo effectively 
brought me into grandmaster company. I 
did not have to wait long for the formal 
confirmation of my playing strength...
However, hard on my heels was another 
rival - the talented master Igor Ivanov, 
formerly from Leningrad, then living in 
Uzbekistan. Around that time he won 
several Soviet tournaments and in the 1979 
Spartakiad he defeated none other than the 
world champion Karpov, but a year later he 
followed Korchnoi and Alburt, in becoming 
the third chess defector (and in the end - a 
grandmaster). Ivanov began the qualifying 
tournament in Daugavpils with two losses, 
but then he scored six successive wins! We 
met in the 9th round and, after not achiev­
ing anything with White from the opening, 
1 complicated the play with a pawn sacri­
fice. In a roughly equal position, not wish­
ing to tempt fate further against a formi­
dable opponent, I offfered a draw, but 
encountered a refusal. And - I promptly 
developed a dangerous attack! However, at 
a critical moment I released the black 
queen, and the draw became obvious.
140

Adult Games
Nikitin was unhappy with my 'pacifism' 
(he later had to speak more than once 
about this psychological defect): 'On seeing 
a way o f making his opponentforce a draw, 
Garry did not bother to look fo r a stronger 
move. Such a situation of fighting with 
yourself was once described by Karpov, who 
drew this apt conclusion: “It’s not possible to 
play fo r a win, when in your heart you are 
agreeable to a draw". To overcome yourself 
in such a position you have to love chess 
madly -fo r example, like Fischer'.
But my reserve of nervous energy was 
already exhausted. 
In the 10th round 
literally in one move I threw away my 
advantage in a game with Kapengut, 
whereas Ivanov won against Palatnik and 
caught up with me - we both had 7V2 out 
of 10 ('plus five'!). In the concluding three 
rounds the contenders for finishing in the 
cherished first seven endeavoured not to 
lose their precious ‘pluses', and the leading 
group was seized by a drawing epidemic.
And so I reached the finish together with 
Ivanov, sharing 1st-2nd places. Fortune 
favoured me: I had the better Buchholz 
score. Nikitin: ‘Garik jumped fo r joy. Where 
had the tiredness gone? Despite such an 
insipid finish he unexpectedly won the only 
qualifying place to the Premier League - a 
stunning success!' I remember that, when 
there were no places on the participants' 
bus for me and my mother and we had to 
get off, the inveterate wit Eduard Gufeld 
shouted after us: ‘Yes, mother, we are going 
a different way!' Everyone laughed loudly, 
but these were prophetic words: subse­
quently I never played again either in the 
qualifying tournament, or in the First 
League...
Apart from Ivanov, those who qualified 
for the First League were Kapengut, Ku- 
preichik, 
Mikhalchishin, Panchenko and
Tseshkovsky, and later, after Panchenko 
withdrew, Alburt and Makarychev were 
also allowed in. And, incidentally, three 
prize-winners in the qualifying tournament
- grandmasters Tseshkovsky, Mikhalchishin 
and 
Makarychev 
managed 
to 
break 
through into the Premier League, and later 
Tseshkovsky even became champion of the 
country (cf. the next chapter).
From the magazine Shakhmaty v SSSR: 
‘The main examinations of any young 
player's maturity are the championships of 
the country. It was such an examination 
that Kasparov took in Daugavpils. The 
confident play he demonstrated indicates 
that, under the guidance of Botvinnik, Garik 
has already passed his first tests. A qualita­
tive leap has occurred in his play, one which 
it will be possible to evaluate conclusively 
only during the USSR Championship Premier 
League in Tbilisi. Kasparov's victory in Dau­
gavpils was no accident. For the first time a
15-year-old player will perform in the main 
tournament of the country - Garik has 
established a record o f its kind'.
From the Riga magazine Shakhmaty. 
'Modern chess is increasingly becoming a 
young man's game. But even so, when a 15- 
year-old boy demonstrates an encyclopaedic 
knowledge of the openings, rich imagina­
tion, rapid calculation in highly complicated 
middlegame situations, and a possession of 
good technique fo r converting an advantage 
in the endgame - all this cannot but cause 
astonishment'.
Bagirov: ‘I did not exclude the possibility 
of Kasparov qualifying fo r the First League. 
But that which he accomplished exceeded all 
expectations. From my heart I congratulate 
myyoung compatriot, and I hope that in the 
elite too he will not prove “out of place".'
Botvinnik: ‘During the six months since the 
Sokolsky Memorial, Kasparov has made a
141

Garry Kasparov on Garry Kasparov: Part One
huge leap forward. I realised this when 
playing through his games from the qualify­
ing tournament. I am in no doubt that in the 
Premier League Kasparov will certainly not 
look a timid novice. / like thefact that in every 
game, irrespective of the standard of his 
opponent, he puts his heart into it and al­
ways aims only fo r a win. At his 15 years he 
thinks at the board and calculates variations
better than I did at his age. At the age of 12, 
when Kasparov was already a candidate 
master, I had only just begun playing chess... 
For Garik I have one wish - don't become 
conceited! This is now the main thing'.
So, in two leaps I jumped straight into 
adulthood. I was full of energy and any 
doubts about my future disappeared. From 
now on my life would be devoted to chess!
High Society Debut
46th USSR Championship Premier League (Tbilisi, 1-27 December 1978)
l
2
3
4 5
6
7
8
9
0
l
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
1 Tseshkovsky
*
Y,
Y,
Y, Y,
Y,
X
1
1
0
X
X
1
1
X
1
1
X
11
2 Tal
y,
•
y,
y, y,
y,
y,
1
y,
y,
y,
y,
1
y,
y,
1
1
1
11
3 Polugaevsky
y,
y,
•
y, y,
1
1
y,
0
y,
y,
y,
y,
y,
y,
y,
1
1
10
4 Georgadze
y,
y,
y,
• 
y,
y,
y,
y,
y,
1
y,
y,
y,
1
y,
y,
y,
y,
9 /
5 Sveshnikov
X
X
X
X *
1
1
y,
y,
0
y,
1
0
y,
y,
y,
y,
y,
9
6 Geller
x
x
o
x  o
*
1
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
1
X
1
9
7 Romanishin
y,
y,
0
y, 0
0
•
0
y,
1
1
1
y,
y,
1
1
1
0
9
8
Beliavsky
0
0
y,
y, y,
y,
1
•
0
1
1
y,
y,
y,
1
0
y,
1
9
9
Kasparov
0
y,
1
y, y,
y,
y,
1
•
y,
0
y,
y,
0
y,
0
1
1
8Yz
10
Gulko
1
y,
y,
0 1
y,
0
0
y,
•
y,
y,
y,
y,
y,
y,
y,
y,
8
11
Timoshchenko
X
X
X
X X
X
0
0
1
X
*
X
X
X
1
0
y,
y,
8
12
Bagirov
y,
y,
y,
y, 0
y,
0
y,
y,
y,
y,
•
y,
y,
y,
y,
y,
1
8
13
Makarychev
0
0
y,
y, 1
y,
y,
y,
y,
y,
y,
y,
•
y,
y,
y,
y,
y,
8
14
Razuvaev
0
X
y,
0 y,
y,
y,
y,
1
y,
y,
y,
y,
•
Y,
Y,
Y,
0
7Vz
15
Tukmakov
X
X
X
X X
X
0
0
X
X
0
X
X
X
*
1
Y,
Y,
7Yz
16
Mikhalchishin
0
o
X
X X
0
0
1
1
X
1
X
X
X
0
*
X
X
7Vz
17
Dorfman
0
0
o
X X
y,
0
y,
0
y,
y,
y,
y,
y,
y,
Y,
•
1
6Yz
18
Kuzmin
y,
0
0
X X
0
1
0
0
y,
y,
0
y,
1
y,
y,
0
•
6
From the Baku Sport newspaper (July
1978): ‘Garry Kasparov, a star pupil in the 
8th class of Baku school No.151, has put 
aside chess matters fo r a time and is relax­
ing on the banks o f the Caspian Sea. But at 
the end o f the year, fo r the first time in his 
life, he is due to meet some famous grand­
masters in the championship o f the country 
in Tbilisi. Kasparov does not hide his joy, as
he awaits his December rendezvous with the 
best players in the country, but at the same 
time he is very cautious in assessing his 
chances: "I should like to finish no lower 
than 14th, to avoid returning back into the 
qualifying tournament. To finish in the top 
nine, thus booking my place in the next 
premier league, will be very difficult".'
When preparing for my first USSR cham­
142

Adult Games
pionship final, I did not set myself any 
ambitious targets, thinking that first and 
foremost I should demonstrate good play 
and gain experience. Nikitin always used to 
say that the main thing was to play well, 
and the successes would follow. True, I later 
learned that back in 1975 he had shown my 
mother a schedule of my future results. 
Against the year 1978 was marked: USSR 
Championship Premier League.
Not long before, at the tournament in 
Minsk, I had been anxiously awaiting my 
first meeting with a grandmaster, whereas 
now I was opposed by as many as 16 hold­
ers of the top title. Botvinnik's strategic 
directive was extremely clear: 'Play 17 good 
games, without thinking about the overall 
result'. Of course, I couldn't help thinking 
about the result, but I didn't set my sights 
too high: not to drop below the First 
League. But the start of the championship 
went well for me.
On arriving at the wonderful Tbilisi Chess 
Palace, where the tournament was to be held,
I suddenly remembered that I would not be 
playing for the first time on that stage: in 
January 1976 it was here that the concluding 
round 
of 
my 
victorious 
USSR 
Junior 
Championship took place (cf. Game No.13). 
But now I would have to come on to the stage 
every day, and under the intense gaze of 
numerous spectators battle with the 'big 
boys'. And whirling around in my mind was 
the agonising question, whether I would be 
able to survive in a competition with the 
titans, from the games of whom I had learned 
and whom until quite recently 1 was able to 
meet only in a simultaneous display.
In the 1st round I was paired with Black 
against the great Yefim Geller. The differ­
ence in experience was vast: as yet I had 
none, whereas he had already participated 
three times in the Candidates events (and
later he would do so a further three times!). 
‘Has Garik prepared for fumigation?', they 
asked my mother, who, of course, was very 
anxious that evening. After all, Geller not 
only smoked a lot, but he also played excel­
lently with White...
Viktor Khenkin: 'The pairings brought to­
gether the youngest and the oldest partici­
pants in the tournament. Kasparov - 15, and 
Geller - 53. Almost 40 years separate the 
opponents - such a thing can only happen in 
chess. This game was at the centre of atten­
tion. Apart from  the character of the game 
itself and the accompanying talk about the 
"passing ofthe batonfrom one generation to 
another", everyone was intrigued by the 
question: how would the young player adapt 
to the classical environment ofth e Premier 
League? I will say straight away: both on the 
stage and at the chess board Garik conducted 
himself as though all he had been doing 
throughout his life was to appear in finals of 
the USSR Championship. And yet this was his 
first genuinely strong tournament. The first 
stage, the first floodlights, and the first audi­
torium, filled with hundreds of fans. Even 
highly experienced players are sometimes 
unable to suppress the anxiety caused by the 
unusual circumstances. Remember how in 
1963 Petrosian lost the first game of his 
match with Botvinnik effectively without a 
fight (and in 1949 the young Petrosian 
began with five zeroes in his first USSR 
Championship, whereas another debutant - 
Geller - shared 3rd place! - G.K.). Kasparov 
was certainly no less anxious. But even so, he 
succeeded in focusing on customary chess 
images.'
Yes, before the first tournament game in 
my life against a world-class grandmaster I 
felt extremely nervous. But when the 
arbiter started the clocks, the anxiety 
quickly subsided.
143

Garry Kasparov on Garry Kasparov: Part One
Came 29 
Ye.Geller-G.Kasparov
46th USSR Championship, 
1st round, Tbilisi 2.12.1978 
Caro-Kann Defence B17
1e4c6
At a reception at the end of the tourna­
ment, Gufeld laughingly said to me within 
earshot of everyone: 'Why do you play the 
Caro-Kann all the time?! Look at yourself in 
the mirror - you're just like one of the Mafia! 
You should play only the Sicilian Defence!' 
And I myself began inclining towards this 
under the influence of my games with Geller 
and Tseshkovsky, played in Tbilisi.
2 d4 d5 3 CLld2 dxe4 4 tt:Jxe4 £ f5  5 CLlg3 -&g6
6 h4
In Daugavpils Kholmov successfully em­
ployed against me the rare plan with 6 CLlf3 
CLld7 7 &c4, and later he explained: 'After 
looking at the games of my opponent, I 
concluded that he had an excellent knowl­
edge of the main variations with 6 h4.' 
After this lesson I endeavoured to expand 
my knowledge in 'my' variations.
6...h6 7 iLlf3 tLld7 8 h5 .th7 9 ..td3 txd3 10 
'iVxd3 'Wic7 (10. ..e6 - Game No.17) 11 td 2  
tt:Jgf6 12 0-0-0 e6
13 tt:Je4
Geller's patent: White immediately ex­
changes the knight which has no particular 
future on g3. We had also spent much time 
looking at another classical line - 13 We2 
0-0-0 14 tt:Je5 
(Spassky-Petrosian, 13th 
match game, Moscow 1966) 14...CLlb6 or the 
sharper 13 ...c5 14 .:lh4 .:lc8 (Mikhalchishin- 
Kasparov, Daugavpils 1978).
13...0-0-0
In those times this was a virtually obliga­
tory move, but later the flexible 13. .. ;..e7, 
retaining the option of kingside castling, 
also came into its own.
14 g3
With the intention of .i.f4.
14...tt:Jxe4 (4)
The natural reply. 14. ..CLlg4?! 15 i¥e2 
tt:Jdf6?! 16 j_f4 'iYa5?! (16. ..'1Wd7 17 tt:Je5) is 
unsuccessful on account of 17 tt:Jxf6! gxf6 
(17. ..tt:Jxf6 18 tt:Je5) 18 tt:Jd2! f5 (Geller- 
Petrosian, Moscow 1967) 19 f3! tt:Jf6 20 tt:Jb3 
with the threat of We5. And if 14..tt:Jc5 15 
tt:Jxc5 
^ xc5 (l.Zaitsev-Petrosian, Moscow 
1968), then 16 c4 and &c3 is good, al­
though Black still plays this way.
Ag ainst Tseshkovsky in the 16th round I 
tried 14...c5? 15 .i.f4 c4 (an idea, generated 
in the hurly-burly of the tournament), and 
after 16 We2 ifc6  17 tt:Jxf6 gxf6 18 d5! exd5
144

Adult Games
19 ttJd4 'ia6  20 &bl I agonised terribly over 
the search for the best defence. Moreover, 
after 16 !Ji.xc7 cxd3 17 £xd8! .!tJxe4 18 .l:h4! 
ttJxf2 19 .:f1(d2) Black has insufficient 
compensation for the exchange.
15 #'xe4
One of the tabiyas of the entire variation.
15... .i. e7 (2)
To me and my trainer this seemed the 
most accurate move, but later we gave 
preference to the natural and still fashion­
able 15. ..ttJf6 16 *e 2 , and now not 16...c5?!
17 dxc5 ili.xc5 18 Sh4! (Geller-Foguelman, 
5antiago 1965; Tal-Hubner, Montreal 1979
- Game No.143 in Volume II of My Great 
Predecessors), but 16 ....id6 17 c4 c5 18 .ic3 
cxd4 19 lt:Jxd4 (19 .ixd 4  'it'a5) 19 ...a6 or 
even 
16 ...Sd5 
(5tein-Korchnoi,- 
5ousse 
Interzonal 1967).
The immediate 15. ..ii.d6 is also not bad, 
with the idea of 16 c4 c5 or 16 c.t>b1 .l:!.he8, 
and if 17 i!Wh7, then 17 . ...:g8 (Kramnik-Leko, 
12th match game, Brissago 2004).
16 'lt>b1 (Black would also have been satis­
fied with 16 .i.f4 .i.d6, as well as 16 c4 c5 17 
i.c3 .if6  or 16 .!tJe5 ct:Jxe5 17 dxe5 Bd5) 
16. ..2he8 (4) 17 #e2!?
A novelty! Removing his queen from pos­
sible attacks, White prepares S h e l or .!tJe5. 
The earlier continuation 17 c4 c5 18 .if4
.id 6 19 .!tJe5 (Geller-Hort, 5kopje 1968) 
faded because of 19..Se7l (Gheorghiu-Hort, 
Olympiad, Lugano 1968).
17...^d6 (36)
A difficult choice: the longer I thought, 
the more obscure the way to equalise 
appeared. 17....if8 18 c4 was no better 
(Balashov-Hubner, Wijk aan Zee 1982), and 
again 17 . ..c5?! was inappropriate in view of
18 .if4  .i.d6 19 ili.xd6 'iVxd6 20 dxc5 'iVxc5 
21l:td3.
18 l:the1
White completes his development, al­
though 18 c4 also suggests itself, with the 
idea of 18 ... e5 19 lih e l or 18...c5 19 .ic3.
18...ttJf6 (24)
After 18...e5 in Informator Geller recom­
mended 19 dxe5. and I - 19 ili.c3 e4 20 lt:Jh4 
(underestimating 20...ltJf6), although later 
in our opening monograph 5hakarov and I 
suggested 19 c4! (I should add that if
19 ...e4?!, then 20 c5 is strong). In the event 
of 18...:.e7 19 c4 c5 20 ili.c3 tt'lf6 21 tt:Je5 (21 
dxc5!?) 21...cxd4 (Kasparov-Vukic, 5kara
1980) White retains an enduring plus with
22 .ixd4!.
19 liJe5 c5
20 dxc5?!
Geller had also spent a lot of time in 
thought and he was beginning to grow
145

Garry Kasparov on Garry Kasparov: Part One
tired. Otherwise he would have found the 
strong manoeuvre 20 ..icl!, of which I was 
afraid at the board, since I couldn't see any 
clear response: I didn’t want to exchange
20...&xe5 21 dxeS, condemning my king- 
side to a bind, while after 20. ..^ds 21 c4 
tt:b4 22 a3 tt:c6 23 tt:Jxc6 Wxc6 24 i.e3 
White has a small but enduring advantage 
(if 24. ..'ie4+ 25 ifc2).
20. ..^xe5l (5)
Apparently Geller was counting on exert­
ing pressure after 20. ..i.xc5 21 f4, and he 
underestimated this reply: with a tempo­
rary pawn sacrifice Black greatly simplifies 
the position.
21 Wxe5 'iYxe5 22 Sxe5
22 ...Sd4 (20)
After another long think I did not make 
the best choice. After 22 . ..lt:Jg4!? 23 Se2 Sd5 
the draw would have been achieved with­
out any particular problems, for example:
a) 24 'it>c1 Eed8 (apparently 24...Sxh 5!?
25 f3 tt:f6 26 b4 Sd8 is simpler) 25 f3 tt:le5
26 l:lfl, and now not 26...t2Jc4(?) 27 &c3 
‘with 
an 
excellent 
game 
for 
White' 
(V.Khenkin; 27 i.b4!?), but 26...Sxc5 27 i.c3 
lt:Jc6 28 ^xg7 Sxh5 or 28 g4 lt:Jd4, and Black 
is alright;
b) 24 b4 Sed8 25 'it>c1 a5 (it is useful to 
exchange a pair of pawns) 26 a3 axb4 27
axb4 Hxh5 28 i.c3 Sxd 1+ 29 'itxdl Sf5 3C 
'itel g5 with equality.
23 *c1.l:ted8 (2) 24 f3 tt:d7 (5)
White 
is 
also 
slightly better 
after
24..l:18d5 25 Sxd5 Sxd5 26 g4 Sxc5 21 
i.b 4.
2S .l:!.ee1
My Informator recommendation 25 Se2 
lt:Jxc5 26 I!.del is harmless in view of 
26. ..l:14d5 27 g4 S8d6 28 i.c3 f6 etc.
2S ... tt:Jxc5
26 i.c3
Geller suggested the preparatory 26 g4, 
but after 26...lt:Ja4 27 i.a 5  b6 28 Sxd4 l:!.xd4
29 &d2 Hd6 no achievements for White are 
apparent. Perhaps it was slightly better to 
play 26 i.e3!? (to hinder a potential ...g7-
146

Adult Games
g6) 26 ....l:xd1+ 27 S xd l litxdl+ 28 'it>xdl 
'Lld7 29 g4 a6 30 'it>e2, retaining a small 
plus, although here too Black should be 
able to hold the position.
26.„Sxdl+ (3) 27 !1xdl Sxdl+  28 Wxdl f6
29 gb4
In the event of 29 'ie2 (Geller) 29..st;c7 
and if 30 gb4 Black has 30. ..<;i;>c6.
29...'Lld7 30 'It>e2
The trumps of White's position are al­
most worthless. Thus if 30 .te7!? (trying not 
to allow the black king across to ‘its' wing), 
then 30...fs! 31 'it>e2 tt:Jf6 32 .txf6 gxf6 is 
good, with a probable draw.
30...Wd8! (a sound plan) 31 g4 (31 ..td6 'it>e8 
or 31 ...fs 32 g4 'lt>e8) 31...'it>e8
32 f4?1
The last chance of fighting for an advan­
tage was 32 'it>e3 ^ 7  33 Wf4 (33 .td6 fs!), 
but after 33...'Llb6 34 g e l etJd5+ 35 'ie 4  
Black would be saved by 35.. .fs+! 36 gxfs 
'Llf6+ 3 7 \t>es exfs and ...'Llxhs. Because of 
the undermining move .. .f6-f5 and the 
weakness of the h 5-pawn, White would not 
have time to create a passed pawn on the 
queenside and exploit the advantage of 
bishop over knight.
32...'it>f7 33 gd2
Of course, not 33 fs? 'Lles. Geller was 
hoping to immobilise Black's kingside and
then set about creating a passed pawn on 
the queenside.
33...g6! (4)
An unpleasant surprise: Black is threat­
ening to seize the initiative. There was an 
acceptable, but passive alternative: 33. ..fs
34 g5 g6 35 hxg6+ 'it>xg6 36 gxh6 Wxh6 37 
.te3 a6 38 ;-.d4 \t>h s 39 'It>f3 bs etc.
34f5!
In his traditional time-trouble Yefim Pet­
rovich is equal to the occasion! White could 
no longer delay this advance: if 34 hxg6+? 
'ixg6 35 f5+ exfs 36 gxf5+ 'it>xfs 37 ..txh6 
'ie 4  he has a very difficult position, and 
also after 34 ..tc3 fs! 35 gxfs exfs 36 hxg6+ 
'ixg6 only Black has winning chances.
34...gS
It made sense to create a passed pawn -
34 ... exfs!? 35 gxfs gxhs 36 ..txh6 'Lles, 
when a certain accuracy would still have 
been required of White. Now, however, 
complete calm ensues.
35 .tc3 'Llb6 (5)
35. ..exfs 36 gxfs 'Lles 37 b3 We7 38 ..tb4+ 
'It>d7! (39 .tf8  'it>e8) was also convincing.
36 i.d 4  'Llc8 37 'it>f3 b6 38 fxe6+ 'it>xe6 39 c4 
'Lle7 40 gc3 (40 cs 'Llc6!) 40...fs (5) 41 ..tg7 
'Llg8
Here the game was adjourned, and be­
fore sealing his secret move, Geller offered
147

Garry Kasparov on Garry Kasparov: Part One
me a draw. However, this was politely 
declined. The eminent grandmaster was 
very unhappy about this, but I wondered 
whether Black might be able to ‘latch on' to 
the weak h5-pawn.
Home analysis showed that after any 
sensible reply by the opponent, including 
the sealed move 42 b4, my chances of 
success were short-lived. And we agreed a 
draw without resuming the game, this time 
on the proposal of Black (’/i-yi).
In the 2nd round I had White against my 
compatriot, grandmaster Vladimir Bagirov. 
The first tournament encounter with the 
long-standing leader of the Azerbaijan 
team! My opponent also chose the Caro- 
Kann, but with 4..C:bd7. In a slightly better 
position, on the 18th move I did not risk 
sacrificing my knight on e6 and I castled 
kingside, which led to simplification and a 
quick draw. Later we spent a long time 
analysing the game in the players' room, 
and this was described in the sports press:
'Ex-world champion Mikhail Tal leaned 
over Garik and with unfeigned admiration 
in his voice commented on the variations he 
was demonstrating - "one more biting than 
the other". And everything reduced to the 
fact that these variations “ended in Bagirov
being mated, or completely crushed”. One of 
the grandmasters standing alongside quietly 
remarked that “White should have sacrificed 
the piece" and asked the youngster why he 
didn't do this. Garik replied seriously: “There 
were too many variations. I couldn't calcu­
late them all." To this Tal instantly re­
sponded with his disarming smile: “You 
shouldfirst sacrifice, and then calculate”.'
The knight sacrifice did indeed look very 
promising (it was only many years later 
that the sole defence for Black was found, 
one that none of us had seen). And I re­
proached myself for my excessive timidity 
in relation to the experts, especially since 
the move earlier I could have played 17 
i.c4, in order to sacrifice not the knight, but 
the bishop on e6. Bagirov, by contrast, was 
happy with the result of the game and he 
even prophetically stated: 'The time will 
come when everyone will regard a draw 
with this boy as a blessing...’
In the 3rd round I made a quiet draw 
with Black against Makarychev - this also 
quite satisfied my opponent. And in the 4th 
round I was paired against one of the 
tournament favourites, Lev Polugayevsky, 
many times a participant in the Candidates 
matches, who had also started with three 
draws. A few years earlier we had met in a 
clock simultaneous, but never one-to-one.
Came 30 
G.Kaspa rov-L. Polugayevsky
46th USSR Championship, 
4th round, Tbilisi 6/9.12.1978 
Sicilian Defence B43
1 e4 c5 2 ltJf3 e6
Polugayevsky prepared seriously for the 
game, and instead of his patent but dan­
gerous variation in the Najdorf (2 . ..d6 3 d4
148

Adult Games
cxd4 4 t/Jxd4 t/Jf6 5 l1Jc3 a6 6 &g S e6 7 f4 
b5!?) he decided to choose a reserve 
weapon - the Paulsen Variation. As he 
himself explained: 'Why should I do that 
which is expected of me?'
3 d4 cxd4 4 t/Jxd4 a6 5 t1Jc3 (5)
In the 21st Century I tried 5 c4 t/Jf6 6 t/Jc3 
Wc7 (the new fashion instead of 6 ....ltb4) 7 
a3 - against Kramnik (2nd match game, 
Moscow 
2001), 
Vallejo 
and 
Ivanchuk 
(Linares 2002).
5...1Vc7
Also avoiding the variation 5 ...b5 6 .ltd3, 
which in the mid-1960s occurred in my 
opponent's games, and in the late-1990s in 
mine.
6 .lte2 (4) 6...b5
Here it is, the opening surprise of the 
experienced fighter: my basic preparation 
for White was mainly directed against
6...t/Jf6 or 6 ...t/Jc6.
7 f
 (14)
A solid move, but rather an awkward 
one, and less energetic compared with 7 
0-0, as I played later:
a) 
7 ...b4 8 <1Ja4 ^ b7 9 c3!? (a sharp pawn 
sacrifice; 9 &f3 &d6 10 eS!? is also interest­
ing, Efimenko-Volokitin, Bundesliga 2007)
9...t/Jf6 (9 ....ltxe4 10 i.f3  t/Jf6 11 &gS or 10 
it.e3!?) 10 cxb4 i.xb 4 11 i.e3, and White
has good prospects (Kasparov-Topalov, 4th 
rapid match game, Sofia 1998);
b) 
7...&b7 (7...t/Jc6 8 tt:Jxc6 dxc6 9 &gS!?, 
Anand-Leko, Dortmund 1996) 8 Se1! t/Jc6 
(after 8 ... b4?! I long ago devised a knight 
sacrifice - 9 t/Jd5!) 9 t/Jxc6 dxc6 10 e5! CDe7 
(lO. ..ttxe5? is weak because of 11 &h5! 
1Wd6 12 ±xf7+!) 11 -&d3 11Jg6 (or 11...2d8 12 
.ltg5 h6 13 'i'h5, Kamsky-Lutz, Dortmund 
1993) 12 'Yih5 with the initiative (Kasparov- 
Ye Jiangchuan, Batumi (rapid) 2001). In this 
topical line 10...l:i.d8 11 i. d3 c5 or the more 
recent 10....&b4 is not so clear.
7... ’ b7 (the alternative is 7 ...ic6  8 £ixc6 
dxc6, and if 9 0-0 i.d6) 8 0-0
8 
l'e 2 is no b e tte r:8  ...11Jc6 (8 ...b4 9 
ttJd5!?) 9 11Jxc6 dxc6 10 e5 f1Je7 with equal­
ity 
(Tal-Gheorghiu, 
Moscow 
Interzonal 
1982).
8...11Jc6 9 t/Jxc6 (5) 9...dxc6!
After 9 ....ltxc6?! Black has to reckon with 
the typical sacrifice 10 t'LldS!, which prom­
ises White an obvious advantage: lO. ..exd5
11 exd5 &b7 12 2el+ 'it>d8 13 d6! i.xd 6 14 
xb7 .i. xh2+ 15 'it>hl "i!Vxb7 16 'it>xh2 
(Crouch) or lO...&xd5 11 exd5 .U.c8 12 c3 
11Jf6 (Barua-Bischoff, Calcutta 1997) 13 g3! 
=- e7 (13...i.d6 14&g5) 14 ^ el etc.
10 e5!? (35)
This unclear pawn sacrifice was a nov­
149

Garry Kasparov on Garry Kasparov: Part One
elty, devised after agonising hesitation at 
the board - I very much wanted to activate 
my bishop on f3. In the old game Estrin- 
Polugayevsky (Moscow 1964) after 10 a4 
&d6 11 axb5 (11 g3 tt:lf6 is equal) 11...cxb5
12 e5 &xe5 13 tt:lxb5 axb5 14 1ixa8+ ±xa8
15 &xa8 &xh2+!? (the equalising 15.JL'lf6
16 h3 O-O is more modest, Nisipeanu- 
Ivanchuk, Khanty-Mansiysk (rapid) 2007) 16 
'ith1 ±d6 17 'iVd3 b4 18 Sd 1 rt;e7 19 &e3 
tt:lf6 20 :!.a1 ..tc5 21 Wc4 l:f.c8 White did not 
gain full compensation for the pawn.
10..."ixe5
10...b4 is hardly any better: 11 tt:le4 (11 
tt:la4!?) 11. ..Wxe5 12 c3!? (5tohl).
1 1 l:te1 "fic7
In the event of 11...Wd6 (Barle-Miles, 
Bled/Portoroz 1979) the black queen comes 
under attack with gain of tempo: 12 We2 
CLif6 13 a4! b4 14 CDe4 CLixe4 15 Wxe4 "flic7 
(15 ...O-O-O 16 ±e3!) 16 ..tf4 ±d6 17 ±xd6 
®xd6 (Hambardzumian-Alvarado, Najdorf 
Memorial 2007) 18 Sad1! with excellent 
compensation for the pawn.
12 .&h5i (11)
Creating the threat of l:f.xe6+. The less 
vigorous 12 a4 CLif6 13 axb5 axb5 14 Sxa8+ 
&xa8 15 CLixb5 cxb5 16 &xa8 &d6 17 g3 O-O
18 &g2 b4 19 -&g5 &e5 leads to equality 
(Velimirovic-Rublevsky, Herzeg Novi 1999).
12...^e7i
My opponent also sharply reduced his 
speed of decision-taking - he had plenty to 
think about. It is clear that Black has to 
return the pawn, but he would like to find 
the best way of doing this. Let us consider 
the other possible replies:
a) 12...g6? 13 'iVd4 f6 14 Sxe6+ rt;f7 15 
i1.f4 c5 16 "Yie3 Wd7 17 i.g 4  f5 18 .l:te1 fxg4
19 CDe4 with a very strong attack;
b) 12 ... i1.c8? (a strange '5teinitz-style' 
recommendation by Crouch) 13 CLie4! i.e7 
(13...g6 14 ±f3) 14 Wf3 CDf6 15 f
 or
14...g6 
15 iVc3 e5 16 &f3, and Black is in 
trouble;
c) 12...fid8 13 Sxe6+ i.e7 14 'iVf3 g6 15 
&f4! (5tohl) 15...Wd7 16 Se3!? c5! (not
16...gxh 5? 17 Wxh5 c5 18 2ae1) 17 i.g 4 
.1Lxf3 18 i xd7+ rt;xd7 19 Sxf3 'itc6 20 l!e 1, 
retaining pressure in the endgame;
d) 12...CDe7 13 'iWf3 (after 13 Sxe6 g6! 14 
CLie4 fxe6 or 14 Se4 Sd8 15 'ti'e2 c5 16 &f4 
'i!Vb6 no way to gain an advantage is appar­
ent) 13 ...CLig6 14 'i¥h3 .1Lc8! (Crouch) 15 a4l 
b4 16 &xg6 fxg6 17 tt:le4 .1l.e7 (17... e5?l 18 
'i!Vb3) 18 ^g5! with the initiative;
e) 12...CLif6!? 13 Sxe6+ &e7, transposing 
into a position which could have arisen in 
the game - cf. the note to Black's next move.
13 l:txe6 (6)
150

Adult Games
13 ...g6
This at first sight strong reply (Black is 
threatening to win material) gives White 
new possibilities. The developing 13..tt:Jf6 
was safer, after which I was intending to 
fight for the initiative with the unexpected 
move 14 lt:Je4!. Thus, in the event of
14 ...0-0?! there is the unpleasant 1S tt:Jxf6+ 
gxf6 16 fixf6! gxf6 17 i.h 6  or 17 Wg4+ 'ih 8
18 gd2. Instead, 14...tt:Jxh5 1S 'i'xhs 0-0 16 
i.f4  'id 7  is correct, when White is at a 
crossroads:
a) 17 J:e5 f6! (but not 17. ..Sad8?! 18 J:e1 
gb4? 19 ctJf6+! gxf6 20 SgS+! with a spec­
tacular mate, Gild.Garcia-Zapata, Medellin 
1992) 18 Sd1 We8 19 tt:Jd6 (19 tt:Jxf6+?! gxf6
20 Wg4+ 'ih 8  21 Sd7! fxe5! 22 gxe5+ .i:!.f6
23 Ixb 7  'i'f7 - Stohl) 19 ...'iVxh5 20 .l:xh5 
i:ad8 with equality;
b) 17 tt:Jg5! i.xg5! (17 ...h6?! 18 Sd 1 We8?
19 .:xh6! and wins - Crouch) 18 ^d6! Wf5 
19 'i'xg5 Wxg5 20 gxg5 c5 (20. .Sfe8 21 
:l.d7) 21 ge3 c4 22 f3 - White has some­
what the better endgame, but in view of 
the opposite-colour bishops a draw is the 
most probable result.
14 Ite1? (34)
An important moment in the game, not 
mentioned by the commentators. Alas, 
despite the time spent, I missed 14 Se4!
with the idea of ;, f4 - this would have set 
Black difficult problems:
a) 14. ..gxh5? 1S 
'iVd7 16 'i!Vxh5 tt:Jf6
17 'i'e5! ..We6 18 Sae1 Sf8 19 'ir'c7! tt:Jxe4 20 
tt:Jxe4 l:d8 - Black is a rook ahead, but after
21 h3! (an escape square!) he loses his 
queen: 21. ..ga8 22 Se3 and tt:Jd6+, or 21...fS
22 tt:Jd6+ I!.xd6 23 Sxe6 J:xe6 24 'i'xb7 with 
a decisive material advantage;
b) 14. ..c5 1S gf4! 'i'd8! (after 1S ...'iVd7?!
16 'iVxd7+ 'it>xd7 17 gg4+ fS 18 Sd 1+ 'it>e8
19 Itee1 White has powerful pressure) 16 
'iVe2!? (16 J:e3 b4! 17 ) f3 Wxd1+ 18 tt:Jxd1 
gxf3 19 I!.xf3 f5 and ...tt:Jf6 or 17 We2 gxh5
18 Hd1 Wb6 is unclear) 16. ..gxh S 17 Sd1 
#b6 18 I!.d6 Wa5 19 Se3 Sd8! (19...b4?! is 
weak in view of 20 tt:Jd5 ^.xd5 21 !:lxd5 
'iNxa2 22 l:td1!) 20 Wxh5 b4 21 ctJe4 &xe4 22 
l:xe4 with splendid compensation for the 
piece;
c) 14 ... l:d8! (the immediate inclusion of 
the rook eases the defence) 1S We2 cS 16
i.f4 ^ 6  17 i. f3! 
* xe4 18 tt:Jxe4 with 
sufficient 
initiative 
for 
the 
exchange 
(18...'if8 19 Se1 or 19 a4).
Thus my sacrifice of pawn and bishop 
was completely correct, and only the faulty 
rook retreat to e1 casts doubts on it.
14...I!.d8?
Timidly played, and after a long think. 
Immediately after the game I asked my 
opponent why he hadn't taken the bishop -
14...gxh5!, and the grandmaster candidly 
admitted that 1S 'i'd4 f6 16 Wd1 seemed 
dangerous to him - ‘the king is rather 
weak .. .'. Gufeld, who was standing along­
side, picturesquely exclaimed: 'Are we 
hearing this from the author of the Po­
lugayevsky 
Variation?!' 
Indeed, 
after
16....1:d8! (this is safer than Timman's move
16 ...b4) 17 WxhS+ 'if8  with the intention of 
...c6-c5 (and if 18 ge3 there is also 18...gc8) 
Black would have parried the attack, retain­
151

Garry Kasparov on Garry Kasparov: Part One
ing his extra piece and every chance of 
winning.
Instead of 16 'it'd1 it is possible to play 16 
±f4 c5! 17 We3 l!Vc6 18 ^ 3 , and here 
18. ..'it>f8 19 .l:!.e6 l!Ve8 20 fib6! ± c .. (Crouch)
21 1\Vf3 etc. leads to a sharp game. But the 
accurate 18...b4! 19 tt:Je4 Sd8 secures 
Black's advantage.
What then should be done after the cap­
ture of the bishop? White loses after 15 
Wxh5? o-o-o, and 15 &g5 c5 (Stohl) does 
not 
look 
any 
good. 
In 
the 
game 
Wojtkiewicz-lonov (Yurmala 1980) White 
made the attempt 15 lbe4 and after
15. ..'it>f8? 16 lli"d4? f6 17 tt:Jc5 ±c8 18 i.f4  
'id 8  19 l!Ve3 Wd5 20 b4 ±xc5 21 bxc5 i.d7! 
he was left empty-handed. But by 16 'iVxh5 
h6! (Sveshnikov) 17 b3! and &b2 he would 
have achieved a good game. True, Black too 
could have played more strongly - 15. ..c5! 
(Stohl; 15. ..Sd8?! 16 'iVf3! c5 17 f
 is 
unclear) 16 tt:Jd6+ 'it>f8 17 lbxb7 l!Vxb7 18 
Wxh5 Bd8! with hopes of converting the 
extra piece.
15 Wf3
Now the position is again one of dy­
namic balance.
15...c5
Here too 15...gxh5 was possible, al­
though in their time both Speelman and
Crouch condemned this capture because of
16 itf4  'followed by &e5'. And indeed,
16..."i'"c8? 17 &e5 c5 18 tt:Je4! is nightmarish 
for Black, while in the event of 16...'i'd7?! 17 
#xh5! c5 18 ±e5! (18 Sad1 'i'c6 19 flxd8+ 
'it>xd8 20 f3 'it>e8! 21 'iWe5 1\Ve6! 22 ^ 8 +  
l!Vc8 is equal) 18...Wc6! 19 f3 tt:f6 20 lli"h6 
'it'd7! (20...Bg8? 21 ±xf6 .l:!.xg2+ 22 'it>h1! - 
Stohl) 21 JL.g3! (with the threat of .l:!.xe7+!) 
Black has to fight to survive: 21. ..tt:Jd5! 22 
'i'xc6+ ii.xc6 (22...'it>xc6!? 23 tt:Jxd5 i.g5!) 23 
.l:i.ad1 ,&f6! (not Crouch's variation 23... 4 >e8?
24 .&h4 and wins) 24 lbxd5 ^xd5 25 Sxd5+ 
'it>c6 26 Bf5 &xb2 27 .l:!.xf7 b4 etc.
However, 16 ...'i'b6 is safer, not fearing 
either 17 &e5 c5 18 'i'xh5 lbf6 19 'i'h6 
'it'd7! 20 ^ 3 +  'it>e8, when White has only a 
draw by repetition - 21 ^ 6 , or 17 'Wig 3 c5, 
transposing into a position from the game.
16 ±f4! (I think that Polugayevsky had 
underestimated this move)
16...'iHb6
Black would like to simplify the positior
- 
16.....txf3(?) 17 ..txc7 ..txh5 18 ±xd8 
'it>xd8, but after 19 f3! the bishop at h5 is 
trapped and he is literally one move short 
of being able to free it: 19...g5 20 .l:!.ad1+ 
'it>c8 (20. ..'it>e8 21 .l:!.d6 - Timman) 21 tt:Jd5 
..td6 22 tt:Jb6+! 'it>c7 23 .l:!.e8 or 19...f5 2C 
.l:!.ad1+ 'lt>e8 (20...'it>c8 21 tt:Jd5! - Crouch) 21
152

l:d6 'it>f8 22 l:!.xa6 &h4 23 Sa8+ f
 24 Se2 
and wins.
Crouch drew attention to the possibility 
of 16...'id7. intending 17 
g4 &xf3 18 
&xd7+ ^xd7 19 gxf3 'lt>c6 with equality. 
But Black may have been frightened by the 
irrational continuation 17 'it'g3!? gxh5 18 
Wg7 'ifg4 19 .&e5!.
17 Wg3 gxh5 18 .lic7l (5)
Of course, not 18 ^e5? tt:Jf6! 19 .lic7 (19 
'i!Vf4 'it>d7!) 19.. -Wc6 20 i.xd 8  2g8! and wins 
(Timman) or 18 'it'g7? 'iVg6! (18...Wf6?? 19 
l:xe7+! 'il;xe7 20 ^g5) 19 Sxe7+ tt:Jxe7! 20 
'ifxh8+ 'it>d7 21 Sd1+ ;d 5  22 'i'xd8+ 'it>xd8
23 tt:Jxd5 tt:Jf5! 24 c3 ^c8, and White cannot 
hold the position.
18 ...Wg6
The only move. Already both players had 
used most of their time on the clock, and 
the rest took place in a time scramble.
19 -&xd8 Wxg3 20 hxg3 &xd8 21 Sad1+ 
ctlc7 22 tt:Jd5+ -&xd5 23 .:.xd5
In this ending, which has arisen by force, 
in contrast to the variation with 16...&xf3 
the white rooks do not have their knight 
assistant, and hence there are no mating 
threats. It only remains for Black to com­
plete his development.
23...h6! 24 Sxh5 Sh7
Now the bishop can be moved from e7
Adult Games 
and the sleeping knight brought into play.
Material is roughly equal - rook and 
pawn against bishop and knight, but in 
addition the black pawns are targets for the 
rooks. At the board I optimistically reckoned 
that my chances, at the least, were not 
worse.
25 :lhe5 (5)
25 
a4!? was also interesting: 25...b4 26 
'it>f1 1:g7 27 !If5 &c6 28 b3 i.f6  29 Se8 i.d 4 
30 l:a8 'it>b6 31 l:tf8 with equality.
2S. ..'it>d7
Aiming for safety in time-trouble. The 
immediate 25. . .ii.d6!? was more logical.
26 :l5e3 (3) 26....Ug7 27 Sd3+ *c7  28 Sa3 
Sg6 29 .l:i.f3
After this I offered a draw, having in 
mind the repetition of moves - 29 ...Ag7 30 
Sa3. However, instead of replying the 
grandmaster moved his bishop. Inciden­
tally, in my next game with Polugayevsky, 
in the USSR Team Championship (Moscow
1979), in a similar position I also offered a 
draw, and on this occasion my opponent 
replied that he wanted to 'play on for a bit', 
but - he again lost.
29...&f6?!
This is not yet a mistake, and yet it plays 
into White's hands, allowing him to acti­
vate his rooks.
153

Garry Kasparov on Garry Kasparov: Part One
30 c3! (30 2e8 .i, xb2 31 Sxf7+ 4 d 6 32 2a7 
4d5 with equality - Stohl) 30...^d7 31 
Bd3+ *c 7  32 Be8
Here Polugayevsky grew nervous, evi­
dently regretting that he had allowed the 
enemy rook into his camp. Meanwhile, the 
playing time was rapidly expiring: for the 
last moves to the time control we had 
literally seconds remaining...
32...lt:le7?
By bringing back his bishop - 32 . ...&e7!, 
Black could then have activated his knight 
in time and maintained the balance by 
dynamic play: 33 l:ta8 (33 l:tf3 l:tg7) 33 ...c4
34 Sa7+ 4b6 35 .l:i.dd7 Se6 36 b4 ..id6 37 
Bdb7+ 4c6 38 Bxf7 ttJf6 39 Sxa6+ 4d5 40 
'it>f1 CLle4 with equality (Crouch), or 33 b3
i.d 6  34 .l:i.a8 ctJf6 35 .l:i.xa6 ctJg4 36 l:ta7+ (36 
l:1d1 Bf6) 36...'it>b6 37 Sxf7 ttJe5 38 2g7 
l:txg7 39 l:txd6+ and l:txh6, with three 
pawns for a piece and a probable draw.
33 .l:i.ed8 ctJc6?!
With his flag about to fall, Black becomes 
rattled. His position is already very un­
pleasant - say, 33. ...tg5?! 34 f4 Ji.f6 35 
B8d7+ 4 c8  36 4h2! or 33...c4?! 34 .l!3d7+ 
'it>c6 35 Sd6+ 4c5 36 l:txa6. However,
33 ...ctJc8!? was more resilient: 34 fi8d7+ 
4c6 35 l:txf7 b4 36 f4! CiJd6 (36...c4? 37 f5!)
37 Sa7 ..id8! (but not 37. ..4^6?! 38 l:txa6+!
4xa6 39 Bxd6+ 4b7 40 f5 4c7 41 l:te6!) 38 
l:txa6+ gb6 39 cxb4 4b5 40 Sxb6+ 'it>xb6 41 
bxc5+ 'it>xc5 42 'it>h2 - four pawns for the 
knight guarantee White the advantage, but 
it is still a long way from a win.
34 B8d7+ ^b6 35 Bxf7 &e7 36 Be3 (3)
36.....1d6 37 f4 c4 38 'it>h2
I sawthe more vigorous move 38 f5! with 
the possible sequel 38...l:tg8 39 l:te6 l:td8 40 
l:tff6 4c5 41 J:xh6, winning, but in the time 
scramble I didn't want to spoil anything 
before the adjournment and I played as 
solidly as possible.
38...Ji.c5 39 S e 2 b4
The waiting move 39...Ji.d6 is hardly any 
better - objectively Black has little hope of 
saving the game.
40 Be4!
Depriving the opponent of counterplay.
40...bxc3 (to Stohl's move 40...b3 there is 
the strong reply 41 a4!) 41 bxc3 i.f2  (alas 
the g3- and c4-pawns are not of equa' 
value) 42 Sxc4
Again 42 f5 !? was more energetic, far 
example: 42 ... > xg3+ 43 4h3 .l:i.g5 44 Sxct 
..id6 45 l:tf6 4c7 46 g4 h5 47 'it>h4 l:txg4+ 48 
l:txg4 hxg4 49 'it>xg4 ctJe5+ 50 'it>h5 with a 
quick win.
Here the game was adjourned. From the 
press: ‘According to Botvinnik's preliminary
154

Adult Games
assessment, 
White 
has 
good winning 
chances.' The adjournment session took 
place only after the 6th round.
42 ....i.xg3+ (the sealed move) 43 Wh3 .i.e1
44 a4!
The crux of the straightforward home 
analysis: the black king is deprived of the 
b5-square, so that it cannot drive the rook 
from c4, and now g2-g4 and f4-f5 is threat­
ened.
44...1t:a5
Things are also dismal for Black after
44...h5 (5tohl) 45 2f5! h4 46 Sg5, or
44....1:!.g3+ 45 'it>h2 gg6 
(no better is
45 ... l:.xc3 46 Sxc3 .i.xc3 47 g4 or, as pointed 
out by 5tohl, 45 ...Sd3 46 g4! .i.xc3 47 Sh7)
46 g4 Sd6 47 'ig2 gh4 48 Wf3 etc.
45 Sb4+ (4)
4S...'it>c5?
Blundering a piece. It is probable that 
Polugayevsky no longer believed it was 
possible to save the game (especially after 
44 a4). At any event, when I replied 46 Sf5+, 
he stopped the clocks without any visible 
sign of vexation.
It is amusing that, after 45...'ltc6, 64, 
Shakhmaty v SSSR and Informator all gave 
one and the same ‘way to win' - 46 Sf5(?) 
gxc3(?) 47 Sxa5 with the idea of 47....ixb4
48 fixa6+. However, 5tohl and a computer
easily refuted this variation by 46...2g3+ 47 
'it>h2 .l:!.xc3! 48 Sxa5 gg3+ 49 Wh3 ^ e1+ 50 
'ig 4 Sg3+ 51 'it>f5 .i.xb4 with a draw (52 
.l:!.xa6+ Wd7 etc.).
In fact White has at least two completely 
safe ways to the goal:
a) 46 S b l Se6 (46....i.xc3? 47 2c1) 47 f5 
.i:re3+ 48 'it>g4 
'. xc3 49 Sa7 (5tohl) or
46 ...fig3+ 47 clth2 Se3 48 Sf6+! (5tohl's 
move 48 g4 is parried by Crouch's reply
48...tt:lc4!) 48...'it>c7 49 f5! 5 g3+ (49 ....ixc3
50 Hxh6) 50 'it>g1 .id6 51 Sxh6 tt:lc4 52 f6 
tt:ld2, and now not Crouch's move 53 f7(?) 
because of 53. ...i.c5! with a draw, but 53 
.l:!.d1! .i.c5 54 'it>h2 .i.d6+ 55 clth1 Se6 56 g4 
tt:le4 57 'ig2 gxf6 58 Sxf6 tt:lxf6 59 g5 and 
wins;
b) 46 !tb8 gg3+ 47 clth2 Sxc3 48 Sc8+ 
'it>d5 49 fixc3 gxc3 50 Sa7 or 47...Se3 48 
l:tf6+ (48 g4!?) 48...Wc7(d5) 49 Sg8 followed 
by Sxh6 etc.
46 SfS+ 1-0
Times: 2.35-2.44. From the press: 'Kas­
parov's first win over one of the strongest 
players in the world'.
An uneven, but interesting and very 
tense game, with an original treatment of 
the opening. It was and still remains an 
object of my pride.
Nikitin: 'The fight is intensifying with 
every round. At times the hall in the Chess 
Palace resembles an agitated beehive, and 
then a brightly flashing sign “Quiet!" helps 
to restore order. In this difficult situation the 
young Kasparovfeels very much at home. He 
has already adapted, and become ac­
quainted with his rivals - in short, he has 
become a man on the stage.’
Viktor Khenkin: ‘It somehow turned out 
that the 15-year-old master was not only 
immediately taken seriously, but they also 
began to be afraid of him. The Odessa player 
Tukmakov, playing White against him in the
155

Garry Kasparov on Garry Kasparov: Part One
5th round, so diligently exchanged the 
pieces, that a draw became inevitable as 
early as the 21st move. “Out o f harm's way’, 
the grandmaster explained his tactics. But 
Garik is aiming fo r a fight; he needs to gain 
in strength, and test himself'
In the 6th round I played another strong 
Ukrainian grandmaster - Gennady Kuzmin, 
twice a prize-winner in USSR Champion­
ships and a participant in Interzonal Tour­
naments. The successful start had given me 
confidence, and before a game with an­
other chess authority I no longer experi­
enced any timidity (especially since our two 
previous games in simultaneous displays 
had ended in draws).
Came 31 
G.Kasparov-G.Kuzmin
46th USSR Championship, 
6th round, Tbilisi 8.12.1978 
Ruy Lopez C9 7
1 e4 e5 2 tZ:lf3 ttJc6 3 -&b5 a6 4 -&a4 tLlf6 5 
0-0 (5 d4 - Game No.1) 5 ... -&e7 6 Se1 b5 7
ii.b3 d6 8 c3 0-0 9 h3 tLla5 10 i.c 2 c5 11 d4 
'ilc7 12 d5 (6)
My knowledge in the main lines of the 
Chigorin Variation - 12 ttJbd2 cxd4 13 cxd4
ttJc6 or 13. .^,b7 - was as yet insufficient, 
and I immediately closed the centre, since 
here I had some slight but pleasant experi­
ence (12 ... c4?! 13 b4! - Game No.14).
12...ttJc4
An alternative is 12 . .. ,&d7 13 b3 (if 13 
ttJbd2, then 13 ...g6 14 tLlf1 tZ:lh5 or 13 ... c4 
with the idea of ... tZ:lb7-c5) 13...tZ:lb7 14 c4 b4 
15 tZ:lbd2 tZ:le8 (Rubinstein's old plan) 16 
tZ:lfl g6 17 i.h 6  li:Jg7 18 g4 f6 19 tZ:lg3 Vi-Vi 
(Kasparov-Matanovic, Banja Luka 1979). 
The draw secured me victory in the tour­
nament, otherwise I would have played on:
19...11:Jd8 20 'i'd2 tLlf7 21 i.e3 etc.
The immediate 12...ttJe8 is also possible, 
for example: 13 b3 tZ:lb7 14 tt:Jbd2 g6 15 a4 
Sb8 16 axb5 axb5 17 lLlf1 lLlg7 followed by 
...f7-f6 and ...lLld8-f7 (Sion Castro-Beliavsky, 
Leon 1994).
13 a4! (12) 13...-^d7 14 b3 tZ:la5
In my view, this is better than 14. ..lLlb6
15 a5 lLlc8, which gives White somewhat 
the better chances after both 16 b4 c4 17 
l2lbd2 (Kasparov-lvanchuk, Prague (rapid) 
2002), and 16 c4!? g6 17 lLlc3 tt:Jh5 18 tZ:le2 
(Topalov-Shirov, Linares 2004) or 16...b4 17 
tZ:lbd2 (Adams-Kasimdzhanov, 5th match 
game, Tripoli 2004).
15 axb5 (7) 15...axb5 16 ttJbd2 tZ:lb7
The ‘bad' knight should not have been
156

Adult Games
moved away immediately (nor in the varia­
tion 16...c4 17 b4 tt:b7 18 .\il,b2). It was more 
logical to play 16 ...:i.fb8 or 16 ...g6 17 ctJf1 
CUh5 
18 
..li.h6 
l:!fe8 
(Psakhis-G.Kuzmin,
Krasnoyarsk 1980).
17 &b2 g6 (now if 17. ..c4 apart from 18 b4 
there is also 18 bxc4 bxc4 19 ..li.a3 with play 
against the c4-pawn) 18 c4 (5)
1B...tt:h5?
18...b4 was correct (and if 19 tt:h2 tt:h5), 
maintaining a closed and quite tolerable 
position.
19 cxbSi (4) 19. ....li.xb5 20 tt:c4
Unexpectedly the knight has acquired an 
excellent 
post, 
since 
the 
exchange
20.....li.xc4? 21 bxc4 is unacceptable for Black 
in view of the invasion of the white bishop 
via a4. White has an easy game - his next 
few moves are obvious, whereas Black's 
knight at b7 is a big headache: in this half­
open position it is not easy to bring it back 
to life - he lacks time and space.
20. ..f6
Kuzmin is relying on the typical idea of 
..:l:tfb8 and ...tt:d8-f7, but here this does not 
help. After 20...ctJg7?! in Injormator I gave
21 tt:fxe5 dxe5 22 ..li.xe5, but after 22 ....i.d6 
it is only a question of compensation for 
the piece - 23 tt:xd6 tt:xd6 24 ..lib2, etc. 21 
Wkd2! is far stronger, and in the event of
21...f5? there is the decisive 22 ltxa8 Sxa8
23 exf5 tt:xf5 24 ..li.xf5 gxf5 25 tt:cxe5! or
23. ..gxf5 24 tt:fxe5! (24 't!Vh6!?) 24 ...dxe5 25 
xe5 ..li.d6 26 tt:xd6 tt:xd6 27 Wf4 followed 
by 2e3.
20...^f6!? was perhaps the lesser evil, 
temporarily 'forgetting' about the fate of 
the knight on b7, although all the same 
Black would have faced a depressing and 
passive defence.
21 Wd2 SfbS 22 ..li.c3 ..tfs
22...tt:d8 is more consistent, when 23 g3 
ctJf7 24 h4 is good, retaining unpleasant 
pressure.
23 tt:h2 (7) 23...ctJf4 (this proves to be a 
blank shot) 24 tt:g4 (6) 24... ; g7
It is not clear what Black has achieved by
157

Garry Kasparov on Garry Kasparov: Part One
switching his bishop from e7 to g7. Most 
probably he has simply lost time, whereas 
White has 
gradually strengthened his 
position.
25 h4 (2) 25...'itc8 26 '2lge3 (11) 26....&xc4
Kuzmin is no longer able to tolerate the 
knight on c4. If 26...Sxa1 27 .l:!.xa1 .l:!.a8 there 
could have followed 28 Sxa8 'i!Vxa8 29 g3 
'2lh5 30 i.d1!? with the threat of i.xh 5 or 
&g4.
27 bxc4 1i.h6 (also after 27. ..'2ld8 28 g3 '2lh5 
in various lines there is the attractive idea 
± d1) 28 .Uxa8 (21) 28....l:!.xa8 29 ..td1!
Black's 
problems 
are 
continuing to 
snowball. His two knights - both the ‘bad' 
one and the ‘good' one - are in a kind of 
impasse.
29....Ua3?!
The final oversight in a very difficult po­
sition. 29- ..f5?! 30 exf5 gxf5 31 'i'c2 e4 
would have lost ignominiously to 32 g4! or 
even 32 1i.g4!, but nevertheless 29...'2ld8 
was somewhat more resilient.
30 g3 (5) 30...'2lh5 31 'il'b2 (4) 31...'tlVa8 (alas, 
the control of the a-file is of no importance) 
32 .&xh5 1i.xe3 33 Sxe3 gxh5 34 'it>g2
The exchange of a couple of pairs of mi­
nor pieces has not brought Black any relief. 
To his 'bad' knight has been added a catas­
trophic weakening of the pawns covering
his king.
34...ctJd8
Black avoids the invasion of his position 
after 34..Sa2 35 ^ 5  'tic8 36 S O  'it>g7 37 
Sf5 or 36 ke1 lia8 37 2b3 '2ld8 38 'li'e8+ 
etc., but he goes from the frying pan into 
the fire.
35 \i1Ve2! ltJf7 36 'it'xh5 'li'a6 37 lif3 (2)
Emphasising the hopelessness of the at­
tempts by the opponent to somehow divert 
White from the final attack.
37...\i1Vb7
The black queen cannot move far away 
from its king: 37. ..'i!Vxc4 38 'iVg4+ 'it>f8 39 
.Uxf6 or 39 'Yi"c8+ 'it>g7 40 'iVf5 with crushing 
threats.
38 \i1Vg4+ (2) 38...'it>f8 39 Wf5 'i!Ve7 40 Wxh7 
:ta4
41 kd2! 1-0
A timely inclusion of the bishop: if
41...1lxc4, then 42 ..th6+ or the spectacular 
42 ±g5!. Times: 2.02-2.27.
Not the most brilliant game, but an im ­
portant one in the competitive respect: 
after it I burst into the leading trio (Be- 
liavsky - 41,! out of 6, Kasparov and Tal - 4), 
whereas the distraught Kuzmin was unable 
to find his form and in the end he finished 
in last place.
158

Adult Games
This lively start made me euphoric, and I 
made a decision - I would stay in the Pre­
mier League! But here I was hit by a cold 
shower - 'Black' losses to Timoshchenko 
and Razuvaev, and a 'White' draw with 
Georgadze dampened my optimism. In the 
championship bulletin I read the following 
dialogue: ‘Should you be congratulated on 
winning against a 15-year-old schoolboy?' 
Yuri Razuvaev was asked. ‘I think I should', 
the Muscovite smiled in reply. ‘This was 
probably my last chance of winning against 
him.' Prophetic words! However, at the time 
this hint at my guaranteed future was a 
faint consolation.
'Things became difficult fo r Kasparov', 
wrote Nikitin in the Baku Sport newspaper. 
'His place among the leaders after the first 
six rounds, and the heightened attention of 
the spectators and journalists, proved a 
difficult psychological test fo r the young 
master. He became nervous and his play, 
although interesting, suffered from  set­
backs. Garik should not be reproached fo r 
the fact that he fell behind the leaders. He 
will no doubt play many times in the Pre­
mier League, and fo r him this tournament 
was an invaluable school of chess knowl­
edge. '
But fortune again smiled on me. In the 
10th round I scored a difficult win over 
Beliavsky (in the adjourned position he 
resigned without resuming), in the 11th I 
adjourned with winning chances against 
Gulko, and in the 12th I gained a powerful 
position against Mikhalchishin. At this 
point I pictured myself finishing in the 
dizzy heights ofthe top three! Then retribu­
tion followed swiftly. In my excitement I 
messed up the game with Mikhalchishin 
and lost! That evening, a tragic one for me, 
was captured in his report by the Soviet 
sport correspondent Viktor Vasiliev:
‘Five rounds before the finish Garik could 
have been in the leading group... In a sharp 
battle with Mikhalchishin, where the players 
castled on opposite sides, Kasparov seized 
the initiative and after winning rook fo r 
bishop he gained a decisive advantage. The 
outcome would hardly have been in doubt - 
if Mikhalchishin had had more time. But fo r 
his last ten moves he had a little more than 
a minute left. and Kasparov, looking out of 
the corner of his eye at the opponent's 
quivering flag, and expecting it tofall at any 
moment, was simply unable toforce himself 
to think. And he had heaps of time - a whole 
hour! But the young player, repeating the 
mistake of many. many others, began play­
ing on the opponent's time-trouble and, of 
course, he himself made several errors, after 
which the advantage passed to Mikhal­
chishin. Did Kasparov know that in the other 
player's time-trouble you shouldn't rush? Of 
course he knew! But the mistakes of others 
do not cost anything; you only pay a real 
priceforyour own...
‘After the round I glanced at Kasparov. To 
say that the youth was upset would be 
putting it mildly. "But what about the 
promise to Botvinnik - to play 17 good 
games, not thinking about the result?" I 
asked. Garik gave a weak smile. And one can 
understand him. Because competitive ambi­
tion and the fervour of the struggle - they 
take their toll (besides, is it really bad to play
17 good games and finish high up?). I am 
sure that the wise Botvinnik, whom the 
youth phones in Moscow after every round, 
will guess his state of mind and will not 
reproach too severely his temperamental 
protegefor his hot-headedness. The mistakes 
of youth - who has not made them?..'
Then, on the adjournment day, I was un­
able to win against Gulko. However, in the 
13th (!) round I defeated another of the
159

Garry Kasparov on Garry Kasparov: Part One
previous 
year’s 
USSR 
co-champions 
- 
Dorfman. And in the 14 th round I engaged 
in a tactical battle with Sveshnikov. From 
the press: ‘The round turned out to be 
unusual and highly entertaining. It began 
with Georgadze setting fire to a cigarette 
packet in an ash-tray (the reality of those 
times! - G.K.). “A fiery round", remarked 
Razuvaev, who had gone down into the 
auditorium (his opponent, Tal, was having a 
long think), and at this point the lights went 
out in the hall. And when they came back 
on, the astonished spectators found that the 
aforementioned Tal and Razuvaev were no 
longer on the stage: in the darkness, no 
longer able to see the position, they had 
agreed a draw.’ I also offered a draw in the 
darkness, but Sveshnikov agreed only when 
the lights came on...
On 'plus one', I still cherished hopes of 
clinging on to the 'bronze', but in the 15th 
round I missed a certain win against Ro- 
manishin, and in the 16th, penultimate 
round, I lost hopelessly in a Caro-Kann to 
Tseshkovsky and came down to earth - to 
5O%. Nevertheless, after a quick concluding 
draw with the leader Tal, which suited us 
both (in the event of various shared places, I 
had the better Berger coefficient), I man­
aged to finish in sole 9th place and retain 
my 'pass' to the Premier League.
That same evening, in one of the quiet 
rooms behind the stage, I played a blitz 
match with Mikhail Tal, who had just won 
his sixth gold medal as USSR champion. Our 
tense encounter ended, to my delight, in a 7­
7 draw. On returning to the hotel, for form’s 
sake, I wrote down all 14 games from mem­
ory. I also recall with what rapt attention the 
play was followed by two Alexanders - Bakh 
and Roshal, people from Karpov's circle. They 
were probably already in agreement with 
Tal, who in an interview gave a very com­
plimentary assessment of my play: 'Kasparov 
is undoubtedly a unique phenomenon in 
chess. I can name only two players who at the 
age of fifteen performed so successfully in 
major tournaments - Fischer and Spassky. It 
is clear that whatever place the young player 
takes in the next championship, it will no 
longer be a sensation.'
Asriyan: ‘Mikhail Botvinnik, whom I inter­
viewed 
immediately 
afterwards, 
judged 
Garik's 9th place to be an undoubted success. 
True, Makogonov, with whom, on Botvinnik's 
advice, Kasparov was studying at that time, 
thought that the young player could even 
have finished 5th, but he was suffering from 
a cold (he could not restrain himself, and 
against the advice of his trainers, he ate some 
ice-cream). Incidentally, in this championship 
ofthe country, fo r the first and last time, the 
paths of two Baku players - Bagirov and 
Kasparov - crossed, and Garik, who finished 
half a point ahead of his compatriot, as 
though took from him the baton ofthe best 
player in Azerbaijan, which in his time Bagi­
rov had taken from Makogonov. ’
From the magazine Shakhmaty v SSSR: 
‘For the first time such a young player - 15- 
year-old Garry Kasparov - took part in the 
USSR Championship Final. His performance 
was, of course, the chiefsensation. A success­
fu l start, 
wins over highly-experienced 
grandmasters... Despite isolated set-backs, 
explained by inexperience, he played inter­
esting chess, and boldly accepted a fight, not 
fearing the exalted titles of his opponents. 
With White hefought splendidly - 6 points 
out of 8. He was less successful with Black - 
2/i out of 9. Kasparov’s virtues, as well as his 
deficiencies, are clearly apparent. There can 
be no doubt that with further serious work 
he can expect great successes.’
And the successes were not long in com­
ing.
160

Adult Games
'This is the new Fischer!’
International tournament in Banja Luka (10-30 April 1979)
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
1 Kasparov
*
y,
y,
y,
y,
1
y,
1
1
1
1
y,
1
y,
1
1
n yi
2 Smejkal
y,
*
y,
y,
y,
y,
y,
y,
0
1
y,
1
1
y,
1
1
9Yi
3
nossrednA
y,
y,
*
Y,
Y,
Y,
Y,
Y,
1
Y.
1
Y,
Y,
1
y,
y,
9
4 Petrosian
y,
y,
y,
*
y,
y,
y,
y,
1
y,
y,
y,
y,
1
1
y,
9
5 Adorjan
y,
y,
y,
y,
*
y,
y,
y,
y,
y,
y,
1
y,
y,
y,
1
8Yi
6 Knezevic
0
y,
y,
y,
y,
*
y,
y,
y,
y,
y,
1
y,
y,
y,
1
8
7 Matanovic
Y,
Y,
Y,
Y,
Y,
Y,
*
Y,
Y,
Y,
Y,
Y,
Y,
Y,
Y,
Y,
7Yi
8 Browne
0
y,
y,
y,
y,
y,
y,
*
y,
y,
y,
0
1
1
y,
y,
7Yi
9 Bukic
0
1
0
0
y,
y,
y,
y,
*
1
y,
y,
y,
y,
y,
y,
7
10 Marjanovic
o
0
Y,
Y,
Y,
Y,
Y,
Y,
O
*
Y.
1
0
1
Y.
1
7
11 Marovic
0
Y,
O
y,
y,
y,
y,
y,
y,
y,
*
y,
y,
y,
y,
y,
6Yi
12 Garcia
Y,
O
Y,
Y,
O
0
Y.
1
y,
0
y,
*
1
0
y,
1
6Yi
13 Vukic
0
0
y,
y,
y,
y,
y,
0
y,
1
y,
0
*
y,
y,
1
6Yi
14 Kurajica
Y,
Y,
O
0
Y,
Y,
Y,
O
y,
0
y,
1
y,
*
y,
y,
6
15 Hernandez
0
o
Y,
o
Y,
Y,
Y,
Y,
Y,
Y,
Y,
Y,
Y,
Y,
*
6
16 Sibarevic
0
0
Y,
Y,
O
0
Y,
Y,
Y,
O
Y,
O
0
y,
y,
*
4
Today it is hard to imagine: despite my 
success in the previous championship of 
the country, in 1979 I had no expectation of 
a single ‘adult' tournament, apart from the 
USSR Team Championship in July and the 
next Premier League in December. And yet 
it was already high time that I became both 
an international master, and a grandmas­
ter! It should be remembered, however, 
that the appearances of Soviet chess play­
ers abroad were strictly rationed, and many 
languished for long months or even years 
in the Sport Committee's queue for inter­
national tournaments.
‘The 16-year-old Garry would have been 
stuck with this, had not Botvinnik again 
come to the rescue,' Alexander Nikitin 
recalls. 'On learning of the strong grand­
master tournament planned fo r the spring 
in Yugoslav Banja Luka, he had intensive 
discussions with the organisers. And they,
unable to resist the enormous prestige of the 
ex-world champion, agreed to the participa­
tion o f the young Soviet master, who had 
neither an international title, nor a rating. 
Campaigning fo r his pupil, Botvinnik gave 
assurances that the youngster played very 
well and if anyone would have regrets about 
his inclusion in the tournament, it would be 
his opponents.
‘The Sports Committee did not take any 
part in Botvinnik's diplomatic discussions, 
but when it saw that, apart from ex-world 
champion Petrosian, the organisers had also 
invited Kasparov to play, it categorically 
refused to allow his mother or his trainer to 
travel with him. This was a blessing in 
disguise: the tournament brought together 
the youngster and the highly-experienced 
ex-champion.’
And indeed, in my first ‘adult' interna­
tional tournament I was fortunate to play
161

Garry Kasparov on Garry Kasparov: Part One
under Petrosian's paternal care. I remem­
ber how before this my mother and I went 
to meet him at his home, and his wife Rona 
Yakovlevna said to my mother: ‘Don’t you 
worry; in 1953 Tigran also played in the first 
foreign tournament of the 16-year-old 
Spassky. This is a good omen!' The help of 
'Iron Tigran' proved invaluable. His hu­
mour, 
genuine benevolence and wise 
advice created a good atmosphere, and I 
quickly adapted to the unfamiliar situation. 
In our free time we talked a lot, and not 
only about chess topics, we went for walks 
together, gave simuls', analysed and dis­
cussed games we had played.
The line-up of the tournament in Banja 
Luka was very strong: of the 16 contestants,
14 were grandmasters, a third of whom 
were then among the world elite. We were 
warmly greeted by our hosts. Yugoslav 
appeared to be a genuine chess Mecca: 
where else were so many international 
tournaments held and so many interna­
tional masters and grandmasters pro­
duced! Petrosian always had many fans 
there, and I too soon sensed the sympathy 
of the chess enthusiasts - and I caught fire! 
Although, of course, I was anxious, I was 
hoping for a high place (after all, few of the 
opponents were capable of scoring 5O% in 
the USSR Championship Premier League), 
and to achieve the grandmaster norm (101/2 
out of 15), to say nothing of the interna­
tional master norm (71/ 2).
I was a little fortunate with the pairings: 
in the first round I made a draw with White 
against Petrosian, and the prospect of 
playing the ex-world champion no longer 
weighed on my mind. In the evening I asked 
Tigran Vartanovich what I should play in 
the 2nd round after 1 e4 against Sibarevic - 
the only Yugoslav master in the tourna­
ment. Perhaps the Caro-Kann? Petrosian
replied: ‘In the Caro-Kann White has a safe 
position, and there is a protracted struggle. 
Against such an opponent you should play 
the Sicilian Defence!' The following day that 
is what I did - and I scored a convincing 
win. Over dinner Petrosian was trium­
phant: 'Well, what did I say! The Caro- 
Kann?! You'd be sitting here now, analysing 
an adjourned position ... '
After the 2nd round there was a free day, 
which coincided with my birthday. The 
organisers decided to give me a 16th birth­
day present - a respectable suit (which was 
not surprising, since in Banja Luka I was 
strutting around in my Baku clothes), and 
we set off to the supermarket. By Soviet 
standards it was a fairytale spectacle, the 
choice of goods - including suits - being 
incredible. And they said to me: 'Choose 
whichever one you want!' I hesitated, and 
here the genuinely experienced Petrosian 
took the initiative. Pushing me away, he 
carefully examined all the suits, chose one 
of the most expensive, in a fine check, and 
solemly pointed to it: ‘This one!'
From the following day my motto at the 
board was ‘Full speed ahead!'. In the 3rd 
round I was opposed by the 30-year-old 
Walter Browne, several times USA cham­
pion and a participant in Interzonal tour­
naments - one of the noteworthy western 
players of that time. This was a serious test, 
although, with the Premier League already 
behind me, I did not experience any par­
ticular trepidation.
Game 32 
G.Kasparov-W.Browne
Banja Luka, 3rd round 14.04.1979 
Queen's Indian Defence E12
1 d4 tt:lf6 2 c4 e6 3 tt:lf3 b6 4 a3 (4)
162

Adult Games
My first experience of employing the Pet­
rosian Variation, which later became a 
favourite of mine and brought me numer­
ous memorable wins. At that time I did not 
yet have any deep knowledge here and I 
was only just starting to develop my 
grandmaster opening repertoire.
4...c5
This continuation leads to a more com­
plicated game than the traditional 4...&b7 
5 tt:Jc3 d5 (5 ...ctJe4 - Came No.61) 6 cxd5 
tt:Jxd5 7 e3 (Came Nos. 43, 52, 85) or 7 'i¥c2 
(Came Nos. 73, 75, 98). Perhaps Browne was 
hoping to exploit my youthful impulsive­
ness and inexperience? I stopped to think.
5 d5 (14) S...^a6 6 Wc2 exds
Timman's move 6 ...We7, which was fash­
ionable at that time, proved to be dubious 
because of the reply which I found together 
with Magerramov: 7 &g5 exd5 8 tt:Jc3! .i.xc4
9 e4! (Kasparov-van der Wiel, Graz 1981).
7 cxd5 d6 (7...g6 - Came No.68) 8 tt:Jc3
8...tt:Jbd7?!
It is hard to say why my opponent did 
not play 8...g6 and ... &g7. with normal play 
in the spirit of the Modern Benoni. 'It is 
from such imperceptible errors that an 
advantage for one of the sides is often 
generated' (Nikitin).
9 ..lif4! (8)
Now, because ofthe weakness of the d6- 
pawn, Black is forced to develop his bishop 
more modestly - at e7, and he has a rather 
passive position.
9.....\ie7 10 g3 (7)
Whereas 
White 
develops 
his king's 
bishop at g2.
10. ..0-0 11 ,ig 2 SeB 12 0-0 ctJh5 (if 12. ..b5 I 
was planning 13 b4!) 13 ^d2 (6) 13...tt:Jhf6 
Browne was evidently checking whether 
there would again follow 14 &f4. But, of 
course, I had no intention of repeating 
moves.
14 .l:.fe1 (5)
Beginning preparations for the typical 
pawn breakthrough e2-e4-e5. The prophy­
lactic 14 a4 would have allowed the oppo­
nent to make successful use of the transit 
point e5 after 14. ..&b7 15 e4 ctJg4.
14... ^ f8?!
Again slightly passively played. Now if
14... : b7 15 e4 ctJg4 White had the reply 16 
h3 tt:Jge5 17 tt:Jxe5 tt:Jxe5 18 f4 tt:Jc4 19 e5 
with the initiative. But perhaps Black 
should have initiated counterplay on the 
queenside - 14...b5!?, although here too 
after 15 b4! White's chances are better:
15 ...Sc8 16 bxc5 (16 ^h3!?) 16....l:.xc5 17 
l ‘b3 etc.
15 a4 (4)
163

Garry Kasparov on Garry Kasparov: Part One
Playing for a bind and to restrict the op­
ponent's possibilities. White is threatening 
also to play h2-h3, and so Browne tries to 
improve the placing of his minor pieces, 
before he becomes too cramped.
15*. .tt:lg4 16 tt:Jb5 (9) 16.....t b7
White's offensive develops smoothly af­
ter 16 ...l2lge5 17 tt:Jxe5 tt:Jxe5 18 f4 and e2- 
e4.
17 e4 (4) 17. *.a6 1Bl2la3!
With the intention of creating a striking 
force with l2Jc4 and ..tc3, exploiting the fact 
that the black bishop is not on the long 
diagonal.
White's advantage is becoming increas­
ingly obvious - in the words of Nikitin, 'he 
has succeeded in consistently accumulat­
ing small positional pluses'.
18..J:tb8
If 18...g6, then again 19 h3, for example:
19...l2lge5 20 tt:Jxe5 tt:Jxe5 21 f4 or 19...l2lgf6
20 l:Iad1 'W/c7 21l2lc4.
19 h3 (10) 19...tt:Jgf6
After 19... l2lge5 in lnformator I gave 20 
l2Jh2 with the idea of f2-f4. 20 l2lh4 is also 
good. But perhaps 20 tt:Jxe5!? is simpler - if
20 ...l2lxe5 21 f4 l2ld7 22 ..tc3 the threat of 
e4-e5 is very strong, while after 20...dxe5 
(seemingly the lesser evil) 21 l2Jc4 'Wic7 all 
the same White dominates in the centre
and Black's position is unpleasant.
20 &C3 (9)
Continuing to prepare e4-e5. 20 l2Jc4 b5
21 l2la5 'l&'b6 was not so clear, whereas now 
Black is deprived of counterplay.
20...'W/c7 21 l2ld2 (21 ..tfl!?) 21.....\tcB 22 
..tf1!
An accurate prophylactic move, again 
not allowing ...b6-b5. Black is almost para­
lysed.
22...g5?
Browne's reaction staggered me: is such 
a weakening really possible?! 'However, 
Modern Benoni devotees often do this, and 
they are rarely punished for a positional sin 
of this kind.' (Nikitin)
I was expecting the natural move 22...g6 
(the problem of the f8-bishop has to be 
solved - 22...l2le5?! 23 f4 tt:Jed7 24 'ir'd3 
merely plays into White's hands) and I 
would probably have replied 23 f4 (intend­
ing e4-e5) 23...l2lh5 24 'it>h2 ..ltg7 25 l2lac4 or
24. ..l2ldf6 25 'f&'d3 with an obvious advan­
tage.
23 l2lf3! (5)
White, exploiting his opponent's 'hole- 
creating' play, promptly changes tack and 
begins a swift attack.
23...h6
Also after 23...g4 24 l2lh4 h5?! 25 Wd2
164

Adult Games
lL:Je5 26 f4! gxf3 27 lLlc4 or 24. ..LDe5 25 hxg4 
lLlfxg4 26 f3 tLlf6 27 lLJc4 Black's position is 
unenviable.
24 lLJc4
The most aggressive, although nothing 
would have been spoiled by some useful 
waiting move - say, 24 b3 or 24 &d3.
24...bs 25 axbs axbs
26 es!
Of course, White also has an excellent 
position in the event of 26 &a5 'eNb7 27 
lLla3 c4 28 lLJd4 lLle5 29 b3 or 26 LDa5!? b4
27 &xf6 LDxf6 28 lLJc6, but the strike in the 
centre is far more flamboyant and vigorous. 
Intuition and specific calculation suggested 
to me that Black's counterplay was too late.
26...lLlxdS
A difficult choice. Black would have lost 
the exchange without sufficient compensa­
tion 
after 
26...dxe5 
27 
lL:Jcxe5 
tLlxe5
(27...lLJxd5? 28 lLlxf7!; 27...Sb6 28 &a5) 28 
&xe5 Sxe5 29 lL:Jxe5 (29 Sxe5!?) 29 ...lLJxd5
30 Bad1 etc.
26...bxc4 27 exf6 Sxe1 28 Sxe1 was also 
unsatisfactory for Black - in Informator I 
assessed this position as winning for White, 
and this is correct: if 28...tLlb6 he decides 
matters with the thunderous 29 tLlxg5!! 
hxg5 30 'i!Vd2 f
 31 'ifxg5+ ^g6 32 &g2 
and &e4, while after 28...'1lt:M8 (attacking
the f6-pawn) there is the no less deafening 
stroke 29 Be6!! (threatening 'Wif5 and lL:Jxg5)
29 ...:l.b3 (with the idea of ...Sxc3) 30 lL:Jxg5! 
hxg5 31 f
 -&h6 32 'il'e4! tDe5 (32. . . f  33 
"*'e3! or 32...lLJf8 33 Se8 'Wid7 34 .&xc4 does 
not help) 33 &xe5 dxe5 34 &xc4 Sb4 35 
l:te7 &a6 36 'i!Vxe5 &xc4 37 Se8+ 'i'xe8 38 
'iHxe8+ &f8 39 d6 with a pretty win.
27 lLJxd6 (4) 27... xd6 (after other replies 
too Black has a very difficult position) 28 
exd6'li'd8
29 lLJeS (6)
A logical move: White needs to exchange 
pieces, to clear the way for the d-pawn.
However, there was also a combinative 
solution - 29 Sxe8+ (or first 29 tLlxg5!)
29...#xe8 30 :f1e1 'i'f8 31 lL:Jxg5! hxg5 32 
'i'f5 lL:Jxc3 33 'i!Vxg 5+ &h8 34 bxc3 1Vxd6 35 
i.d3! or 31. .lLl7f6 32 Se5! b4 (32. ..lLJxc3 33 
'iHxc3 and wins) 33 &d2 'il'xd6 34 lLlf3, and 
Black has no defence.
29...1.Jb4 (there is nothing else: 29 . ..lL:Jxc3?
30 lLJc6!) 30 i¥d2
30 
'i'c1! was rather more forceful, keep­
ing the c5-pawn under fire.
30...tLlxeS 31 Sxes Sxes 32 ^xes lLJc6 33 
'i¥e3
Probably the simplest: the power of the 
passed d6-pawn is irresistible.
33...LDxeS (of course, not 33 ...f6? 34 &xf6!
165

Garry Kasparov on Garry Kasparov: Part One
#xf6 35 VINe8+ and #xc6) 34 WxeS c4 35 
gg2 ge6 (if 35 ...ib 7  White would have 
won by 36 d7! '■ xg2 37 'ltxg2) 36 Sa7 (5)
36...b4?!
The final error, now in severe time- 
trouble. 36...'\'Wf8 was more resilient, al­
though after 37 jL,d5 (3 7 d7 l'id8 38 j{_c6 b4 
is not so clear) all the same Black has a lost 
position: 37 ...jL,xd5 (37.. .l:le8 38 Sc7!) 38 
#xd5 l:d8 39 d7 <.t>g7 40 'i'e5+ f6 41 l'Wxb5 
etc.
37 .ie4! (an elegant stroke: jL,h7+ is threat­
ened) 37...c3 (alas, 37...®b6 38 lie7 and
37 ...gd7 38 
d5 are both bad for Black) 38 
.ih7+! 'it>xh7 39 Wxe6 1-0
Times: 2.08-2.29.
Although Browne's play in this impor­
tant game was far from perfect, the rout I 
inflicted on him impressed both the specta­
tors, and the contestants. By scoring 21/2 out 
of 3 I took the lead, and I sensed that they 
had begun to respect me.
The following day I easily defeated the 
Cuban Roman Hernandez with Black - in a 
King's Indian Defence, although events 
developed more in the spirit of the Benko 
Gambit. And in the 5th game came a meet­
ing with one of the home players - the 
experienced Drazen Marovic, the editor of
the Yugoslav magazine Sahovski glasnik.
Game 33 
G.Kaspa rov-D.Marovic
Banja Luka, 5th round 16.04.1979 
Queen’s Gambit 061
1 c4
In Banja Luka my steady drift from 1 e4 
to the closed games continued. I don't 
remember why I played this rather than 1 
d4 (evidently to avoid something), but the 
result was a classical Queen's Gambit.
1 ...e6 2 tt:Jf3 dS 3 d4 tt:Jf6 4 tt:Jc3 .ie7 5 jL,gS 
0-0 6 e3 tt:Jbd7 (6...h6 - Game Nos. 20, 41, 54, 
92) 7 Wc2
Intending queenside castling and a di­
rect attack on the king - this plan always 
attracted me, and I analysed such positions 
a great deal.
7...cs
In the game Kasparov-Portisch (Brussels 
1986) Black played 7 ...h6, expecting the 
usual 8 .th4 or 8 h4 c5 9 0-0-0 (Portisch- 
Barcza, Budapest 1961), but even in the 
Oueen's Gambit I used to seek romanti­
cism, and therefore I replied 8 cxd5!?. The 
sudden piece sacrifice threw the venerable 
grandmaster into an almost irrational
166

Adult Games
panic, and he preferred to go into an infe­
rior, but typical position - 8...exd5 9 i.f4 ! c5
10 i.e2 b6 11 o-o i.b 7 12 S fd l Sc8 (but 
already on the 14th move he made a seri­
ous mistake and lost).
8...hxg5!? is more critical - after 9 dxe6 
fxe6 10 tt:xg5 tt:b6 11 h4! and h4-h5 White 
has two pawns for the bishop and chances 
of an attack, but it is unclear how serious 
they are.
8 0-0-0
The simplifying 8 cxd5 tt:xd5 9 .JJ..xe7 
'i/xe7 10 tt:xd5 exd5 11 i.d3 h6 or 11...g6 
(Alekhine-Capablanca, 10th match game, 
Buenos Aires 1927) was not at all to my 
taste. But, by contrast, the variations with 8 
o-o-o fascinated me (and if something is 
interesting, let’s play it!), although now I 
take a rather ironic view of my attacking 
bursts . ..
8 ...Wa5 (the main reply) 9 ^ b l
This move of Keres and the associated 
scheme of development was what I was 
counting on. In the old game Rotlewi- 
Teichmann (Karlsbad 1911) after 9 cxd5 
exd5 10 dxc5 tt:xc5?! 11 tt:d4?! i.e6 12 4b1 
.l:!.ac8 Black gained excellent play, but in the 
event of 11 tt:xd5! tt:xd5 12 .l:Ixd5 f6! 13
c4! 'it>h8 14 .fl.f4(h4) .id 7 he would have 
had to 
show that he had sufficient 
compensation for the pawn. 10...h6! 11 h4 
(or 11 .fl.h4) 11...'i'xc5 is more solid.
9...h6
I 
think that there is also nothing terrible 
for Black after 9...dxc4 (or 9...cxd4 10 exd4 
dxc4) 10 i.xc4 cxd4 11 exd4 tt:b6 12 .fl.b3 
.fl.d7 (Keres-Fichtl, Prague 1943). Of course, I 
had not prepared killer variations for all 
eventualities, but I had a strong desire to 
create a war-like atmosphere on the board.
10 h4 (6)
A standard method of attack. Possibly, so 
as not to provoke its development, Black
should have managed without the moves 
...h7-h6 and h2-h4.
10...dxc4
Up to here Marovic had followed the 
Yugoslav Encyclopaedia of Chess Openings 
of that time, which recommended 10... cxd4
11 exd4 hxg5(?) 12 hxg5 tt:e4 13 tt:xe4 dxe4 
(14 Wxe4 'I!Uf5). But at home I had found the 
deadly move 14 c5!, for example: 14...f5 15 
gxf6! .l:!.xf6 (15. ..tt:xf6 16 tt:e5) 16 'iVxe4 tt:f8
17 .id3 or 14...tt:xc5 15 dxc5 Sd8 (l5 .. .Wxc5
16 Wxe4 Wf5 17 'Ylt'xf5 exf5 18 Sd4!) 16 
2xd8+ iVxd8 17 .ic4  
xg5 18 Wxe4 .fl.f6 19 
tt:e5 with a fearfully strong attack.
Alas, this preparation never in fact saw 
the light of day. However, instead of
11...hxg5? Black has the forceful reply
11....fl.b4! and then 12 .id2 dxc4 13 .ixc4  
tt:b6 14 .ib 3 .fl.d7 15 tt:e5 .fl.c6 16 f3 .id5 17 
g4 i.xb3 18 'i"xb3 (Piket-Condie, Kiljava 
1984) 18...Sfd8 with a normal game.
11 .fl.xc4 (10) 1 1 . ..tt:b6
For a long time I considered this ‘side­
ways' move to be dubious and I gave pref­
erence to another defence: 11 ...cxd4 12 
exd4 tt:b6 13 i.b 3 i.d 7 14 tt:e5 (14 d5!? 
.i:tfc8!) 14. . ..Uac8 15 .Eth3 (a variation from 
lnformator) 15. ...: c6! or 11...Sd8!? 12 dxc5 
(12 g4?! b5! 13 .ixb 5 .ib7) 12...tt:xc5 13 
Hxd8+ .fl.xd8 14 .if4  .id 7 with equality.
167

Garry Kasparov on Garry Kasparov: Part One
However, as we will see, the text is not yet a 
mistake.
12 ,ix f6  (12 j_d3 .td7!) 12...gxf6?!
Afraid of losing a pawn, Marovic breaks 
up his king's fortress. It would have been 
much safer to play 12...j_xf6! 13 lt:Je4! and 
now not 13 ...j_e7? 14 dxc5 (Cvitan-Toth, 
Lugano 1984), since 14...j_xc5 is bad be­
cause of 15 lt:Jfg5! g6 16 &b3, winning, but 
the cool-headed 13 ...lt:Jxc4! 14 lt:Jxf6+ gxf6
15 'Wixc4 cxd4 16 lt:Jxd4 (if 16 exd4 or 16 
l:rxd4 there also follows 16... e5!) 16...e5 17 
lt:Jb3 ^ 6  18 lt:Jc5 l:!.d8, and it is hard for 
White to exploit the weakness of the enemy 
king.
And even after the less suitable move 
order, given by me in Informator - 13 ...cxd4
14 lt:Jxf6+ gxf6, allowing 15 l:rxd4 lt:Jxc4 16 
l:rg4+! 'it>h8 17 l:txc4 e5 18 lt:Jg5?! fxg5 19 
hxg5, instead of the losing 19...e4? 20 l:rc5 
'YWb4 21 a3!, Black has the defence 19 ...'it>g7!
20 l:rc5 "iWa6 21 gxh6+ 'it>h8.
13 .te2 (6)
13...cxd4 14 exd4?! (5)
An important moment. At the board the 
capture with the pawn seemed to me to be 
the most logical: it is seemingly easier for 
the queen to attack the black king ('i!d2 
with the threat of "iWxh6). But in fact 14 
lt:Jxd4! 
d7 15 'Wie4 was stronger, with play
on both wings: 15 ...l:!.ab8 16 j_d3 f5 17 "iWf4, 
and Black is in trouble (17...'ih7 18 lt:Jb3 
"iWb4 19 gxf5+! exf5 20 Sd4 and wins), 
while in the event of 15...l:!.fc8 both the 
‘greedy' 16 "iWxb7 (16...l:rab8 17 'i!a6) and 
the 'creative' 16 l:rh3!? are in White's fa­
vour.
14...^d7 15 l:th3 (the point of White's plan)
15...1t:Ja4
15...l:tfc8 is risky: 16 'iVd2! (if 16 l:rg3+, 
then not 16 ... 'it>f8? 17 lt:Je5! fxe5 18 'Wih7! 
'it>e8 19 l:tg8+ j_f8 20 ..th5 and wins, but
16 ... Wh8! 17 "iWd2 j_f8 with unclear play)
16 ...j_f8 17 lt:Je4 'Wixd2 (17 ..."iWf5? 18 £d3) 18 
lt:Jxf6+ Wg7 19 lLlh5+ 'it>h8 20 l:t(lt:J)xd2, and 
Black is a pawn down, although he has 
some compensation for it.
16 l:tg3+ (34) 16...'it>h8
17 "iWd2
Realising that 17 lt:Jxa4 ..txa4 18 'Wic1 
Wh7 19 b3 ..tb5 was unpromising, I decided 
to allow a weakening of the pawns defend­
ing my king.
17...lt:Jxc3+ 18 bxc3 Wh7
The correct move. In the event of
18 ...'i!Vf5+? 19 &d3 'ilVh5 there is the sudden 
and very powerful stroke 20 Sg6M fxg6 21 
g4 'Wixg4 22 'Wixh6+. I saw this at the board, 
although later in Informator I assessed the 
position after 22...Wg8 23 l:tg1 "iWxg1+ 24
168

Adult Games
tt:Jxgl l:tf7 as unclear. In fact 25 i.xg 6 l:tg7
26 '2le2! gives White good winning chances:
26...1.f8 27 tt:lg3 or 26...ge8 27 i.xe8 Sxe8
28 '2lf4 etc.
19 i.d3+ (16)
Here I could not altogether imagine what 
to do next. After 19 d5 the simple 19...f5 or
19....:g8 is possible, and the frontal attack 
does not succeed.
19...fS 20 lt:les gbs! (the only move) 21 
Sf3?! (4)
This move, to which I previously attached 
an exclamation mark, has only one advan­
tage - a psychological one: it creates a new 
threat (g2-g4), which scares the opponent!
It is clear that if 21 i.c2 Marovic would 
have replied 21. ..ga4!, insisting on the 
exchange of bishops. Therefore the best 
chance was 21 J:!.e3! (defending the e5- 
knight and intensifying the threat ofg2-g4)
21...1.xd3+ 22 "ilUxd3 'it>h8?! 23 'iVe2 or
22...'it>g7 
23 g4!, nevertheless retaining the 
initiative.
21...f6?
A serious positional mistake - an irrepa­
rable weakening of the e6-pawn, and with 
it a whole complex of light squares. It was 
essential to play 21 ...gf6(d6) 22 g4 (22 tt:lc4 
i.xc4!) 22 ...gxe5 23 gxf5 i.xd3+ 24 Wxd3
i.d6!, 
parrying 
the 
attack 
(but 
not
24..J:!.ad8? which I gave in Informator, 
because of 25 fxe6+ 'it>h8 26 e7 and wins), 
or 21. ..i.xd3+ 22 'iYxd3 i.d6! (with the same 
threat of ...gxe5; bad is 22...h5? 23 g4! hxg4
24 l:txf5! or 22 ...f6? 23 l:txf5! - it was these 
tactical strokes that I was hoping for) 23 
tt:lc4 'i!Vb5+ 24 '>tal ge7, maintaining the 
dynamic balance (for example, 25 .Ubl "ir'a6
26 g4 J:!.ac8 27 tt:Je5 'ixd 3 28 Sxd3 l:tc7 29 
gxf5 i.xh 4  etc.).
Well, the nature of this mistake is per­
fectly explicable: the grandmaster, accus­
tomed to the quiet treatment of the 
Queen's Gambit with kingside castling, was 
suddenly forced to play a sharp position 
rather like a Sicilian - and he cracked under 
the pressure.
22 '2lc4 "i/c7
The situation has changed sharply: now 
after the exchange 22 ...i.xc4? 23 i.xc4  the 
white bishop is rampant. 22 ...'iYa4 23 'iVe2 
was only a small improvement for Black.
23 'ie 2  (3) 23...gxc4 (and this is despera­
tion: if 23 . ..'id7 there is the decisive 24 dS!)
24 i.xc4  es 25 l:!.xfs
Black has been left empty-handed - he is 
a pawn down and without any counterplay.
25 ...i.a3 26 'ife4 (6)
26 
dxeS! fxe5 27 'iYg4 would have won 
more quickly.
169

Garry Kasparov on Garry Kasparov: Part One
26...^>h8 27 .l:i.hs Wh7 28 'Y!'xh7+
28 
i.d3 'Wixe4 29 &xe4, etc. was also 
good.
28...^xh7 29 dxes &g6 (29...1ac8 30 J:d4)
30 g4 fxes 31 .l:td7?
A vexing lapse! In my opponent's severe 
time-trouble I relaxed, having about 15 
minutes in reserve and thinking I could win 
'as I pleased'. The simple 31 J:xe5 would 
indeed have concluded things quickly, since
31 ...Sxf2? is not possible because of 32 
Hd7!.
31...5ae8!
Unexpectedly the situation has again 
become sharper. Here I became nervous 
and I hurriedly captured a pawn.
32 Sxb7?! (10)
I should have taken myself in hand and 
found 32 i.d5! with the threat of i.e4+, 
which would still have maintained real 
winning chances: 32...e4?! 33 J:xb7 J:xf2 34 
j_c6! He7 (34. ..2e6 35 lf5 !) 35 Bxe7 ii.xe7
36 i.xe4+ &g7 37 g5 or 32. ..Ie7  33 j_e4+ 
4g7 34 Sd2 followed by g4-g5.
32...5 xf2 33 Sxa7
I hurriedly grabbed another pawn. Now 
after 33 i.d 5 J:e7 White would have had 
little chance of success.
33...^f8?
With his flag hanging, Marovic missed
the saving intermediate move 33. ..Sd8! - 
after the forced 34 i.f7+! Sxf7 35 Sxa3 the 
win for White would have been highly 
problematic: 35 . ..Bf1+ 36 &c2 J:f2+ 37 ^b3 
Ib8+ 38 &c4 If4+  39 &c5 J:xg4 40 .l:xe5 
Sxh4 41 Ba6+ <&f7 etc.
34 Sa6+ ^h7 35 .l:i.fs
And in this again hopeless position Black 
lost on time (1-0). Times: 2.17-2.30.
A fourth successive win! An uneven 
game, and by the highest standards by no 
means a masterpiece. Nevertheless it also 
made a big impression - by its daring: it 
was a long time since o-o-o had been 
played against this line of the Queen's 
Gambit. The enormous intensity ofthe play 
excited the spectators - the audience was 
buzzing, and as soon as I had won, some 
man in the middle row wearing a military 
uniform leaped up from his seat and ex­
claimed: 'This is the new Fischer!'. Later it 
transpired that this was the famous Yugo­
slav journalist Dmitri Bjelica (at that time 
he was involved in military training).
From my telephone interview with a 64 
correspondent: 'The tournament in Banja 
Luka has begun rather unexpectedly for 
me. Of course, I was hoping to perform 
successfully, but I thought that the fight for 
the lead would be sharper'. After a difficult 
draw in the 6th round with Jan Smejkal, 
one of the heroes of the 1973 Leningrad 
Interzonal Tournament, I happily disposed 
of a quartet of Yugoslav grandmasters - 
Marjanovic, Knezevic (although I had a 
rather dubious position), Bukic and Vukic! 9 
out of 10!!
The most crucial encounter was the one 
with Milan Vukic. Before the start of the 
tournament, like the opponents of the 
young Capablanca in San Sebastian 1911, 
he had been openly complaining that the
170

Adult Games
organisers had invited a player whom no 
one knew. 'Kasparov doesn't even have an 
international rating!' he complained. 'The 
Russians are sending us children. They are 
insulting 
us.’ 
However, 
the 
spectators 
apparently thought differently and they 
were on my side. They gave me especially 
strong support during my game with Vukic. 
The grandmaster took offence at the audi­
ence and even began arguing with them, 
but someone shouted to him: 'You should 
be playing chess, not disputing rights'. My 
win created a storm of delight in the audi­
torium. Never before had I enjoyed such 
enthusiastic support!
Incidentally, not only Vukic, but also 
some ofhis colleagues were afraid oflosing 
rating points playing against an opponent 
who did not yet have a rating, and they 
expressed their dissatisfaction with my 
participation in the tournament. However, 
as in Minsk 1978, as soon as I began gather­
ing points all these conversations died 
down.
Strictly speaking, I had earned an inter­
national rating of 2545 back in the 1978 
USSR Championship Premier League. How­
ever, although by FIDE rules a rating should 
be assigned to a player on the result of his 
first rated tournament, no one was in a 
hurry to give me an Elo rating. The Moscow 
chess officials cynically stated.'There's 
plenty of time fo r that'. But if I had been 
assigned a rating starting from scratch on 
my result in Banja Luka, it would have been 
2695, while after ten rounds it even 
reached 2800, higher than Fischer’s record!
I remember how at the time Andras Ador- 
jan said with a laugh: 'Don’t worry: now 
they will quickly assign you your Soviet 
rating'. And that is what happened: to­
wards the end of the tournament suddenly 
I at last received my lawful 2545, and then
an additional 30 points for Banja Luka.
A few years later, with 9 points out of 10,
I would have fought for a super-result. But 
then, 
after making quick draws with 
Andersson, 
Matanovic 
and 
Guillermo 
Garcia, two rounds before the finish I had 
already guaranteed myself sole first place 
in the tournament and had achieved not 
only the international master norm, but 
also my first grandmaster norm! My fight­
ing 
spirit evaporated. The concluding 
games, with Kurajica and Adorjan, also took 
place 'in a spirit of peace and mutual 
understanding', and all the same the mar­
gin over my nearest rivals remained two 
points. I was happy with my performance, 
although later I slightly regretted that I had 
not tried to squeeze the maximum...
From a telephone interview with Petro­
sian: 'Garik is undoubtedly a great talent. 
His dynamic, interesting play was a particu­
lar feature o fth e tournament. Many chess 
fans came specially to the Large Hall ofthe 
House of Culture to see Kasparov. In Yugo­
slav newspapers he is constantly compared 
with Robert Fischer.'
Bozidar Djurasevic: 'The results of the 
tournament in Banja Luka were sensational: 
by a wide margin, victory was gained by a
16-year-old schoolboy from  Baku, Garik 
Kasparov. Our experts assess exceptionally 
highly the creative and competitive poten­
tial of this talented master. Kasparov cer­
tainly has a great future. There can be no 
doubt that very soon Garik will be joining 
thefightfor the world chess crown'.
Robert Wade: 'Kasparov's remarkable per­
formance here should forever enshrine the 
tournament among the epics of chess. Is 
there such a precedent in chess history? 
Robert J. Fischer at Zurich 1959 (3rd to Tal)? 
Boris Spassky at Bucharest 1953? Both were
16.'
171

Garry Kasparov on Garry Kasparov: Part One
When I returned to Baku, another event 
occurred that was important for my career: 
on 14th May 1979 my mother and I were 
invited to meet the leader of Azerbaijan, 
Geidar Aliev. One of the participants at this 
meeting, the journalist Valery Asriyan, 
recalls: 'This was some news - Aliev invites 
Kasparov! A genuine sensation. True, after 
his victory in Banja Luka Garik was a hero... 
Nevertheless, the very fact that the First 
Secretary o f the Azerbaijan Communist 
Party Central Committee and Candidate 
Member ofthe Politburo meets a ninth-year 
schoolboy could not help be a surprise. This 
had never happened before!'
Nikitin: 'From this moment the Azerbaijan 
sports authorities began providing all the 
assistance needed for the further improve­
ment ofthe swiftly-rising chess star. Kasparov
resorted to Aliev's assistance only in extreme 
cases, when nothing else could restore delib­
erately flouted justice. I have no doubt that 
without the support of this outstanding 
leader, Garry would never have got through 
to the match with Karpov in 1984.'
I had only a short rest after successfully 
completing the ninth class at school. While 
still in a state of victorious euphoria, I did 
not play my best for Azerbaijan in the USSR 
Team Championship (Moscow, July 1979) - 
in the semi-final, although I again defeated 
Polugayevsky, I scored just 2 out of 4, and 
our team only qualified for the C Final. There 
I scored 31/2 out of 4. but this was faint 
consolation - not the same standard of 
opponent... The lesson received forced me 
again to get down to serious work on chess. I 
had to prepare for the Premier League.
First 'Bronze'
47th USSR Championship Premier League (Minsk, 29th November - 27th December 1979)
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
1 Geller
*
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
1
X
1
1
1
X
X
X
1
1
1 1 /
2 Yusupov
X
•
o
X
X
1
1
1
X
X
Yz Yz 1
1
Yz 1
Yz o
101/2
3 Kasparov
y,
1
•
y,
y,
1
1
1
0
y,
0
y,
y,
y,
1
1
0
y,
10
4
Balashov
Yz X
Yz •
Yz Yz Yz Yz Yz Yz Yz Yz 1
Yz Yz Yz 1
1
10
5
vehc
raka
M
Yz Yz Yz X
*
X
1
0
1
X
0
X
Yz X
1
X
y,
1
91/2
6 Georgadze
Yz 0
0
X
X
*
1
1
X
X
0
1
0
1
1
Yz Yz 1
91/2
7
ikhi
icei
rpuK
Yz 0
0
y,
0
0
*
1
1
1
y,
1
1
Yz Yz 0
1
1
91/2
8
niani
aga
>
Yz 0
0
Yz 1
0
0
•
1
y,
Yz 0
1
1
Yz 1
1
Yz 9
9 Lerner
O Yz 1
Yz O Yz 0
0
•
Yz 1
Yz Yz Yz 1
1
Yz Yz
81/2
10
Rashkovsky Yz Yz Yz Yz Yz Yz o
Yz y,
•
1
Yz Yz Yz 0
Yz Yz y,
8
11
yksv
.2
B
0
Yz 1
Yz 1
1
X
Yz 0
0
*
Yz 0
0
0
1
1
Yz 8
12
Razuvaev
o
Yz Yz Yz Yz o
o
1
Yz Yz Yz •
Yz Yz 1
Yz Yz Yz 8
13
Romanishin o
0
Yz o
Yz 1
o
o
Yz Yz 1
Yz •
1
1
Yz o
1
8
14
Tal
Yz o
Yz Yz Yz o
Yz o
Yz Yz 1
Yz o
*
Yz o
1
1
7 /
15
Dolmatov
Yz Yz 0
Yz 0
0
Yz Yz 0
1
1
0
0
Yz •
1
1
Yz 71/2
16
Sveshnikov
Yz 0
o
Yz Yz Yz 1
o
o
Yz o
Yz Yz 1
o
*
1
Yz 7
17
Anikaev
o
Yz 1
o
Yz Yz o
o
Yz Yz o
Yz 1
o
o
o
•
Yz 51/2
18
o
yksvokhses
1-
1
Yz o
o
o
o
Yz Yz Yz Yz Yz o
o
Yz Yz Yz •
5/
172

Adult Games
In the autumn of 1979, before the cham­
pionship of the country, I played three 
games in Baku in a local team tournament 
and, by tradition, a training match with 
Magerramov. The preparation was serious. 
Two months before the championship 
Botvinnik wrote to me: 'What concerns me 
most of all isyour play with Black. Afteryour 
success in Banja Luka they will be pulling 
out all the stops against you, especially with 
White. Therefore with Black you should play 
solid variations, without any risk. However, 
passive play is not fo r you - the variations 
must without fail have opportunities fo r 
counterplay'.
N ikitin-'The three-month work plan 
which I compiled included chess, physical 
and psychological preparation, including 
auto-training. A major repair of variations 
already tested plus excellent competitive 
form  enabled Garry to conduct the first half 
of games more intensively than earlier, 
withoutfearing tiredness in thefifth hour of 
play. And, as a result, we had no particular 
opening problems.'
After the Sokol sky Memorial I considered 
Minsk to be a lucky city for me and I again 
travelled there with great hopes, intending 
not only to consolidate my place in the 
Premier League, but also to endeavour to 
improve on my previous year's result. 
Incidentally, this Premier League promised 
to be especially interesting: the participa­
tion of the world champion was expected. 
But literally just before the drawing of lots, 
Karpov pulled out, referring to the recent 
birth of his son . .. And so a reserve partici­
pant was allowed into the tournament - 
19-year-old Artur Yusupov, who fully justi­
fied the saying about a player included at 
the last moment doing well: he won the 
silver medal and the title of grandmaster!
Initially I played very cautiously - so
much so, that the chief arbiter Salo Flohr, 
an old friend and rival of Botvinnik from 
back in the 1930s, was surprised by my 
unusual restraint. 'No sacrifices - more in 
the style of Karpov or Petrosian,' he said 
about my first round win over Tamaz 
Georgadze, one of the heroes of the previ­
ous championship, who on his home 
ground in Tbilisi had not suffered a single 
loss. But other experts thought that 'this 
game is of undoubted interest, revealing 
features of the chess character of the young 
playerfrom Baku.'
Came 34 
G .Kasp aro v-T.G eo rgad ze
47th USSR Championship, 
1st round, Minsk 30.11.1979 
Philidor Defence C41
1 e4
A year earlier I opened 1 d4, but did not 
achieve anything in a Queen's Gambit - the 
game ended in a quick draw, and so this 
time I decided to try 'serving from the 
right'.
1 ...e5 2 iLlf3 d6
The Tbilisi grandmaster's first two moves 
came as a surprise to me. Before this Geor­
gadze was faithful to 1 ...c5, and, in particu­
lar, he used to employ (like, incidentally, my 
3rd round opponent - Yusupov) the Chely­
abinsk Variation, for which my trainer and I 
had prepared. And suddenly the Philidor 
Defence!
3 &C4 (8)
After some thought I made a psychologi­
cally strong move - I avoided the main line, 
with which my opponent was more famil­
iar. If 3 d4 there could have followed
3...exd4 4 4Jxd4 ttJf6 5 tLlc3 ii.e7 6 g3 d5 
(Geller-Georgadze, 3rd round), 6 &e2 0-0 7
173

Garry Kasparov on Garry Kasparov: Part One
0-0 a6 (Tseshkovsky-Georgadze, 7th round) 
or 6 ..tf4 0-0 7 ®d2 d5!? with very sharp 
play, demanding extensive preparation.
3 ... ; e7 4 d3
Finally avoiding 4 d4 exd4 5 t2Jxd4 ctJf6 6 
li:Jc3 o-o (011-Georgadze, Malaga 1991). 
White answers a surprise with cunning, by 
choosing a rare development set-up, after 
which for a long time Black has to manoeu­
vre without any concrete aim, in a situation 
unfamiliar for a Sicilian player, which 
should cause him definite discomfort. As in 
fact happened!
4...ctJf6 5 c3 0-0 6 0-0 c6 (a more flexible set­
up than 6...t2Jc6, transposing into a 'pianis­
simo' Two Knights) 7 ^b3 (6) 7... ..te6
8 ii.c2 (8)
This bishop retreat apparently distressed 
Georgadze (here I recall that in the ancient 
Kurs debyutov against 3 il.c4 Vasily Panov 
recommended the immediate 
3 ...ii.e6), 
although it is a logical consequence of 
White's opening strategy: he is playing the 
Ruy Lopez. But what is Black playing?
8...h6
Naturally, Black strives to preserve his 
bishop from exchange by the knight. In the 
event of 8...t2Jbd7 9 .Me1 (9 tLlg5 il.g4)
9...®c7 10 d4 J:e8 11 h3 all the same there 
does not appear to be a more suitable move
than 1L.h6.
9 Se1 (3) 9...C'Z:Jbd7 10 t2Jbd2 (10) 10. ..#c7 11 
d4
Of course, the ...d6-d5 advance should 
not be allowed. By being the first to ad­
vance his d-pawn, White retains a slight 
initiative.
11...l:tfe8
Black could have played 11...il.g4 (after 
which there would have followed 12 h3
ii.h5 13 t2Jf1), but he chooses a restrained 
continuation, which for the moment does 
not oblige him to disclose his plans.
12 h3 (11) 12...li:Jf8
A typical knight manoeuvre to g6. After
12 ...l:tad8, completing Black's development, 
I would also have replied 13 c4.
13 c4!? (6)
After first denying Black the g4-square, 
White unexpectedly changes the general 
pattern of the position and seizes space in 
the centre. The quiet 13 t2Jf1 tLlg6 14 tLlg3 
.Mad8 15 .id 2 also promised him slightly 
the better chances.
13...t2Jg6
Black allows the further advance of the 
d-pawn, possibly fearing 13 ...exd4 14 tLlxd4 
'iVb6! 15 ctJ2f3!? (White has to sacrifice a 
pawn: after 15 t2Jxe6 t2Jxe6 16 ctJf3 ctJd7 he 
cannot expect anything) 15. ...ixc4 16 ctJf5
174

Adult Games
.l:!.ad8 17 b3 &e6 18 tt:Jxe7+ Sxe7 19 &b2 
with fair compensation for the minimal 
material deficit.
14 dS -&d7 15 tt'lb1! (7)
The routine 15 tt:Jfl would have weak­
ened White's fighting potential on the 
queenside - 15 ...cxds 16 cxds fiac8 etc. But 
now he is planning an offensive with etJc3, 
&d2, b2-b4 and so on.
Incidentally, 
among 
my 
memorable 
games this is the third where the return of 
the queen's knight to b1 occurred (cf. Game 
Nos. 18 and 24).
1S...jL,f8?!
Black does not sense the danger. In the 
quest for counter-chances he should have 
opened the c-file - 15...cxd5 16 cxds and 
after 16...b5 begun ‘5panish' counterplay 
on the queenside, with, for example, the 
following piece arrangement in mind: 
...Bec8, ...'i^7, .....ie7-d8-b6(a5) and in some 
cases ...tt'lhs.
16 tt:Jc3 c5?
And this is already a serious positional 
mistake (Tarrasch would have written 
'decisive'), the direct consequence of Black's 
discomfort and psychological problems. 
Georgadze was aiming to avoid the ‘dan­
gerous' opening ofthe position, and to play 
as solidly as possible, but here ‘solidly'
signifies passively. Even with a loss of time, 
he should have reverted to the plan with 
...cxd5.
17 i.a4! (4)
With this central pawn structure it has 
become advantageous for White to ex­
change the light-square bishops, especially 
since the prospects for the remaining dark- 
square bishops are so different.
17...a6 18 ..ixd7 tt:Jxd7?!
A loss of time. 18. ..'i!Vxd7 was more logi­
cal, after which I liked 19 a3 (after the 
constricting 19 a4 White has to reckon with
19 . .. a5, when he has only one wing remain­
ing, although even here after 20 <it>h2 and 
g2-g3 his chances are clearly better) 19...b5
20 i.e 3 , not preventing the opponent from 
opening the queenside. After 20....l:!.eb8 21 
etJd2 ..ie7 22 'i:Ve2 sooner or later White 
would have advanced b2-b4, and with 
enormous effect, since on this part of the 
battlefield he has more pieces. Even so, for 
Black this was the lesser evil.
19 g3 (7)
Now White also begins cramping the 
enemy forces on the king side.
19.....ie7 20 h4 tt'lf6 21 tt'lh2 'i!Vd7 22 a4 Wh3
This demonstration of activity was ac­
companied by - a peace offer! I should 
mention that here the blocking of the
175

Garry Kasparov on Garry Kasparov: Part One
queenside by 22...a5 was now unattractive 
in view of 23 ®f3 and ctJd1-e3 (preventing 
...f7-f5), when Black begins to suffocate.
23 l f 3  (3) 23...^d7
And this ‘backward spurt' is explained by 
a sober assessment of the situation after 
White's declining of the draw. 23 ....i.d8 24 
a5 b5 25 axb6 ..ltxb6 or 24. .Sb8 and ...b7-b6 
(in order to answer axb6 with ...Bxb6) was 
possibly more resilient, but in time-trouble 
it is not easy to take such a committing 
decision. Georgadze gives up ideas of 
counterplay and switches to exclusively 
passive defence, relying on the solidity of 
his pawn chain.
24 as (2)
It becomes obvious that Black has wasted 
too much time. White dominates on both 
wings.
24...ctJf8 (if 24....i.d8, then 25 'ig2, and
25...b6? 26 axb6 .i.xb6? is no longer possible 
because of 27 h5 and ..ltxh6) 25 ..ltd2 (5)
25....Uec8 26 lLlfl (11)
Black's problem is that, with extremely 
restricted space for manoeuvring, he has to 
parry threats by the far more mobile white 
army. Now 27 ctJe3 is threatened.
26...ctJg4
A forced reply: to allow ctJe3 would be too 
dangerous (and ...g7-g6 would be a new
weakening). But now the black queen is 
tied to the d7-square, and the switching of 
the f8-knight to the vicinity of the queen- 
side has become impossible, which White 
exploits by immediately opening up the 
play on that wing.
27 ct:Ja4 (7) 27....i.d8 28 Ie c 1 Sab8
29 b4!
The start of the decisive offensive. As 
they say in such cases, the rest is a matter 
of technique.
29...cxb4 30 ii.xb4 hs
The quest for success in an open battle -
30...b5? 31 axb6 .i.xb6 32 c5 dxc5 33 ii.xc5 
.i.xc5 34 ct:Jxc5 Bxc5 would have ended in 
failure for Black after 35 Oxc5 .l:.b2 36 ctJe3 
ct:Jxf2 37 Oc2!. And if the knight deserts its 
post with 30...ctJf6 31 ctJe3 g6 both 32 l:Icb1 
and the immediate 32 c5! are good.
31 ct:Jb6
A perfectly safe continuation in the op­
ponent's time-trouble: I did not want to 
allow Black even a hint of counterplay.
The line I give in The Test of Time - 31 
#d3(?) b5 32 axb6 .i.xb6 33 ct:Jxb6 (33 c5 
.Ita7!) 33. ...Mxb6 34 = a3 is less good in view 
of 34...®a7! with unnecessary complica­
tions (35 c5 dxc5 36 BxcS?! ct:Jxf2! or 35 ctJe3 
l2ld7). But 31 Wa3!? was the most 'com­
puter-like' way to win: 31....i.c7 32 c5 dxc5
176

Adult Games
33 tt:lxc5 Wb5 34 f3 tt:lf6 35 '2ld3 tt:lg6 36 
'it>g2 or 31. ..b5 32 axb6 &xb6 33 tt:lxb6 (33 
&xd6!?) 33. ..l:txb6 34 f3 tt:lf6 (34. ..l:tcb8 35 
&xd6!) 35 c5 dxc5 36 ,&xc5 etc.
31...^xb6 32 axb6
Now, if the c-file is opened, the b6-pawn 
ensures White an outpost at c7.
32...'ife7 (if 32...'i¥d8 again 33 'iVa3! was 
very strong - but not 33 c5 '2ld7! -
33 ...i:Yxb6 34 .Ua2 l:td8 35 &a5 and wins) 33 
'iYa3
33....l:.d8
When your flag is hanging it is hard to 
decide on a positional exchange sacrifice -
33 ....l:.c5!? 34 - xc5 dxc5, but this would 
have prolonged the resistance. However, 
after 35 tt:le3 (35 f3 tt:lf6 36 tt:le3 will also do)
35 ...tt:lxe3 36 'iYxe3 tt:ld7 37 Scb1 or 37 'i.!Vg5 
(the computer), or perhaps even 37 d6!? 
(my recommendation from The Test of 
Time) White would have gradually de­
stroyed the opponent’s defences.
34 f3 (9) 34...'2lh6 (34. ..tt:lf6 35 tt:le3 or 35 c5)
35 c5 dxc5 36 &xc5 Wf6 37 'itg2 :.eS 38 
.ke3 tt:ld7 39 .Uabl We7
This leads to a loss of material, but it was 
also impossible to hold the position after
39 ...Bbc8 40 li.c7 Sxc7 41 bxc7 b5 42 Sc1.
40 Wxe7
And here, without managing to play
40....Mxe7, Black lost on time (1-0). But even 
without this the obvious 41 ltc7 would 
have led to the immediate collapse of his 
position. Times: 2.18-2.30.
My next win, in the 2nd round against 
Sveshnikov, was also achieved by solid 
positional play, in an 'insipid' endgame 
with symmetrical pawns (it is true that I 
made an error, but my opponent failed to 
exploit it and I transposed into a winning 
pawn ending).
But in the 3rd round I came out ofhiding 
and won against Yusupov (who had also 
started with 2 out of 2) in a style which one 
commentator even compared with that of 
Alekhine. My own commentary was closer 
to reality: ‘Artur and I are friends; we both 
studied in Botvinnik’s school. Before this we 
had played each other only in junior com­
petitions. And now - our first “adult" 
encounter, and immediately in the cham­
pionship of the country! In Minsk Artur was 
making his debut in the Premier League, 
and it turned out that I, as an “old-timer", 
was examining him. But I won surprisingly 
easily.’
Came 35 
G.Kaspa rov-A. Yusupov
47th USSR Championship, 
3rd round, Minsk 2.12.1979 
Ruy Lopez C83
1 e4 e5 2 tt:lf3 tt:lc6
Before the autumn of that year Yusu- 
pov's 
repertoire 
comprised 
the 
sharp 
Chelyabinsk Variation and the quiet Petroff 
Defence. But in the First League Artur had 
already employed the Open Variation ofthe 
Ruy Lopez, which became fashionable after 
the Karpov-Korchnoi match (Baguio 1978).
177

Garry Kasparov on Garry Kasparov: Part One
3 .i.b5 a6 4 i.a 4  lt:Jf6 5 0-0 lt:Jxe4 6 d4 b5 7 
i.b3 d5 8 dxe5 .i.e6 9 i.e3
At the time this was a rare, little-studied 
continuation, which my opponent might 
not even have looked at in his preparations. 
The 'main' variations with 9 c3, 9 'iVe2 or 9 
lt:Jbd2 lt:Jc5 10 c3 were certainly well known 
to Yusupov.
9...i.e7
The Encyclopaedia of Chess Openings 
(1974) promised Black easy equality after
9 ... lt:Ja5, but the game Kupreichik-Slutsky 
(Moscow 1979) shook this assessment: 10 
lt:Jd4 'Wid7 11 'ie 1 ct:Jxb3 (11...lt:Jc6!?) 12 axb3 
.i.e7 13 b4 c5 14 lt:Jxe6 fxe6 15 f3 with 
advantage to White. In the early 1980s the 
move 9 .i.e3 became popular, and the 2nd 
edition of ECO no longer recommended
9 ...lt:Ja5.
On the other hand, 9....i.c5 often occurs, 
for example: 10 'i'd3 (10 'i'e2!? 0-0 11 lid l 
leads to a tabiya of the variation with 9 
'i¥e2) 10...0-0 11 lt:Jc3 lt:Jb4 12 'Wie2 lt:Jxc3 13 
bxc3 i.xe3 14 'i!Vxe3 lt:Jc6 15 a4 lt:Ja5 
(15...'ife7!?, Svidler-Carlsen, Baku 2008) 16 
axb5 (16 lt:Jd4 is more interesting) 16. ..axb5 
17 'irc5 c6 (Kholmov-Antoshin, 35th USSR 
Championship, Kharkov 1967) or 17 lt:Jd4 
"iVe8 18 f4 c5 (Kasparov-Kramnik, 4th match 
game, Moscow 2001), in both cases with 
equality.
10 lt:Jbd2
The theory of this line was in its infancy, 
and it was only later that 10 c3! was 
deemed more accurate. After this, apart 
from 10...0-0 11 lt:Jbd2 (transposing into a 
position from the game), Black has two 
other possibilities - one more solid ('classi­
cal') and one more sharp (‘modern'):
a) 
10...'iWd7 11 ct:Jbd2 2d8 (11...CDxd2 12 
"iVxd2 lt:Ja5 13 i.g5!?, A.Sokolov-Yusupov, 
Montpellier Candidates 1985) 12 .l:i.el 0-0
13 i.c2 f5 (13....i.f5!? is more solid, Dolma­
tov-Yusupov, 1st match game, Wijk aan Zee 
1991) 14 exf6 ct:Jxf6 15 a4! lt:Jg4?! 16 axb5 
axb5 17 i.d 4  lt:Jxd4 (Kasparov-Shirov, Izmir 
2004) 18 cxd4! with advantage to White;
b) lO...CDc5 11 ! c2 lt:Jd7 (11...i.g4 12 
lt:Jbd2 with the idea of 'ib1) 12 J:!e1 (not 12
i.f 4  g5!) 12...lt:Jdxe5 (more risky, but more 
principled than 12... 0-0 13 i.f4 , Dolmatov- 
Yusupov, 7th match game, Wijk aan Zee 
1991) 13 ct:Jxe5 ct:Jxe5 14 i.d 4 f6 or 14. ..lt:Jg6 
(a 
fresh 
example: 
Balogh-Mikhalevsky,
Olympiad, Khanty-Mansiysk 2010), and for 
the moment Black parries all the attacks.
10...0-0 (l0...ct:Jc5! is more accurate, and if
11 
c3 lt:Jd3!, Panchenko-Tukmakov, Tash­
kent 1980) 11 c3 (19)
And so after all the game transposes into 
a line of the old variation with 9 c3. 11 
ct:Jxe4 is altogether harmless: 11...dxe4 12 
.i.xe6 fxe6 13 'ixd 8 Saxd8 14 lt:Jd2 lt:Jxe5 15 
lt:Jxe4 lt:Jc4 or 13 lt:Jd2 'id 5 14 'tj'g4 lt:Jxe5 15 
'iVxe4 Sad8.
11...i.g4
11...lt:Jxd2 12 'Wixd2 'Wid7 or 11...'it'd7 is 
considered more or less reliable. However, 
in my opinion, the bishop move is also 
better than its tarnished reputation.
12 ct:Jxe4 (5)
12 
h3 is interesting: 12. ..lt:Jxd2 13 hxg4!? 
(instead of the ancient 13 'ixd2 
xf3 14
178

Adult Games
gxf3 4:lxe5, Leffmann-Gunsberg, Nurem­
berg 1883) 13...4:lxf1 (after 13...4:lxf3+ 14 
gxf3 4:lxe5 15 Wxd5 the two bishops give 
White some advantage) 14 W xfl 4:la5 15 
gxd5 c6 16 ge4 with compensation for the 
exchange 
(Smagin-Kotliar, 
Philadelphia
1989).
12...dxe4 13 'i!Yds
White has no particular choice: 13 &d5 
4:lxe5! is equal (Geller-Korchnoi, Curacao 
Candidates 1962). As it later transpired, the 
further lines with 13 . ..exf3 and 13...®xd5 
were briefly considered in the ECO of that 
time. But at the board, both players, begin­
ning with 10 4Jbd2, were playing 'at sight' 
and with each move were ‘reinventing the 
wheel' ...
13...exf3
After the game Artur maintained that 
the endgame after 13 ...'iVxd5 14 gxd5 exf3
15 gxc6 fxg2 was safe for Black. This is not 
altogether so: in the event of 16 'ixg2 (16 
l:tfc1 
l:tab8!, 
Sadvakasov-Korchnoi, 
2nd 
match game, Astana 2003) 16. ..l:tad8 the 
typical undermining move 17 a4 gives 
White a small but enduring advantage 
(Alekhine-Teichmann, 4th match game, 
Berlin 1921).
16...l:tab8!? is more interesting, with the 
idea of 17 a4 bxa4! 18 l:!.xa4 &e2 with
equality, while if 17 h3 (Adams-Fressinet, 
Bastia 2005), then 17 ...ge6! 18 f4 f6. Or 17 
b4 f6! 18 gd5+!? (18 f4 l:tbd8 with equality, 
Kosteniuk-Ernst, 
Wijk 
aan 
Zee 
2005)
18...Wh8 19 f3 g f5  20 e6 gd6 21 Sfe1 Sfe8, 
and White is probably unable to break 
through.
14 "i¥xc6 fxg2 15 Wxg2 'iVd7 16 g h 6! (12) 
After some thought, I found this garish 
move - without it White has no hopes of an 
advantage: 16 'ifg3 l:tad8 17 f3 gf5 with 
equality (Wolf-Tarrasch, Mahrisch Ostrau 
1923). The unexpected turn of events - now 
a kind of tactical commotion begins - 
unsettled Artur: he sank into thought and 
on the next move but one he committed a 
fatal mistake!
16...gxh6 17 f3
17 
e6 is unproductive: 
17 ...fxe6 18 
#xg4+ Wh8 19 'it'xe6 #xe6 20 gxe6 gc5 21 
l:tae1 l:tae8 with equality (Michel-Najdorf, 
Mar del Plata 1941).
17...hs?
This leads to disaster (how high the value 
of a move is in an open position!). Intui­
tively I realised this immediately, on seeing 
the main weakness of Black's position - the 
vulnerability ofhis bishop on e7 and his f7- 
point. 17 ...gc5+?! 18 Wh1 l:tae8 (suggested 
in ECO) is also inadequate: 19 l:tae1 'iVc6 20
179

Garry Kasparov on Garry Kasparov: Part One
l:!.e4! and fxg4 with powerful pressure, as is
17...'it>h8?! 18 fxg4 h5 (18. ..Sg8 19 h3 h5? 20 
.l:adl!) 19 Sxf7! &c5+ 20 'it>hl 't!Vxg4 21 
Wxg4 hxg4 22 Sxc7 with an extra pawn.
However, the accurate 17 ...:lae8! (com­
pleting 
development 
and 
threatening
18...6.5+ 19 4h1 Sxe5) 18 2ae1! h5 
(18... i  h4?! 19 Se2) 19 Wh1 1Vc6 would have 
enabled Black to fight for equality: 20 fxg4 
Wxg2+ 21 4xg2 3d8! or 20 Se4 Sd8 (but 
not 20... . : d6? 21 exd6 Sxe4 22 fxe4 and 
wins, Nunn-Heidrich, Bundesliga 1985) 21 
fxg4 l:!.d2!. Therefore 20 Se2 is better, 
although here too after 20. ..4g7 21 fxg4 
'ifxg2+ 22 Sxg2 h4 23 Sgf2 f6 24 e6 l:!.d8 
White's achievements are slight.
It follows that not only 13 ...\i!Vxd5 but also
13. ..exf3 is acceptable for Black, but here 
psychology played its part: after this game 
the variation disappeared from grandmas­
ter play.
18 .l:ad1! (3)
Only this, it turns out, is a novelty. Too 
little is given by 18 fxg4? \i!Vxg4 19 \i!Vxg4+ 
hxg4 20 l:!.f4 (Acosta-5zmetan, Bogota 1978)
20...fiae8 with equality.
1B...'il'f5
After 18 ...Wc6 19 fxg4 't!Vxg2+ 20 4xg2 
Sad8 (20...hxg4? 21 Sd7) 21 Sxd8 i xd8 22 
gxh5 c5 23 .i.d5 Black has an extremely
difficult 
endgame 
(23...i.c7? 
24 
e6!,
Cs.Horvath-Zlatohlavek, Gausdal 1986).
19 fxg4 'ixe5
It is hard to attach a question mark to 
this move - the defence after 19..\i!Vxg4 20 
.l:d7 .l:ae8 21 Sxc7 must have seemed very 
thankless to Yusupov.
20 .l:de1! (16)
The decisive move (in contrast to 20 
fixf7? 'ith8! or 20 Sf5? \i!Ve3+ 21 4h1 hxg4
22 'ifxg4+ Wh8 with equality). Black's 
downfall is caused by the open position of 
his king and the uncoordinated state of his 
pieces. Surprisingly, although he would 
appear to have a tempo for the defence, it 
is no longer possible to do anything.
20...#c5+ (20. . .Wd6 21 Sxf7! or 20...\i!Vg5 21 
fif5 'il'h4 22 l:!.e4! Wh8 23 g5 is bad for 
Black) 21 'it>h1
21....1:ad8
This loses a piece, but what can Black 
play? 21...fiae8 will not do: 22 Sf5 'iVb6 23 
gxh5+ 'it>h8 24 Ii.xf7 Sxf7 (24 . . f
 25 
Sxh7+ or 24. . .l!g8 25 Sexe7! Sxe7 26 
't!Vg7+!! is more picturesque) 25 &xf7 Sf8 
26 fig1 VWxgl+ (otherwise mate) 27 'V.INxg1! 
Sxf7 28 h6. White also has a decisive attack 
after 21...±h4 22 Sf5 ®d6 23 Sefl(g1) or
21....1.d6 22 .i:!.f5 'V/a7 23 gxh5+ 4h8 24 .l:!.g1 
Sg8 25 Sg5.
180

Adult Games
And after 21...c6, which is slightly more 
resilient, 22 :tfS 'i'd6 23 gxh5+ 'ith8 24
ii.xf7 is good for White, as is 22 'i'e4 .:!.a7 23 
SfS 'Wid6 24 1:ld1 il'h6 25 gxhs or 22 . ..ii.h4 
(22 . .. _^d8 23 .:!.xf7! l:.xf7 24 £xf7+) 23 :tfS 
flid6 24 S e fl 'i¥e7 (24. ...:1.a7 25 gxhs) 25 
'Wic2!, also with crushing threats.
22 l:.f5 Wd6 23 1id5 'ft'g6 24 Sxe7
Already here the curtain could have been 
lowered, but Artur, dismayed by such a 
blitzkrieg, played on through inertia.
24...1xd5 
25 -&xd5 hxg4 26 We4 (4)
26...'i!Vxe4+ 27 ii.xe4 .Ud8 28 Sxc7 hS 29 ii.c2 
(3) 29...fld5 30 .kb3 Sf5 31 Wg2 a5
32l:.xf7! (10)
Not essential, but flamboyant and effec­
tive: transposing into a pawn endgame is 
the quickest way to force capitulation.
32...l:.xf7 33 Wg3 a4 34 ^xf7+ <t.txf7 35 Wh4 
'it.>g6 36 b3 a3 37 c4 bxc4 38 bxc4 Wf5 39 
^xh5 'it>e4 40 'itxg4 *d 4  41 h4 1-0
White's pawn queens two moves earlier. 
Times: 2.14-2.24.
A hat-trick, as in Minsk 1978! From the 
press: 'The championship of the country 
began with a sensation - after three rounds 
the leader was Kasparov with a 100% result! 
His initial three convincing wins largely set 
the tone o f the entire competition.'
Then Kupreichik burst ahead, scoring 
five successive wins. Meanwhile I slowed 
down, making six draws - with Rashkovsky, 
Geller, Romanishin, Makarychev, Razuvaev 
and Tseshkovsky, although the play in these 
games was far from peaceful.
Nikitin: ‘The congratulations with which 
we were showered after this stunning start 
put the youngster in a state o f euphoria, 
and working with him became difficult. His 
following opponents displayed great tenac­
ity in defence, and after six successive draws 
the euphoria was replaced by irritation. 
Directives and calls fo r a little patience did 
not help.’
After nine rounds there were four lead­
ers - Kasparov, Kupreichik, Balashov and 
Yusupov. On the rest day I tried to divert 
myself from my tournament misfortunes - 
first I gave a ‘planned' simul' in the Poly­
technic Institute, and then in the evening 
Nikitin and I went to the cinema and 
watched an old American classic The Vi­
kings (later my mother complained that it 
had ‘over-excited' me).
For the 10th-round game with Lerner I 
arrived in a fighting mood and in a compli­
cated battle I gained a decisive advantage. 
But in my opponent's desperate time- 
trouble I suddenly became nervous and, 
although I still had nearly S0 minutes (!) on 
my clock, with my impulsive 36th move I 
ruined the fruits of the preceding intensive 
work, and then I altogether lost control over 
the situation and contrived to lose.
This cruel defeat signified the onset of a 
crisis, similar to that which occurred with 
me a year earlier in Tbilisi, between rounds
7 and 9. It is evident that at the age of 15­
16 the burden of leading such a super­
tournament as the USSR Championship 
Premier League was as yet more than my 
nervous system could bear. My play went to
181

Garry Kasparov on Garry Kasparov: Part One
pieces, and the result of each subsequent 
game become unpredictable.
In the 11th round I should have lost to 
Vaganian, but by some miracle I managed 
to hold out and then win in the endgame. 
In the 12th round I had an overwhelming 
advantage against Anikaev, but I again 
went wrong and earned a second nought. 
In the 13th round I obtained a good posi­
tion with Black against Beliavsky - and I 
lost literally in one move! A disaster!
The crowning point of this nightmarish 
period was my 14th-round game with 
Viktor Kupreichik, in which with White I 
rushed headlong into battle.
Game 36 
G.Kasparov-V.Kupreichik
47th USSR Championship, 
14th round, Minsk 22.12.1979 
Slav Defence D15
1 d4 ds 2 c4 c6 3 tLlf3 ttJf6 4 ctJc3 dxc4 5 e4 
b5 6 es ttJds 7 a4 e6 8 axbs ttJxc3 9 bxc3 
cxbs 10 ttJgs gb7 11 i+'hs Wd7 (11 .g6 12
Wg4 - Game No.1 in Volume Ill of My Great 
Predecessors) 12 ttJxh7? (2)
Oh honors: in a new variation for me I 
forgot to include the obligatory 12 ..!te2! 
and only after 12...gd5 - 13 ttJxh7, while if
12 ...h6, then 13 gf3! (Kasparov-Petursson, 
Olympiad, Malta 1980).
12...ltJc6 13 ttJxf8
13 
&e3 (13 ir'h4 ttJxd4!) 13 ...'iVd5! with 
the idea of 14 j£,e2 Wxg2 15 Ilf1 tLlb4! was 
little better for White.
Alexander Nikitin describes the acute 
sufferings he experienced that evening:
‘The demonstrator, after removing the 
bishop from f8, had only just placed the 
white knight there, when Ifelt a shiver down 
my spine: the move 13...'VI!Yxd4!! immediately
came to mind. The inevitability of White's 
defeat after 14 cxd4 11xh5 seemed so obvi­
ous, that my heart missed a beat and I 
reached in my pocket fo r a vasodilator.
"What a terrible run of misfortune the ill- 
fated game with Lerner has produced’’, I 
thought to myself. I looked at the stage, 
glanced at the culprit o f my sufferings, and I 
immediately realised that he too had seen 
the opponent's knock-out blow.
‘However, when he saw this Garry unex­
pectedly quickly composed himself and took 
the psychologically correct decision. He did 
not jump up and walk around the stage, as 
he would have often done before, but with 
an imperturbable and perhaps even self­
confident appearance he remained seated, 
demonstrating his readiness to continue the 
‘blitz'. Five minutes passed, then ten... Ku­
preichik sat and thought. Although after his 
brilliant start he had also become becalmed 
and was now almost on his last legs, it was 
hard to believe that this sharp-sighted and 
clever tactician would not notice the queen 
sacrifice...
‘A further ten tiring minutes passed, and I 
was now almost reconciled to the inevitable. 
Sitting alongside me in the hall was Borya 
Gelfand, the future famous grandmaster, 
but then a young first category player, 
whom I had been recommended to watch at 
the Petrosian school, and he suddenly asked 
in a perplexed whisper: “But what if Black 
takes the pawn with his queen?’’ Oh God! I 
went out into the foyer. Another half hour of 
torment rushed by imperceptibly, but when I 
returned to the hall Kupreichik had still not 
made a move. He was sitting calmly at the 
board, like a sphinx, hardly changing his 
pose. Only now he looked less cheerful, and 
in his bearing there was a hint of uncer­
tainty. Perhaps he might not see it?! And 
indeed, without satisfaction Viktor finally
182

Adult Games
made a move - he took the queen with his 
rook...'
13...Sxh5? 14 etJxd7 'ito>xd7 15 Sb1 ! a6 16 
^xc4 etJa5 17 ^f1 (8)
And on the 45th move Black resigned 
(1-0). Times: 2.00-2.31.
When in analysis after the game I 
showed Kupreichik 13 .. .'i'xd4, he almost 
jumped out of his seat! A real chess drama... 
Nikitin: ‘Somefour hours later we met Garik, 
who had not yet recovered from his suffer­
ings, but was happy and content after an 
accurately conducted ending and a much 
needed win. "Well done, Garinka, you didn't 
Jet on", said his mother about the oversight 
on the 13th (!) move. "You're growing up, 
lad", I added intentionally rather crudely. 
Yes, that evening the chess goddess Caissa 
graciously gave her young knight a helping 
hand...'
After this win the tournament no longer 
seemed so brutally 
exhausting. 
Three 
rounds before the finish, the slump sud­
denly came to an end. The following day 
without any particular anxiety I drew with 
Black against Balashov.
But in the 16th round, to be in conten­
tion for a medal I had to beat another 
acquaintance from the Botvinnik School 
and junior competitions - the 20-year-old
debutant in 
the championship Sergey 
Dolmatov, the winner of the First League 
and the world junior champion the previ­
ous year. Although in this tournament he 
was not performing very successfully, any 
kind of surpri se could be expected of him.
Came 37 
G.Kasparov-S.Dolmatov
47th USSR Championship, 
16th round, Minsk 24/25.12.1979 
Slav Defence 01 4
1 d4 d5 2 c4 c6 3 ltJf3 etJf6 4 cxd5
Why not 4 ctJc3 (Game Nos. 36, 65, 66, 82, 
93)? At that time many ideas were floating 
about in the Exchange Variation and it was 
not a drawing line, but a way of avoiding 
the Meran Variation, which for the moment 
the 
Dvoretsky-Yusupov-Dolmatov 
team 
knew better than I did.
4...cxd5 5 ctJc3 etJc6 6 ^f4
6...^f5
6...e6 is more passive, while transposing 
into the Chebanenko Variation by 6...a6!? 
acquired 'citizen's rights' only in the 1980s.
7 e3 e6 8 ^b5 ^d6
8...6b4?! 9 CUe5 is less good for Black 
(Game No.75 in Volume II of My Great
183

Garry Kasparov on Garry Kasparov: Part One
Predecessors), while the main defence is
8...lLld7 9 Wa4 (9 0-0 ii.e7 - Game No.74 in 
Volume Ill of My Great Predecessors) 9....l:!.c8 
(9...'ilfb6 10 lLJh4) 10 0-0 (little is promised 
by 10 ii.xc6 l:txc6 11 Wxa7 Wc8!) 10...a6 11 
gxc6 2xc6 12 Sfc1 ii.e7 13 tt:ld1 (if 13 lLle2, 
then 13. ..^ 6 ! 14 l:txc6 bxc6 with equality)
13 ...bs 14 "i?Nb3 1\Yc8 or 14...l:tc4 with double­
edged play. However, the move in the game 
is also, perhaps, not so bad.
9 tt:Jes (10)
9...1c8
In principle this is a loss of time, and 
Black should try to solve the problem of the 
c6-point in other ways:
a) 9 ...ii.xe5 10 gxc6+ (after 10 gxe5 2c8 
White's only hopes lie with his two bishops)
10...bxc6 11 ii.xe5 0-0 12 
xf6!? (12 0-0
lbd7 13 gd6 2e8 is equal - Kottnauer- 
Trifunovic, 
Beverwijk 
1962; 
Andersson- 
Yusupov, Linares 1983) 12. .."iVxf6 13 0-0 e5 
(Vera-Bellon, Malaga 1981) or 13. ..Bab8 and 
... e6-e5 - despite the chronic weakness of 
his c6-pawn and the c5-square, Black is 
close to equality;
b) 9 ...0-0!? (an interesting pawn sacrifice) 
10 ii.xc6 bxc6 11 tt:Jxc6 "id7 12 ii.xd6 (12 
lbe5 ^ 7 !) 12. ..#xd6 13 lbe5 (13 1\Ya4 tt:ld7!)
13. ...l:!.ab8 14 g4!? (if 14 Wd2, then 14. ..."i4
15 b3 .l:!.fc8 is good) 14. ..ii.g6 15 lLlxg6 fxg6!?
16 2b 1 e5 with active play, although for the 
moment White retains his extra material.
10 i.xc6 + (14)
Giving Black a backward pawn. After 10 
0-0 there can follow 10... ii.xe5 11 ii.xe5 0-0 
(H.Olafsson-Vusupov, Reykjavik 1985).
10. ..bxc6 11 0-0 0-0 12 2c1 #e7 (the at­
tempt to get rid of the weakness by 12 ... c5? 
does not work because of 13 tt:lb5) 13 lba4 
(14) 13.....ixes 14 i.x e s lLld7 15 tt:Jcs (11)
15 
g3 would nevertheless have allowed
15 ...c5.
1S...f6
The strong bishop should probably have 
been exchanged - 15 ... tt:Jxe5 16 dxe5, and 
now after both 16...2b8 17 Wd4 h 5 18 b4 or
17 ...l:tb5 (Malinichev-Zargarian, Volodarsky 
2007) 18 f3!, and 16... f6 17 Wd4 fxe5 18 
Wxe5 Wc7 19 f4 or 19 1\Yxc7 2xc7 20 f3 
Black merely has slightly the worse chances, 
whereas the move in the game adds to his 
problems. Dolmatov was hoping to set up a 
counterattack on the kingside, but White's 
attack on the queenside develops more 
quickly.
16 ii.g3 es 17 Wd2 (with the obvious inten­
tion of .l:!.c3 and 2fc1) 17 ...lLJb6?!
All in the same risky, 'counterattacking' 
spirit - Black also avoids the exchange of 
knights. 17. ...l:!.fe8 was better.
184

Adult Games
18 b3 e4?!
Black somehow cannot bring himself to 
return his knight with 18...'Lld7. In Informa­
tor I recommended 18 ... h5, since in the 
event of 19 h4 Black would have subse­
quently gained an opportunity to exploit 
the weakening of the kingside. But after the 
immediate closing of the centre he has an 
objectively difficult position.
19 tZ:la6 (19 l!c2!?) 19...h5 20 'ir'b4 (8)
20...#b7 21 'Llc5 Wie7 22 a4 (6)
22.^.g5?!
It was more resilient first to minimise 
the threat of a4-a5, by prophylactically 
defending the queen and vacating the f8- 
square for the knight: 22...J:!fe8 23 a5 tZ:ld7
24 'Lla6 'Llf8, and if 25 i.d6, then 25. ..'ir'f7
26 'Llb8 &d7 27 Sc2 h4 28 h3 tt:Je6 29 l!fc1 
'Lld8, or even better 22 ...l!f7!? 23 a5 tZ:ld7 24 
tZ:la6 tt:Jf8, practically forcing the transition 
into an endgame - 25 Wixe7 (25 i.d6?! 
i'!Vb7!) 25- .Sxe7, although even here after
26 tZ:lb4 SL.d7 27 l!c2 and l!fc1 Black would 
face a cheerless defence. Therefore in 
search of counter-chances Dolmatov aimed 
at any cost to keep the queens on.
23 a5 tt:Ja8
Now after 23...tZ:ld7 24 tt:Ja6! the ex­
change of queens is fatal for Black (the 
knight on d7 has taken the square for the 
bishop, from where it could defend the c6- 
pawn), while in the event of 24. ..1i'f7 25 
&c7 or 25 SL.d6 Sfd8 26 'iVb7 it is also hard 
to offer him any good advice.
24 tt:Ja6! 'iVe8?! 25 Sc2 h4 26 i.d 6 l!f7 27 
Sfc1 (threatening tt:Jb8 - White already has 
a decisive advantage) 27...Sg7 28 tZ:lb8! 
.;. d7 29 'ir'b7 (10)
29...'it>h7!
A brilliant reply! I was sure that the game 
was decided: 29...We6 30 'Llxd7 'Yixd7 31 
'Wixd7 .Uxd7 32 l!xc6 etc. But all is not yet so 
simple.
30 'tWxa8 (4)
It was also possible not to lose time on 
the capture of the 'dead' knight, for exam­
ple:
185

Garry Kasparov on Garry Kasparov: Part One
a) 30 b4 (threatening b4-b5) 30. ..'i+Ve6 31 
l2Jxd7 l:td8 (31...Wxd7 32 Wxd7) 32 tt:lxf6+ 
'i+Vxf6 3 3 k e  5 'Vj'xe 5 34 'Vj'xa8 (suggested by 
me in Informator, but 32 Exc6! is simpler) 
or 30. ..'i+Yd8 31 tlt'xa7 (only not 31 b5?? 
i.g4!) 31..ke8 32 tlt'c5 Sxb8 (32. ..lib7 33 
l2Ja6) 33 ’ xb8 'li'xb8 34 b5 llJc7 35 bxc6 and 
wins;
b) 30 'ixa7!? 't+Ye6 31 ka3 (the most ac­
curate: White has won a pawn and retained 
his powerful bishop) 31 .....ie8 32 'ilfxa8 h3
33 g3 i¥f5 34 f3 exf3 35 'it>f2 or 31. ..h3 32 
ti:lxd7 Sxd7 33 't+Ya6 Sdc7 34 gxh3, repelling 
the desperate attack (34...'Yi'xh3 35 k d 6!) 
and winning.
30...'\i'e6
31'ixa7!
White is obliged to return the piece, giv­
ing up his fine bishop. It would be suicidal 
to play 31 I!.xc6?? Jlxc6 32 Sxc6 Sd8!, when 
he cannot disentangle himself without 
losing material (33 j_,c7 'iVg4 34 S c1 l:c 8!). 
And if 31 Jl.c5?, then 31. ..j(e 8! with danger­
ous counterplay: 32 kxa7  (32 -\f8 l:tf7)
32 . ..h3 33 
c5 'i+Yg4 34 f3 exf3 35 g3 We4! 
36 'it>f2 f5 and f5-f4, or 32 !!.f1 h3 33 f4 exf3 
34l:txf3 hxg2 35 Sxg2 .ig 6! and ...j(e4.
31...'Ylxd6 32 l2Jxd7 Sxd7 33 'irb6 (33 l a 6!? 
l:tdc7 34 h3 i¥d7 35 b4 was also good, or
34. ..f5 35 'iVe2 'it>g6 36 Sc5) 33...Sdc7 34 a6
(6)
34 
b4 >je6(d7) 35 b5! etc. would have 
won more simply.
34...#d7
5ergey was already in serious time- 
trouble. If 34...h3 the correct reply is 35 b4!.
35 l:lal? (2)
A serious delay. There was still a win by
35 b4 h3 36 gxh3 (36 g3 'ig 4 37 'it>f1 'i+ff3 38 
a7! is also possible) 36...tlt'xh3 37 b5 'Yi'g4+
38 Wf1 Wh3+ (38 ...<4^6 39 a7) 39 <* e 1 'iVxh2
40 'i+fa5 Wh1+ 41 'it>d2 'Yi'h2 42 <it>d1 and b5- 
b6.
35...h3
‘Black has defended cleverly and created 
real counterplay.' (Yudovich)
36 gxh3 (9) 36...&g6!?
Vacating the h-file for the rook and leav­
ing the queen to defend against the ad­
vance of the a-pawn. In the event of
36 . . . 'iVxh3 nothing would have been given 
by either 37 Sca2 f5! and ...f5-f4, or 37 b4 
'Y!Ug4+ 38 Wf1 Wf3! 39 !!.ca2 (39 Sac1 f5!)
39..'it>g6! 40 a7 Sh7 41 # b 8! Ech8! (with 
the threat of ...Sxh2) 42 Wg1 S xa 7!.
However, 37 a7! '*'d7 (there is nothing 
else) 38 h3 Ma8 (38...li.b7 39 Wa6) 39 Wg2 
'it>g6 40 Ha6 and S xc 6 (while if 40. ..l:!h8, 
then first 41 Wf1!) would have led after 
exchanges to a rook endgame with an extra
186

Adult Games
pawn for White (and drawing chances for 
Black).
37 f3 (12)
An impulsive advance with the oppo­
nent's flag about to fall. After 37 b4 l!h8! I 
could no longer see a win: 38 b5 Sxh3 39 f3 
exf3 40 a7 .Uc8 41 a8# (41 bxc6 'ig4+ 42 
'ltfl l:.g3!) 41....l:!xa8 42 Sxa8 f2+ 43 Sxf2 
#g4+, or 38 S a c l Sxh3 39 Sxc6 (39 'if1  
l!xh2) 39 ...Hxc6 40 #xc6 #g4+ 41 'it'fl 
Sxe3! 42 #e8+ 'it>h6 with a draw. 38 a7 was 
also very unclear: 38...Scc8!? 39 h4 Sxh4 40 
'i¥b8 Shh8 41 Wg3 Sh3! 42 #g2 Sh4 43 f3 
Ba8 44 .l:!.ca2 'if5  with counterplay.
Apparently the immediate 37 a7!? was 
better, and if 37...l!a8 38 'it>g2 Sa(c)xa7 39 
l!xa7 !txa7 40 'i'xc6, although after 40...#f5
41 We8+ If7  42 Sc1 #f3 + 43 'it>g1 Wxh3 the 
open position of White's king makes it 
extremely hard for him to convert his extra 
pawn.
37...exf3 38 S f2 (4)
38...l:.a7?
An error in reply. 38...c5(?), given by me 
in Informator, is also insufficient in view of 
39 l!xf3 Sc6 40 #b5 cxd4 41 #d3+!. How­
ever, 38. ..#xh3! would have led to a draw: 
39 a7 #g4+ (or 39 ...Se7 immediately) 40 
W fl (40 Whl?! is worse: 40 ...Sh7! - with the 
threats of ...Sxh2+ and ...#g3 - 41 'ib8!
Bhh8 42 'i'd6 'ie4!) 40...'Wih3+ 41 'it>el Se7!
42 a8# Sxa8 43 Sxa8 #g4 44 'itf1 Sxe3 45 
'irb4 'ifl3+ 46 'it>g1 #g4+ with perpetual 
check.
39 fixf3 (now Black is simply ‘one and a 
half pawns down and without any coun­
terplay) 39...Sca8 40 b4 (with the terrible 
threat ofb4-b5) 40...'ic7!
With his last move before the time con­
trol 
Dolmatov 
demonstrates 
tenacious 
defence.
Here the game was adjourned and the 
arbiter asked me to seal my move. The 
resumption took place the following day.
41 'ilkcs? (17)
I had not yet calmed down after the time 
scramble, and with this sealed move I again 
put in jeopardy the win, which could have 
been achieved in the rook endgame after 41 
'ilkxc7 .l:!.xc7 42 e4! Sca7! (42...dxe4 43 Itc3)
43 B a fl Sf8 44 e5 Sxa6 (44. .. f5 45 h4!) 45 
l!xf6+ l!xf6 46 Hxf6+ 'ig7 47 b5 Sa4 48 
l!xc6 l!xd4 49 b6 l:[b4 50 'if2  (say, 50. . .Sb3
51 We2 'it>f7 52 'it>d2 Sxh3 53 Sc8 and wins).
The only plus point of my decision was 
that it came as a surprise to my opponent, 
whereas I was armed 'to the teeth' and 
during the adjournment session I spent 
only 9 minutes!
41...l:.xa6 42 lia fl Sa2
187

Garry Kasparov on Garry Kasparov: Part One
If 42...'i+Yd8 my trainers and I had pre­
pared 43 h4! with the idea of 43...gxh4 44 
'i+Yc2+ 'it>g7 45 'i+Yg2+ 'it>f7 46 'i+Vg5 and wins.
43 Bxf6+ 'it>h5 44 B1f2 Bxf2 (after 44. . .'i+Yh7 
45 'i+Vxc6 White wins) 45 flxf2 'i+Yh7 46 'i+Vc2 
.l:!.a1+?
This attempt to create counter-chances 
in the rook ending proves unsuccessful.
46...'i+Ye7! was far more resilient - this was 
the only problematic spot in our adjourn­
ment analysis. Here I did not see a clear 
win, neither do I see one now, although 
after 47 'i+Yd1+ 'it>g6 (47...'it>h6?! 48 'i+Yf3!) 48 
'i+Yc1 White has a clear advantage.
47 'it>g2 'i+Ye4+
47...'i+Ye7 is too late in view of 48 'i+Vf5! 
with the idea of Sc2 or .l:!.f4. 47...'i+Yxc2 is also 
hopeless: 48 .l:i.xc2 .Mel (48...Ba6 49 'it>g3) 49 
'it>f2 .l:!.h1 50 Hxc6 Ixh2+ 51 'it>g3.
48 'i+Vxe4 dxe4
‘A rook endgame has been reached. To 
win, first and foremost White needs to 
activate his forces.' (Yudovich)
49 d5!
The key idea of our home analysis, of 
which I was very proud. However, there was 
also a win by 49 .l:!.c2 'it>h4 50 d5! cxd5 51 
Hb2 .l:!.a6 52 b5 .l:!.b6 53 .l:!.b4 g4 54 hxg4 
'it>xg4 55 h3+.
49...cxd5 50 Sb2 .l:!.a6 51 b5 Sb6 52 'it>g3
'it>g6 53 «g4 'it>f6 54 Bb4l 'it>g6 55 h4
White creates another passed pawn, on 
the opposite wing, and he will be prepared 
to sacrifice it at a convenient moment, in 
order to divert the opponent's forces.
55...gxh4 56 'it>xh4 'it>f5 57 'it>g3 Bg6+
Two other lines from our analysis:
a) 57...\t>e5 58 h4 'it>d6 (58. ..Hg6+ 59 'it>h3)
59 'it>f4 'it>c5 60 .l:!.b1 d4 61 'it>xe4 (61 exd4+ is 
also good) 61....l:!.e6+ 62 'it>f5 Hxe3 63 b6 He8
64 b7 Sb8 65 'it>e4;
b) 57 ...'it>g5 58 h4+ 'it>f5 59 h5 'it>g5 60 h6! 
.l:!.xh6 61 b6 .l:!.h8 62 b7 .l:!.b8 63 .l:!.b5 'it>f6 64 
'it>f4 'it>e6 65 Sb6+ 'it>d7 66 'it>e5 'it>c7 67 Sb4, 
and in each case White wins.
58 'it>f2 Sh6 59 b6! Sxh2+ 60 'it>e1 Hh8 61 b7 
.l:!.b8 62 'it>d2 'it>e5 63 'it>c3
63...d4+
I was especially proud of the following 
precise variation which we found: 63...'it>d6 
64 'it>d4 'it>c6 6 5 Bb1 'it>d6 66 Sb6+ 'it>c7 67 
'it>c5 (67 Hb5!?) 67 ...d4 68 Sc6+! 'it>d7 69 
'it>b6! dxe3 70 Hc4! and wins.
64 exd4+ 'it>d5
64...'it>f4 would not have saved Black: 65 
'it>c4 (65 .l:i.b6!?) 65. ..'it>f3 66 d5 e3 67 'it>d3 e2
68 .l:!.e4 Sxb7 69 .l:!.e3+ 'it>f4 70 .l:!.xe2.
65 'it>d2 1-0 
Times: 2.55-3.07.
Just like a year earlier in Tbilisi, I con-
188

Adult Games
eluded the tournament with a game 
against Mikhail Tal. On top of the previous 
year’s ‘gold', in 1979 he had also gained 
triumphal victories at the ‘tournament of 
stars' in Montreal (together with Karpov), 
and at the Interzonal Tournament in Riga. 
However, in this championship the ex­
world champion (and a Candidate in the 
current cycle!) was unrecognisable and he 
looked exhausted from his efforts in the 
tournament. Up to the 14th round Tal was 
still holding out and he was on ‘plus one', 
but he was struck down by a very bad cold 
(he was coughing so terribly on the stage, 
that with a smile he even asked the chief 
arbiter: 'Salo Mikhailovich, put up a curtain, 
so that I don't infect the public'), and after 
three successive losses he dropped into the 
lower half of the tournament table.
The placing of the leaders before the 
17th round was as follows: Geller - 11, 
Yusupov - 10, Balashov, Kasparov and 
Makarychev - 91,!. On the concluding day 
all 
drew 
their 
games, 
apart 
from 
Makarychev, who lost with Black to Be- 
liavsky and finished half a step behind.
From the press: 'The hero of the second 
half of the tournament was Geller. Going 
through undefeated, he repeated his success 
of nearly quarter of a century earlier and he 
established an unusual record: never before 
in the championships of the country had the 
winner been older thanfifty! (In 193 7 Leven- 
fish was 49.) Kasparov, who shared 3rd-4th 
places, scored as many wins as the tourna­
ment winner - six, but he also lost three 
games. His result is also a record - never 
before in the championships of the country 
has a schoolboy won a medal.'
Soon afterwards grandmaster Salo Flohr 
wrote this in the magazine 64:
'Regarding our brilliant talent (wunder- 
kind?) Garik Kasparov I have heard many
good words, and I know his games. Here fo r 
the first time I had the opportunity and the 
great pleasure of seeing him play. Garik is 
like a fire at the chess board. He is impulsive 
(to his misfortune, sometimes excessively). 
He passionately loves chess, and he clearly 
prefers to playfor a win. But how he suffers 
after a loss! He loses his appetite and he 
can't sleep, which, however, is not good.
'Kasparov and Yusupov are good lads (and 
not only because they occupied high places). I 
very much liked it when Kasparov would not 
agree that he could have finished first. He 
objected: no, no, Geller played more strongly. 
Yusupov had this to say: fo r everything that I 
know about chess I am indebted to my 
trainer Mark Dvoretsky. Kasparov veryflatter- 
ingly and with gratitude referred to his 
prestigious chess teacher Mikhail Botvinnik.
'Incidentally, 
the youngster’s 
current 
helpers did not hide the fact that the ex­
world champion gave Kasparov valuable 
long-distance consultation and directives. 
According to Botvinnik’s plan, Kasparov 
should have finished in the top six. The 
young man violated this directive by sharing 
3rd-4th places with Balashov. Will Kasparov 
get into trouble from his strict teacher for 
this “violation"? In the 46th championship 
he was ninth, and in the 47th - 3rd-4th. 
What leap will Garry perform in the current, 
Olympic year? 
The following expression 
exists: five minutes away from  being a 
grandmaster. In my opinion, this expression 
is not appropriate fo r Kasparov, and about 
him it would be more correct to say: five 
seconds away from  being a grandmaster. ’
And on the pages of the magazine 
Shakhmaty v SSSR the championship was 
reviewed by another veteran of the chess 
scene - international master Mikhail Yudo- 
vich:
'A number of games were excellently con­
189

Garry Kasparov on Garry Kasparov: Part One
ducted by Botvinnik's pupil Garry Kasparov. 
Of course, this is a player who has a brilliant 
future. Of Kasparov’s deficiencies we must 
mention effusiveness typical o f his age, a 
striving to force events, and at times a 
certain recklessness. But in time all this will 
calm down and be put into place. I think I 
will not be wrong if I say that each new 
appearance by Garik will attract the atten­
tion o f the entire chess world. It is probable 
that at the age o f 16 no one has ever 
achieved such results, demonstrating versa­
tile and resourceful play, such as that, fo r 
example, against Dolmatov.
‘When in the games of a young player we 
see swift attacks, sacrifices and combina­
tions, this pleases, but does not surprise us. 
Such bursts are natural and are even to be 
expected. But when a 16-year-old player 
conducts a heavyweight battle, demonstrat­
ing strategic accuracy, tactical resourceful­
ness and fine technique - this is clear evi­
dence of his exclusivity. The same was seen 
when Capablanca, Botvinnik, Fischer and 
Karpov were young... ’
And so, in my second championship of 
the country I not only consolidated my 
place in the Premier League, but won a 
bronze medal, after which for the first time, 
but once and for all I was included in the 
USSR team. Over a period of six months my 
international rating rose by so points and 
by the start of 1980 it had reached 2S9S. 
Not bad, but still a whole 130 points behind 
Karpov. ..
European ‘Gold'
7th European Team Championship (Skara 
19-27 January 1980): 1. USSR - 361/2 out of 
S6; 2. Hungary - 29; 3. England - 281/2; 4. 
Yugoslavia - 28; s. Bulgaria - 271/2; 6. 
Czechoslovakia - 26; 7. Israel - 2S; 8. Swe­
den - 231/2. Victory for the Soviet team was
gained by Karpov, Tal (each 2/S), Petrosian 
(21/2/S), 
Polugayevsky 
(41/2/7), 
Geller, 
Balashov, Romanishin (each 4/6), Vaganian 
(41/2/6), reserves Yusupov (31/2/4) and Kas­
parov (SV2/6).
I never again had such a triumphal year 
as 1980: I became a grandmaster and I won 
four gold medals - three championship 
medals plus one for the successful comple­
tion of my schooling! As the press com­
mented, I ‘began my course to the “medal" 
year as a chubby, likeable lad, but ap­
proached the end as a lean youth with 
narrow shoulders and a slim neck'.
Three weeks after the championship of 
the country, Yusupov and I made our debuts 
for the USSR team in the European Team 
Championship, which took place in the small 
Swedish town of Skara, close to Gothenburg. 
Playing in the same team as Karpov, Tal and 
Petrosian was a great honour for a 16-year- 
old sch oolboy. Although I was only the 
second reserve, I felt on top of the world and 
I did my utmost tojustify the trust shown in 
me. Artur and I shared a room and together 
we scored more points than any other pair 
of contestants...
Nikitin: ‘Here fo r the first time Karpov 
saw Kasparov in action. They occupied 
diametrically opposite positions in the team 
line-up and played diametrically opposite 
roles in its performance. For various reasons, 
our three leaders at that time - Karpov, 
Petrosian and Tal - performed extremely 
poorly: out of 15 games they scored 13 
draws and 2 losses. And the convincing final 
victory of the Soviet team (by a margin of 
7V2 points) was in fact not easily achieved. 
After four rounds we were only half a point 
ahead of the Yugoslavs. I know how difficult 
it is to take risks in such situations, the more 
so fo r a young debutant in such a star- 
studded team. But in the 5th round match
190

Adult Games
with Czechoslovakia, Garry boldly sharpened 
the play - barely out o f the opening, he 
sacrificed a paw nfor the initiative and won 
in brilliant style.’
Came 38 
G.Kasparov-J.Pribyl
European Team Championship, 
5th round, Skara 24.01.1980 
Crunfe/d Defence D85
1 d4 tt:Jf6 2 c4 g6 3 lt:Jc3 ds 4 cxds tt:Jxds 5 e4 
tt:lxc3 6 bxc3 gg7 7 tt:lf3
At that time the standard move was 7 
1ic4 (Game No.72), but under the influence 
of a Korchnoi-Miles game (Vienna 1979) I 
began employing the innovatory set-up 
with the development of the knight on f3, 
which had not yet accumulated any theory.
I have to admit that in my youth I con­
sidered the Grunfeld Defence to be a not 
altogether correct opening: White creates a 
passed pawn in the centre and advances it 
towards the queening square, at the same 
time building up an attack on the king (for 
this reason the Queen’s Indian with a2-a3 
also appealed to me). It was in this mood 
that I went along to the game.
7...b6?!
'The original cause of Black’s defeat' 
(Nikitin). The usual and most critical reply is
7...c5 (Game No.48). The plan with ...b7-b6 
usually occurred after 7...0-0 8 ge2.
‘Now, however, White hampers the op­
ponent's attack on his pawn centre.’ (Pribyl)
8 1ibs+! c6 (after 8...gd7 9 &e2 the move 
...b7-b6 is made worthless) 9 gc4 (16)
This was the first game on this particular 
theme, and I spent some time considering 
where it was best to retreat the bishop.
9.. 
.0-0 10 0-0 (3)
The exchange ofthe light-square bishops 
could have been prevented by 10 We2, but
10...b5!? 11 kb3 b4 seemed unclear to me, 
and, besides, White has quite good pros­
pects even without these pieces.
10...ka6
‘Since ...c6-c5 is not possible, this is 
Black's best plan’ (Pribyl). And indeed, if
10...6.7, then 11 We2 c5 12 &f4(g5) is 
good.
11 kxa6 tt:lxa6
12 'i!Va4 (3)
Earlier I though that this move was an 
inaccuracy, and I recommended ‘the simple 
12 gg5 Wd7 13 'iVd2 with a solid centre and 
a stable advantage’. However, the queen 
sortie is probably no worse.
12 ...#c8 13 .i.gs Wb7
191

Garry Kasparov on Garry Kasparov: Part One
Pribyl is correct not to hurry with 13. ..c5
- after this there would not have followed
14 d5 gxc3 15 .'. xe7 We8! 16 #xa6 #xe7, 
and not 14 i.xe7 .Me8 15 il.d6 .Mxe4 16 Sfe1 
(Stohl) 16 ....Mxe1+ 17 Hxe1 cxd4 18 cxd4 
t'LJc7 (19 Hc1 #e8!), but simply 14 .l:.ac1!.
14 Afe1 (12)
Developing and creating the threat of 
i.xe7.
14...e6
At the board it was not easy to decide 
which was better - 14...e6 or 14....l:.fe8. 
Apparently the two moves are roughly 
equivalent. Black prepares ... c6-c5, and the 
only visible defect of his position is the 'bad' 
knight at a6.
15 Aab1 (11)
The prelude to a tempting pawn sacri­
fice. Otherwise I could have also chosen the 
more straightforward variation 15 .l:.ad1 c5
16 h4, retaining the initiative with material 
equal.
1 s...cs
The natural move, but also practically 
forced: 16 c4 was threatened, with the idea 
of 16 . ..c5 17 d5. The preparatory 15 ...h6?! 
would have run into the unpleasant reply
16 
ge3, 
again 
hindering 
...c6-c5 
and 
threatening c3-c4.
This is the first critical position. Pribyl: 'At
last Black has managedto attack the centre. 
It appears that the advance d4-d5 is not 
possible on account of the loss of the c3- 
pawn. However...'
16 ds!? (10)
After weighing up the variations, I firmly 
resolved to give up the pawn. ‘One of the 
candidatures for Kasparov's chess coat of 
arms is a white d5-pawn, straining to 
advance towards the queening square' 
(Nikitin).
If the preparatory move 16 .Med1 is made, 
then 16 ...h6?! 17 i.e3! is again unfavour­
able for Black, but there is a risk of White 
conceding the initiative after 16...cxd4 17 
cxd4 0ac8 (5tohl), as well as after 16. ..f5!?
17 Wc4 cxd4 18 cxd4 Wc8 19 ®e2 fxe4 20 
# xe4 Wd7 21 t'LJe5 Wd5 or 17 exf5 fixf5 18 
# c4Se8.
Even so, it was possible to manage with­
out any sacrifices - by trying to provoke a 
further weakening 
of Black's kingside, 
exploiting the absence of his knight from 
f6: 16 h4!? h5?! 17 ®b5 .l:.ac8 18 a4, and 
Black is passively placed (without the 
inclusion of 16 h4 h5 this did not work 
because of 17 ...cxd4 18 cxd4 gxd4! 19 
t'LJxd4 .l:.c5), or 16. ..Hac8 17 h 5, continuing 
to fight for an advantage.
I6...g xc3 (and why not?!) 17 fled!
192

Adult Games
17...exd5
A more uncompromising reply than
17. ..iLg7, expressing a readiness to 'return 
the loot': 18 dxe6 (after 18 d6 lt:Jb4! it may 
be possible to give up the exchange for the 
d-pawn) I8...fxe6 19 gd7 ®c8 20 Sb d l c4! 
(Stohl), or 19 £!:d6 lt:Jb4! 20 Sxe6 'li'c8 21 
2d6 '*'e8! 22 'Wib3+ '*'f7, and by accurate 
play Black achieves equality.
18 exd5
Now the play is more dynamic than after
17...6g7. White's obvious positional pluses
- his strong passed d5-pawn and the unfor­
tunate knight at a6 - fully compensate for 
his material deficit. But Black's defence is 
fairly simple, and all that is required ofhim  
is precise, accurate play. True, this is the 
present-day view, whereas at the time I 
rated my chances ultra-optimistically - the 
passed pawn in the centre inspired me!
18. ..^g7?!
It made sense first to attend to the 
knight. After 18...lt:Jb4? in Informator I gave 
19 
a3(?!) 
lt:Jxd5 
20 'Wic4, 
overlooking
20...1Ld4! 21 lt:Jxd4 cxd4 22 gxd4 CDe7 with 
equality, whereas in fact it is correct to play
19 d6 .1i.g7 20 d7 (Crouch) or 19 'i1Yb3 i. g7
20 a3 lt:Ja6 21 d6. In the event of l8 . ..lLlb8?! 
White promptly regains the pawn - 19 
Sd cl .1i.g7 20 Sxc5 or 19 'Yi'c4 i,g7 20 'Wixc5.
But 18...lt:Jc7! was correct, since my rec­
ommendation 19 iLe7 Sfe8 20 'id 7  is 
parried by 20. ..Eab8 21 i.h 4  (21 i.d6? lt:Ja6 
or 21 &g5 h6! 22 i.xh6? Sed8 is bad for 
White) 21...lt:Ja6 2 2 'iYb5 CDc7! or even
20 ...l:.eb8!? 21 ^g5(h4) ^g7! (21...lLle8 is 
also possible). The regaining of the pawn is 
sounder - 19 'Wic4 &g7 20 #xc5, although 
after 20....Mac8! (threatening the fork ...lt:Je6)
21 iLh4! lt:Ja6 22 'W/e7 g,c7 23 # e 2 Sd7 the 
d-pawn is blocked and Black is on the verge 
of equalising.
19 d6 (7) 19. ..f6
Black naturally wants to take control of 
the d8-square.
20 d7!! (13)
‘A bold piece sacrifice, giving White a 
dangerous attack' (Pribyl). ‘The d7-pawn 
cuts off half of the black army from the 
king's fortress' (Nikitin).
After 20 .1i.f4 White undoubtedly has suf­
ficient compensation for the pawn. 
If
20..J:tae8(?), recommended by me in Infor­
mator, there follows 21 :te l! Sxel+ 22 
E x e l with an invasion at e7. It is also bad to 
play 20...lt:Jb8? (!? - Stohl) 21 d7! fid8 (or
21...1t:Jc6) 
22 Sd6! and wins. After Pribyl's 
suggestion 20...Sad8 21 #c4+ 'lih8 ‘with 
very unclear play' again 22 S e l! is promis­
ing (22...fid7 23 Se6), and therefore it is
193

Garry Kasparov on Garry Kasparov: Part One
better to play 21..l:H7! (this also follows 
after 5tohl's move 21 l:e1) 22 l:e1?! tt:b4 
with the idea of ...Wd5. But the most accu­
rate was the immediate 20. ..£>b4 21 ^ 3 +  
(21 d7 l:ad8 - Crouch) 21. .l:f7 !, surround­
ing 'with warmth and care' the audacious 
d-pawn.
Therefore I preferred a more energetic 
and interesting continuation, intuitively 
sensing that the bishop sacrifice was quite 
correct and that it would be not at all easy 
for the opponent to work things out at the 
board.
20...fxgS?
The critical but incorrect decision, and 
not 'the best chance', as Pribyl thought. 
Apart from this, there were also other 
possibilities open to the two players:
a) 20...h6? (a fatal weakening) 21 Wc4+! 
'it>h7 22 il.f4 l:ad8 23 'iWe6, and Black is in 
trouble: 23. ..tt:c7 24 il.xc7 'lWxc7 25 l:!.d6 l:f7
26 l:bd1 'it>g8 27 tt:h4! il.f8 28 l:6d5 &g7 29 
tt:xg6! <4xg6 30 l:!.1d3 and wins;
b) 20...tt:b4?! (this was suggested after 
the game by Karpov) 21 'iWh3+ 4h8, and 
here there is the flamboyant 22 tt:Je5!? fxe5
23 d8'iW l:axd8 24 l:xd8 l:!.xd8 25 il.xd8, but 
a more obvious advantage is given by the 
prosaic 22 il.f4! (5tohl) 22...l:!.ad8 23 'iWe6;
c) 20...'it>h8 leads after 21 "ifc4!? l:ad8 to
variation 'd', but allows White the addi­
tional resource 21 il.f4, which, however, is 
unclear because of 21. ..l:!.ad8! (the Informa­
tor 21 ...tt:b4? is premature) 22 Sd2 tt:b4 
with double-edged play;
d) 20...l:!.ad8! 21 Wc4+ (21 il.f4? .Mf7)
21 ...<4^8 22 tt:Je5!.
Analysis diagram
Offering a choice of either oftwo pieces: 
d1) 22...fxe5? 23 il.xd8 l:xd8 24 We6!, 
and now Black is not saved by either
24. ..tt:c7 25 'iWe7 'iWa8 26 l:b3! e4 27 l:d6! 
(27...Cbe8 28 l:c6 and wins) or 2 5 ...^ 8  26 
Hb3! e4 27 .l:te3! (but not 27 .l:td6? Cbe8! 28 
l:c6 'ie5 with equality), or Crouch's sugges­
tion 24. ..'iWc7 25 Hd6! il.f8 26 "i/Uxe5+ 'it>g8 27 
'iWe6+ &g7 28 l:bd1! il.xd6 29 flxd6 c4 30 
"i!Ue7+ 4 ’g8 31 Hf6! Wxd7 32 .l:.f8+, or even
2 4 ....'i8  25 l:b3! e4!? (Crouch's improve­
ment, instead of my variation with 25 ...c4?
26 Hh3) 26 .l:.a3! tt:b4 (26 ...Cbc7 27 "i/Uxe4) 27 
l:e3! and .l:.xe4, winning;
d2) 22. ..fxg5 23 Cbf7+ Hxf7 24 'iWxf7 Wc6!
- Pribyl rejected this because of 25 Se1 
tt:c7(?) 26 Se7 ‘and wins' (probably, after
26 ...'iWf6 27 l:e8+!), not noticing the simple
25. ..'iYxd7! 26 "i/Uxd7 fixd7 27 fie8+ il.f8 28 
flxf8+ 'it>g7 29 l:c8 tt:b4 or 29 l:e8 Cbc7 with 
two pawns for the exchange and at least
194

Adult Games
equal chances. 25 Sb3! is far stronger, for 
example:
d2l) 25...C2lc7?! 26 2e3 h5 27 g4!! (but 
not Crouch's variation 27 2e7 "iVf6 28 l:!.e8+ 
ltJxe8 29 dxe8'iV+ 11xe8 30 'i'xe8+ Wh7 with 
a draw) 27...h4 (27...hxg4? 28 .:ldd3! with 
the murderous threat of 11h3+) 28 h3! 'iVf6 
(28...a5 29 .l:tde1! and Se7) 29 Se8+ ltJxe8
30 dxe8'iN+ l:!.xe8 31 Wxe8+ Wh7 32 Sd7, 
and Black's downfall is caused by the 
weakness of his kingside pawns, or 27 . ..'i'a4
28 l:.d6! 'i'xg4+ (28 ...'iNf4 29 'iNe7!) 29 'it>f1 
Wf4 30 "ifxg6 11f8 (if 30...h4, then 31 11e8+ is 
decisive) 31 f3! Wxe3 (31...Wc4+ 32 Wf2 
^ 4 +  33 'ig2) 32 'iNxh5+ 'itg8 33 d8W! 
(again the triumph of the d-pawn!) 33...g4
34 l:.d3 'iVc1+ 35 Wf2 ^ 2 +  36 l1d2 'ic3 37 
'i!r'xg4 and wins;
d22) 25...'iNf6 26 'iVe8+ 'iVf8 27 11e3 ltJc7
28 Sde1 (Stohl), regaining the material and 
retaining the initiative: 28...ltJxe8 29 dxe8W 
f
 30 'i'a4! 'iVf7 31 l:!.e8+ Sxe8 32 I:txe8+ 
Wg7 33 2a8 a5 34 ^ 3 (e 8 ), or 28. ....if6! 29 
Wxf8+ 11xf8 30 l:!.e8 'it>g7 31 l:tc8 ltJd5! 
(31. ..ttJb5 is weaker: 32 2xf8 Wxf8 33 Se8+ 
Wf7 34 d8"iY &xd8 35 Sxd8 - Crouch) 32 
l:.xf8 'it>xf8 33 5 d l! (if now 33 l:!.e8+ Wf7 34 
d 8'i 
1Lxd8 
35 
l:!.xd8, then 
35...'it>e6!) 
33. ..ltJc3 34 d8'iN+ ..ixd8 35 l:!.xd8+ We7 36 
Ith8 a5 37 .l:txh7+ We6(f6), and Black is 
nevertheless saved by his queenside pawns.
But my opponent was unable to resist 
the immediate win of a piece, which made 
things easier for me: now White no longer 
has to think about what to do with his 
bishop, and in addition his knight is greatly 
activated.
21 'iVc4+ 'it>hB 22 ltJxg5 ..if6
The only move. Black would have lost at 
once after 22. ..ltJc7? 23 d8"iV or 22 ...1Ld4? 23 
l:!.xd4 cxd4 24 'iVxd4+ 'itg8 25 ltJe6.
23 ltJe6 ltJc7
Again forced. It was clearly bad to play
23. ..Wc6? 24 ltJxf8 l:i.xf8 25 'i'xa6 ..id4 26 
'iVxa7! or 23...Sad8? 24 2d6! Sxd7 (24. ..^ 8
25 Sbdl) 25 l:txd7 'i'xd7 26 ltJxf8 etc., while 
if 23 . ..ltJb4? there is the decisive 24 l:!.d6! 
(with the threat of ltJxf8 and l:!.xf6; 24 iif4?! 
1lr'b8! 25 'iff3 \d4! with equality) 24. ..ltJc6 
(24.....ie7 25 2e1!) 25 ltJxf8 l:!.xf8 26 l:te1 
(threatening 2xf6!) 26...Wg7 27 l:!.e8! and 
wins (Crouch).
24 ltJxfB 2xfB
25 l:ld6! (8)
A curious moment. At first sight I had a 
tempting opportunity to go into an end­
game - 25 'i'xc5(?) 'iVxg2+! 26 <it>xg2 bxc5
27 l:!.b7 ltJe6 28 2d6, but here Black would 
have held on: 28...ltJf4+ 29 W fl (29 Wf3 
ge7!) 29 ...gd8 30 2xa7 (previously I as­
sessed this position in favour of White) 
30. ..'it>g7! 31 a4 (31 2c6 2f5) 31...Wf7 32 2c6 
ltJd3 
33 
a5 
'ite7 
with 
equality, but
28...^d8!? is even better: 29 l:!.xa7 ..id4 and 
... 'i¥tg7 with active counterplay.
But after the non-standard 'pitching' of 
the rook it suddenly transpires that White 
is completely dominant. I didn't see all the 
consequences of this, but I sensed that I 
was on the right path: the black pieces were 
just too uncoordinated. I remember that 
later Pribyl and I spent a long time analys­
ing the game, and we were joined by Kar­
195

Garry Kasparov on Garry Kasparov: Part One
pov, Vag anian and other players. They were 
perplexed as to how I had won so dashingly. 
They all tried to find a defence for Black, but 
every time they were rebuffed, which is not 
surprising: White's attacking potential is 
very great.
25...ke7
This allows a spectacular development of 
the attack. However, all the same Black is in 
a calamitous position:
a) 25 .. .'i¥b8 26 !tbd1 Wd8 27 l:tc6! 4g7 
(27...kg7 28 'Yi'e4 or 27. ..£g5 28 Wc3+ *g 8 
29 'i!Vg3 is no better) 28 'iHf4! tt:lb5 29 .l:i.c8 
'Wie7 30 l:txf8 iYxf8 31 d8'if kxd8 32 Wxf8+ 
'ixf8  33 fixd8+ rj;e7 34 §a8 and 35 a4, 
winning;
b) 25...kd8 26 l:b3! (we only looked at 26 
h4!?) 26...ii'a6 27 'iVc3+ Wg8 28 'ir'c2! (not 
allowing the black queen to escape, and 
threatening .:xg6+) 28...Sf6 (it is no better 
to play 2 8 ...f  29 lie3 ^ 5  30 a4! 1+Vb4 31 
:.e8+ 'it>g7 32 g3 c4 33 Sd4 or 28...Sf4 29 
2xg6+! 'if8  30 Sd6 'ifc4 31 l!c3 'iVe4 32 
'i'd l!) 29 :!.xf6 i.xf6  30 lif3 Wb5 (there is 
nothing else) 31 l!xf6 Wxd7 32 g3 with a 
technically won ending.
Instead of this Pribyl made the most ob­
vious move - he attacked the annoying 
rook. But now White can advantageously 
regain the material.
26 d8#!! (2)
This move shocked Pribyl: the pride of 
White's position - his passed d-pawn - 
sacrifices itself! 'A completely unexpected 
idea of amazing beauty!' (Nikitin).
26...kxd8
26. 
..l:xd8 27 l:txd8+ i.xd8 loses to 28 'iff7 
'ilt'd5 (otherwise mate) 29 Wxd5 tt:lxd5 30 
2d1 or 28 !i.d1! '*1Vc8 29 Wf7 (Nikitin).
27 'Wic3+! 'ig8 28 lid7! A f6 29 'Yi'c4+
‘A very important check: if 29 'Yi'g3?? 
there would have followed 29 ..'Yi'e4!, when 
Black wins.' (Pribyl)
29...'it>h8 30 'iff4!
The tempo play has concluded - White 
wins the knight and remains with the 
exchange for a pawn and a solid positional 
advantage. But here another opponent of 
mine cracked under the pressure...
30...'W/a6?
‘A mundane oversight, which loses im­
mediately. A pity, since after 30. . .kg7! Black 
would have 
retained 
practical 
saving 
chances' (Pribyl). Indeed, in the endgame 
after 31 'i!Vxc7 'Yi'xc7 32 §xc7 kd 4 I would 
have had to play 33 !tfl! (but not 33 Sxa7? 
2xf2! 34 rj;h1 c4 35 lie 1 Sf8 and ...c4-c3) 
33. ..a6 (33...a5 34 a4!) 34 lic6! (both attack, 
and defence against ...c5-c4). in order 
nevertheless to convert my advantage into 
a win. Black would lose quickly after
34....1.tf6 35 Sxf6 kxf6  36 §e1 and l:te6, 
while in the event of 34..-l:b8 35 Se1 or
34...b5 35 2xa6 the rest would have been a 
matter of technique.
31 'W/h6 1-0
Mate is unavoidable. Times: 1.42-1.41.
The game with Pribyl, along with one of 
Karpov's wins, was judged the best in the 
29th volume of Informator. ‘Every chess 
player has his favourite game. For the 
moment this is mine', I said a year later.
196

Adult Games
'Once I even called it "my evergreen" game.
I like it for the fact that it is so pretty, with a 
piece sacrifice! Such a sacrifice is some­
times called controversial, but even now I 
am convinced that it is correct.'
When Yusupov and I were analysing the 
game in our hotel room, with a sad smile 
Artur said something along the lines of ‘I 
could not do things like that...' He probably 
had in mind the degree of risk and the 
intensity of the play. But if one recalls 
certain games by Yusupov, for example, 
from his matches with Timman (1986), 
Karpov (1989) and Ivanchuk (1991), it is 
readily apparent that Artur very much 
'could'!
In the end I achieved the best result in 
the team, and we returned from Sweden 
with the gold medals. From the western 
press: 'It is very probable that in the next
few  years Kasparov will become one o f the 
top grandmasters in the world. If not in the 
next cycle, then in the one after it, this highly 
talented youth will take a direct part in the 
fightfor the world championship.'
Immediately after my arrival in Baku I 
began a training match with Tal, who was 
preparing for his Candidates match with 
Polugayevsky. However, after two encoun­
ters (I was leading 11/2-1/2) and a series of 
blitz games, Mikhail Nekhemevich was 
obliged to fly urgently to Riga - his uncle, to 
whom he was very close, had died. Tal lost 
his previous form, but not his sense of 
humour - after losing his match to Po­
lugayevsky in the spring, he joked: 'Now I 
am Polutal!' (literally, ‘Semi-Tal' - Transla­
tor's note). But I faced other examinations, 
the first being an international tournament 
in my native Baku.
Grandmaster
20th International Tournament of the USSR Central Chess Club 
(Baku, 29th March - 18th April 1980)
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
1 Kasparov
*
y,
y,
y,
1
1
1
1
y,
y,
y,
1
y,
1
1
1
liY z
2 Beliavsky
y,
*
Y,
X
1
Y,
Y,
Y,
1
1
1
Y,
1
X
1
1
11
3 Gufeld
x
x
*
Y,
Y,
Y,
1
Y,
Y,
Y,
Y,
Y,
1
Y,
X
Y,
8Yz
4 Mikhalchishin
X
Y,
Y,
*
y,
y,
y,
y,
1
y,
y,
y,
0
y,
1
1
8Yz
5
niarioigri
u
K
o
o
Y,
Y,
*
Y,
1
X
X
1
X
X
X
X
1
1
8Yz
6
m
osC
o
Y,
Y,
Y,
Y,
*
o
1
y,
1
X
X
X
1
X
X
8
7 Torre
o
X
o
Y,
o
1
*
1
0
X
X
1
1
1
0
1
8
8 Chiburdanidze o
Y,
Y,
Y,
Y,
o
o
*
1
X
X
1
X
X
1
1
8
9 Lechtynsky
Y,
o
Y,
o
Y,
X
1
0
*
X
X
X
X
X
1
1
7Vz
10 Magerramov
y,
0
Y,
Y,
o
o
Y,
X
X
*
X
X
X
1
1
1
7Vz
11 Padevsky
Y,
0
Y,
X
Y,
Y,
Y,
X
X
X
*
0
1
X
X
X
7
12 Antoshin
0
Y,
Y,
Y,
Y,
X
O
0
Y,
Y,
1
*
Y,
Y,
1
0
6Yz
13
tgo
>
Y,
0
o
1
Y,
Y,
o
Y,
X
Y,
0
Y,
*
Y,
y,
y,
6
14 Zaitsev
0
X
Y,
X
Y,
O
0
Y,
Y,
O
y,
y,
y,
*
1
X
6
15
icvi
oin
a
M
0
0
y,
0
0
y,
1
0
0
0
y,
0
y,
0
*
1
4
16 S.Garcia
0
0
y,
0
0
y,
0
0
0
0
Y.
1
Y.
X
O
*
3Yz
197

Adult Games
With foreign trips at a premium, the in­
ternational 
tournaments of the 
USSR 
Central Chess Club, held nearly every year, 
were a good opportunity for a player to 
gain a higher title in his own country. In the 
spring of 1980 the tournament was held for 
the only time in Baku and it became a 
notable event in the sporting life of Azer­
baijan - there had been no international 
tournaments here since 1964. Of course, I 
awaited this test with particular anxiety: I 
needed a second grandmaster norm, and I 
had no intention of missing my chance.
Eduard Gufeld, the trainer of the young 
lady world champion Maya Chiburdanidze 
and also a participant in the Baku tourna­
ment, wrote in the 64 magazine: ‘The 
organisers were able to assemble a strong 
and evenly-matched field. Among the 16 
players who started the event, there were 11 
(!) grandmasters from eight countries of the 
world, and the others - Chiburdanidze, 
Kasparov, K.Grigorian, Lechtynsky and the 
rapidly progressing Magerramov - fought 
on equal terms with their higher titled 
colleagues. The numerous forecasts by the 
experts were unanimous: the main battle 
fo r victory in the tournament should be 
between Kasparov and Beliavsky. 
These 
forecasts were fully confirmed.'
Alexander Beliavsky was indeed one of 
the best tournament players of that time. 
He won the gold medal of 1974 USSR 
champion (together with Tal), achieved 
impressive successes in Alicante 1978 (13 
out of 13!) and Bogota 1979 (121/2 out of 
14), and a few days before his arrival in 
Baku he scored a brilliant victory in Bucha­
rest (121/2 out of 15). And, incidentally, he 
did not slow down after Baku - he won a 
tournament in Baden (with Spassky), the 
USSR Championship First League, then also 
the Premier League (with Psakhis), and at
the age of 27 he became champion of the 
country for the second time!
Therefore before the start I was not aim­
ing in particular for first place, but for the 
cherished 10 points out of 15. My rating 
was already close to 2600, and everyone 
realised that it was time for me to become 
a grandmaster. But the tournament ex­
ceeded all my expectations. We were play­
ing in the Sailors' Club, on the stage of a 
comfortable hall with seating for about two 
hundred. The organisers created the at­
mosphere of a genuine chess festival. I 
played freely and easily - it can indeed be 
an advantage playing at home. How the 
people of Baku supported me!
Nikitin: 'All those days Garry was persis­
tently shadowed by the anxious world 
champion - among those included in the 
tournament was Karpov's trainer, grand­
master Igor Zaitsev. The chess head of the 
USSR Sports Committee flew  in to assess "on 
site" the degree of support fo r Kasparov by 
the local authorities. He took back bad news 
to Moscow: with the support fo r Garry 
everything was in order.’
The tone of my entire performance was 
set by an interesting first round game with 
the Hungarian grandmaster Istvan Csom, a 
participant in one of the 1976 Interzonal 
Tournaments.
Came 39 
G.Kasparov-I.Csom
USSR Central Chess 
Club Tournament, 1st round 
Baku 30.03.1980 
Nimzo-lndian Defence £42
1 d4 Cbf6 2 c4 e6 3 Cbc3
In those years I regularly played either 3 
Cbf3 b6 4 a3, or, as in the given instance, 3
198

Adult Games
t'Llc3 &b4 4 e3 and t'Llge2 - this variation 
attracted my attention after the match in 
Baguio (1978).
3 ...6 .4  4e3 cs
Or 4 . 0-0 5 t'Lle2 (later I also played 5 
i. d3) 
5.d5 
6 a3 i.e 7  
7 
cxd5 
exd5
(7...t'Llxd5!? 8 g3 t'Llxc3 9 t'Llxc3 c5, Kasparov- 
Tal, 1st match game, Baku 1980) 8 g3 a5 
(8...c6 9 &g2 t'Lla6 or 9...£d6 was also tried 
against me) 9 &g2 :I.e8 10 o-o c6 11 h3!? (a 
new plan of mine, instead of the traditional 
f2-f3) 11 ...&d6 12 g4 h6 13 f4 t'Lla6 14 t'Llg3 
b5 15 'if3  b4 16 axb4 axb4 17 t'Llce2 t'Lle4 18 
t'Llxe4 dxe4 19 'if2  with the initiative on the 
kingside 
(Kasparov-Lerner, 
47th 
US5R 
Championship, Minsk 1979). 6...&d6! is 
stronger, as Kurajica played against me 
(Banja Luka 1979) and I myself played 
against Epishin (Moscow 2004).
5 t'Lle2
Rubinstein's old variation, revived by 
Korchnoi. Later I also tried both 5 a3 and 5 
&d3.
5...cxd4
I would also have been satisfied with
5...d5 
6 a3 .i xc3+ 7 t'Llxc3 cxd4 8 exd4 dxc4
9 11.xc4 t'Llc6 10 &e3 
0-0 11 
0-0 b6 
(Korchnoi-Karpov, 5th match game, Baguio
1978) 12 ' i f 3! &b7 13 &d3 Sc8 14 S a d l 
lic7 15 'iYh 3 t'Lle7 16 &g 5 (Kasparov-Psakhis, 
6th match game, Murcia 1990). But the 
unexpected continuation 5.b6 6 a3 &a5 
proved quite acceptable for Black (Kas- 
parov-Romanishin, 47th U55R Champion­
ship, Minsk 1979).
6 exd4 0-0
A surprise at the very start! Csom made a 
move which had an indifferent reputation. 
The usual line is 6 ...d5 7 c5 t'Lle4 8 i1.d2 
t'Llxd2 9 'l/Vxd2 a5! (the old 9 ...b6?! is weaker:
10 a3 &xc3 11 t'Llxc3 bxc5 12 dxc5 Re- 
shevsky-Najdorf, Dallas 1957; Kasparov-Tal, 
Brussels (blitz) 1987) 10 a3 &xc3 11 t'Llxc3
&d7 (11. ..a4!?) 12 &d3 a4 with a solid 
position 
(Korchnoi-Karpov, 
3rd 
match 
game, Baguio 1978).
7 a3 l.e7
Another revelation: it was thought that 
this was bad for Black Magerramov and I 
looked at 7...11.xc3+ 8 t'Llxc3 d5 9 c5 t'Lle4 10 
t'Llxe4 (not 10 'ic2 t'Llc6 11 &e3 e5!)
10...dxe4 11 &f4 t'Llc6 12 &d6 etc., judging 
this to be the lesser evil.
8 ds (5)
The 
critical 
continuation: 
otherwise
Black may get away with his 'sins' (6...0-0 
and 7...&e7) after, say, 8 g3 d5 (during the 
game I also did not like 8..."ir'c7!?). But 
nowadays White is often satisfied with a 
small advantage - 8 t'Llf4 d5 9 cxd5 t'Llxd5 10 
t'Llcxd5! (10 t'Llfxd5 exd5 with equality, 
Capablanca-Keres, AVRO Tournament 1938)
10...exd5 11 &d3 t'Llc6 12 0-0, and Black has 
some problems equalising (Timman-Anand, 
Wijk aan Zee 2000; Kramnik-Leko, 9th 
match game, Budapest (rapid) 2001).
8...exds 9 cxds Se8
Previously this half-forgotten move had 
occurred only three times, and those were 
in the 1960s. There was more experience 
with another problematic reply - 9...&c5, 
after which the most critical is 10 t'Lla4 
(Evans-Konig, Hastings 1949/50), although
199

Garry Kasparov on Garry Kasparov: Part One
White has also played 10 tt:ld4 (Botvinnik- 
Averbakh, 2nd match game, Moscow 1956) 
or 10 b4 i.b6 11 tt:la4 (Miles-Adorjan, Wijk 
aan Zee 1984; Torre-Karpov, London 1984).
10 g3 (5)
A year later I made a new try - 10 i.e3, 
and after 10. ..d6 11 h3 (11 tt:lg3!? tt:lg4 12 
kd 4 deserves consideration) 11 . ..tt:lbd7 12 
tt:lg3 ; f8 13 ke2 Sxe3?! 14 fxe3 g6 15 0-0 
'ike7 16 'ifd4 I achieved an obvious advan­
tage, although I was unable to convert the 
extra 
exchange 
(Kasparov-Andersson, 
Moscow 1981). But soon it transpired that
10. ..'Lig4! 11 kd 4  'Lih6! is stronger, with 
good play - the threat of ...'Lif5 practically 
forces White to go in for extreme measures:
12 g4 d6 13 h3 f5! (Groszpeter-Adorjan, 
Hungary 1983) or 12 'Lig3 i.xa3+ 13 i.e2 
i.xb2 (Ree-Ligterink, Wijk aan Zee 1984).
On the other hand, the gambit 10 d6!? 
i.f8  11 g3, hindering the development of 
the opponent's queenside, gives White a 
promising position: 11 .. .Se6 12 i.g2 (12 
kf4!? 'Lih5 13 ke3, Korchnoi-Kindermann, 
Beer Sheva 1984) 12...2xd6 13 Wc2 (Gli- 
goric-Karpov, Bugojno 1980), or 11...'i!Vb6 12 
i.g2 i.xd 6 13 i.e3 (Korchnoi-Miles, Wijk 
aan Zee 1984). That is how White should 
fight for an advantage, but, on encounter­
ing this variation for the first time, I re­
stricted myself to the developing move 10 
g3.
10 ...kcs
There is no sense in Black playing 10...d6, 
leaving himself with a passive dark-square 
bishop.
11 i.g 2
Here Csom, who up till then had played 
quickly, stopped to think. Strangely enough, 
the bishop move was a novelty! The Ency­
clopaedia of Chess Openings of that time 
cited the game 
Polugayevsky-Kholmov, 
(29th USSR Championship, Baku 1961), 
where after 11 'Lia4 i.f8  12 i.g 2 d6 13 0-0 
White gained slightly the better position.
But 11...d6!? is far more effective (with 
the idea of 12 tt:lxc5 dxc5 13 kg2 "iVa5+), or 
else 11...b6!?, when 12 tt:Jxc5?! bxc5 13 kg2 
ka6 14 jL_e3 (14 i.f3? d6 and ...tt:lbd7-e5)
14...'Lig4 is unfavourable for White, and so 
there remains only 12 i.g2 i.a 6  13 i.f3 , but 
here the bishop is badly placed, and Black 
achieves a comfortable game by 13 ..kf8 14 
0-0 d6 and ...'Libd7-e5. It was probably 
something along these lines that my oppo­
nent had in mind.
11...d6
Realising that a direct attack on f2 does 
not bring any benefit, Csom continues to 
develop. Indeed, if 11...'Lig4?! 12 0-0 Black
200

Adult Games
has a depressing position after 12 ...'itf6? 13 
tLlf4 tt:Jxf2 14 S xf2 g x f2+ 15 'ix f 2 g5 16 tt:Je4 
^ 6 +  17 .i e3 #xb2+ 18 &g1, while after
12 .. ,.'t/Vb6 White can choose between a 
tempting pawn sacrifice - 13 tt:Je4 ::lxe4 14 
gxe4 tLlxf2 15 Sxf2 gxf2+ 16 'ig2 with a 
wealth of possibilities (16 ...d6 17 gxh7+!) 
and simple defence - 13 We1 andh2-h3.
12 h3 (8)
An important move. The exchange of the 
bishop on c8 for the knight on e2 (12 0-0 
gg4) should not be allowed. The knight has 
a more promising future than may be 
apparent at first sight.
12. ..i.fs
Potentially this gives me tempi for devel­
oping a pawn offensive on the kingside 
(White's only active plan). 12 ...a6! is better:
13 0-0 tLlbd7 14 tLld4 tLle5 15 tt:Jce2 (15 b4? 
i.xd 4 16 ifxd4 gxh3!) 15....td7 with excel­
lent play (Chandler-Andersson, Olympiad, 
Malta 1980). Also, nothing is promised by 
15 g4 h6 (16 g5?! hxg5 17 gxg5 gxd4 18 
't/Vxd4 i.xh3!) or 15 tLlf3 tt:Jxf3+ 16 #xf3 h6.
13 0-0 tt:Jbd7
Black's position looks completely safe, 
and Csom continues playing routinely, 
making 
the 
most 
natural 
developing 
moves. Apparently he should have pre­
ferred 13 ...tLle4!?, allowing the exchange of
his bishop at c5 after 14 tt:Ja4 tLld7, but 
obtaining lively piece play (Zilberman- 
Zhidkov, Moscow 1981). 13 . ..tt:Jbd7 can be 
called the initial cause of Black's subse­
quent difficulties, 
although objectively 
things are not yet so bad.
14 g4! (9)
The advance of the kingside pawns is 
fully justified - it seriously cramps the 
black knights (which in any case have 
restricted manoeuvring possibilities), and 
in addition the bishop on c5 will be unable 
to take part in the forthcoming battle. For 
me g3-g4 was an obvious move, but on 
Csom it had an oppressive effect. From this 
point on the grandmaster began increas­
ingly often thinking for a long time over his 
moves. White's plan of attack came as such 
a surpri se to him that he was unable to do 
anything to oppose it.
14... , e4?
14...i.g6 was correct. In Informator and 
The Test of Time I judged the variation 15 
tLlg3 tLle5 16 g5 tt:Jfd7 17 tt:Jce4 to be in my 
favour, 
but analysis 
shows that 
after
17...'Wb6 the position is one of dynamic 
balance (the direct 18 h4 is parried by
18...gxe4 19 tt:Jxe4 f5!). In addition, Black has 
the move 15...h6 and then, for example, 16 
'it>h2 (but not 16 'it>h1 ? tLle5 17 f4 tt:Jexg4! 18
201

Garry Kasparov on Garry Kasparov: Part One
hxg4 tt:h5!) 16...i..b6 17 f4 !!c8 18 fs i.h 7 19 
.I1Lf 4 tt:Je5 20 tt:Jce4 with unclear play, al­
though White's position appeals more.
15 tt:g3 
xg2 16 \t>xg2
The situation has changed sharply to 
White's advantage: the exchange of bish­
ops has benefitted him, facilitating his 
offensive on the kingside.
16...tt:f8?!
Avoiding the cramping g4-g5 and not 
obtaining anything in return - all the same 
the knight does not reach g6. 16 ...h6 was 
better, although after 17 
White has 
unpleasant pressure: 17 ...a5 (17. ..tt:h7?! 18 
b4 ..1b6 19 tt:Jf5) 18 g5 (18 h4 b5!?) 18 ...hxg5 
19 hxg5 tt:h7 20 tt:ge4 tt:Je5 21 h4 and h4-h5 
or 17 ...2c8 18 h4 and g4-g5 (18...h5 19 g5 
lt:Jg4 20 tt:Jxh5 tt:e3+ 21 kxe3 does not give 
Black full compensation for the pawn).
17 gS tt:6d7 18 h4 
,
Black now faces difficult problems. 18 b4 
i.b6 19 f4 was also quite good, and if
19.. 
tt:g6, then 20 CZ'\ce4 VfilO 21 f5.
18...tt:JeS
Previously I thought that the last oppor­
tunity to gain counterplay was 18 . ..Bc8 
‘followed by ..... b6 and ... tt:Jc5, not conced­
ing the e4-square without a fight'. How­
ever, here too after 19 h5 White has a clear 
advantage (if 19 . ....1b6?!, then 20 h6, 20 f4
and 20 ct:Jf5 are all strong).
19 hs!
The black pieces are greatly restricted, 
and now White's threats clearly take shape
- tt:Jce4 and then h5-h6 or b2-b3 and f2-f4. 
After half an hour's thought Csom realised 
that further passivity would lead to a rapid 
defeat, and he decided to undermine my 
pawn pair.
19...f6 20 ct:Jce4! (13)
White has an overwhelming advantage 
in force on the decisive part of the battle­
field. Many of those watching the game 
were surprised at how quickly, without 
making any obvious mistakes, Csom found 
himself in a lost position: up to the 14th 
move he had nothing to be concerned 
about, but after the 20th he could already 
have resigned with a clear conscience! This 
is how my forcing style took shape...
20. ..fxgS
The lesser evil. 20...tt:Jfd7 is very strongly 
met by both 21 b4, and 21 f4 lt:Jc4 22 'lid3 
b5 23 b3 or 21..CDf7 22 g6.
21 i.xg s "*'b6 22 h6 tt:f7 (or 22. ..gxh6 23 
i.xh 6 tt:fd7 24 b4! i.d 4  25 tt:f5!, and if
25 ...i.xa1, then 26 f4 etc.) 23 hxg7 tt:d7
Defending against the immediate threats, 
but Black is helpless against the transfer of 
White's army to the kingside.
202

Adult Games
24 ti:Jf6+ (14) 24...ti:Jxf6 25 &xf6 (among 
other things, 26 b4 is threatened, winning 
the ill-starred bishop) 25..:i+Vb5 26 fih l (5)
26....1b6 27 'i1'f3l
White simply prepares to double rooks 
on the h-file.
27...ti:Je5
Black would also have lost ignominiously 
after 27...h6 28 Exh6! ti:Jxh6 29 Eh1 or
27 ...^d8 28 ^xd8 I:i.axd8 29 I:i.xh7!.
28 ti:Jf5! (the e2-knight also has its say, 
creating the threat of ti:Jh6 mate) 28...ti:f7
29 .:!.xh7! 1-0
Times: 1.38-2.27.
In the 2nd round I employed the Modern 
Benoni against Karen Grigorian and ob­
tained a promising position. However, in 
the opponent’s severe time-trouble I went 
wrong, and after my impulsive 28th move 
Grigorian could have won immediately. In 
this amazing position only one move would 
win, whereas all the others would lose! 
With his flag hanging, White missed his 
chance and two moves later he resigned. 
Later the classic phrase ‘lucky like the first 
prize-winner' involuntarily came to mind.
So, 2 out of 2. But in my 3rd round game 
with my main rival, Beliavsky, I didn't know 
what to do with White, and I felt very
uncertain. I didn’t want to play either a 
‘Spanish', or a Queen's Gambit, and in the 
end I employed some fuzzy hybrid of the 
English and Catalan Openings, allowing 
Black to gain a draw with ease (1 c4 e6 2 
ti:Jf3 d5 3 g3 dxc4 4 -&g2 lLld7! 5 ir'a4 a6 6 
'¥Vxc4 b5 7 'i!Vc6 Sb8 8 Wc2 ..tb7 etc.). What 
told was my lack of experience: the ability 
to beat players of the class of Beliavsky was 
to come later.
In the 4th round with Black I shared the 
point with Gufeld (he played openly for a 
draw). And in the 5th round my opponent 
was the well-known Filipino grandmaster 
Eugenio Tone, a friend of Fischer, the 
winner of a four-player tournament in 
Manila 1976 (where he sensationally de­
feated Karpov), and a participant in several 
Interzonal tournaments - in 1982 he even 
qualified for the Candidates matches.
For some valid reason Torre flew into 
Baku with a delay of two rounds and his 
postponed games were played later on the 
days for adjournments. The grandmaster 
began splendidly - before the game with me 
he had 21/2 out of 3 and one game in reserve 
(which in the end he also won). Therefore 
our game was of particular competitive 
significance. Tone played a slow version of 
the Benoni and ended up in a cramped 
position (1 d4 C5 2 d5 d6 3 C4 e5 4 e4 -&e7 5 
lLlf3 &g4 6 lbbd2! lba6 7 _;. e2 lbf6 8 a3 etc.). 
White gradually increased his spatial advan­
tage, and after the first time control the 
following curious position was reached.
Game40
G.Kasparov-E.Torre
USSR Central Chess 
Club Tournament, 5th round 
Baku 4/13.04.1980
203

Garry Kasparov on Garry Kasparov: Part One
Almost without thinking, Torre played 
41-...&h6. Instead of this he could have tried 
to set up a fortress with 41...h6 - the pawn 
palisade looks impassable, but White carries 
out the following plan (I will omit Black's 
moves: they do not change the position): 
'Llg4, .l:!.fb2, .i.d2 (here the black king goes to 
h7), ^3-e4, 'Lld3-e1-f3-h4-g6, the king 
moves across to b3 and all the rooks are 
exchanged, then the king returns to the 
centre and after 'Llg6-e7-c6 (the black knight 
is at d7), 'Llg4-h2, g3-g4, 'Llh2-f3-h4-g6 
White places his knights at c8 and e6 and his 
king at d3, after which the sacrifice on b6 is 
decisive ('Llxb6 'Llxb6, &a5 'Lld7, b5-b6-b7, 
lLle6-d8-c6 and 'it>d3-a7). Black has no way of 
opposing this multi-move plan.
42 'Llg4
Here the game was adjourned, and Torre 
sealed his next move. The analysis of the 
position, carried out together with Nikitin 
and 
Shakarov, 
proved 
not 
only 
very 
interesting, 
but 
also 
uncommonly 
protracted: the game was resumed only 
after the 11th round - it was moved from 
7th April (Torre was playing a postponed 
game) to the 13th, i.e. to my birthday!
It is obvious that Black is not able to pre­
vent the white pawn from reaching h6, 
after which the knight on e8 will be crip­
pled. At first the winning plan seemed 
simple after both 42 ... ..ig5 (cf. the game 
continuation) and 42...'it>g7 43 'Llxh6 'it>xh6
44 ..ltd2+ \t>g7 (of course, not 44. ..'ixh5? 45 
'it>h3 with mate) 45 h6+ 'it>f7 46 &c3(c1), 
when the knight is transferred to e4, and 
after 'it>f3 and Sg2 the advance of the g- 
pawn decides the outcome.
However, soon it transpired that 46 &c1 
allows Black counterplay: 46...'Lld7 47 .l:!.fc2! 
(defending the c4-pawn: 47 .Mfe2?! e4 48 
'Llf2 is inaccurate on account of 48...lt:Je5 or
48... e3 and ...'Lle5) 47...e4 48 'Llf2 e3 49 'Llg4 
(in order to answer 49 ...'Lle5 with 50 'Llxe3)
49 ...e2!?, a desperate lunge.
Analysis diagram
50 
Sxe2(?) 'Lle5 51 'Lle3 'Lld3, wreaking 
havoc in the white ranks. It was only much 
later that I discovered 50 \t>f2! 'Lle5 51 
'Llxe5+ dxe5 52 'it>xe2 'Lld6 53 g4 .Uxa2 
(53. ..l:!.e7 54 ..lte3) 54 .Mxa2 'Llxc4 55 .l:!.a8 
\t>e7 56 g5 fxg5 57 'it>d3 and wins.
But at the time we settled on 46 &c3 - 
although the exchange of the bishop for the 
knight on e5 is undesirable (the knight on 
e8 returns to life), even so it is useful to 
keep the dangerous knight under fire. It 
became obvious that Black cannot delay the 
advance of the e5-pawn: 46 ... 'Lld7 47 .l:!.fe2
204

Adult Games
(threatening tt:lf2-e4, 'it>f3, l:!.g2 and g3-g4- 
g5) 47 . ..e4 48 tt:lf2 lt:Je5 49 &xe5 fxe5 50 
tt:lxe4 'it>e7 51 l:!.a6! .Mxa6 52 bxa6 .Ma7 53 
l:!.a2 with a straightforward win (53..l2lc 7
54 g4 .l:!.xa6 55 .Mxa6 tt:lxa6 56 g5).
The path for White is far more tortuous 
after 46...e4! 47 tt:lf4 tt:ld7(?!) 48 tt:le6 'it>e7. 
Now he fails to achieve his goal with 49 
l:!.fe2 tt:le5 50 l:!.xa7 Sxa7 51 l:!.xe4 l:!.a3 52 
±xe5 dxe5 53 l:!.g4 S a 2+ 54 'it>h3 S a l. 
White can consolidate his advantage only 
with the far from obvious manoeuvre 49 
Sae2!, conceding the a-file, but retaining 
both rooks. For example:
a) 49. ..l:i.a3 50 Sxe4! Sxc3 51 tt:lxc5+ lt:Je5
52 tt:Jxb7 l:!.a3 53 c5! dxc5 (53 ...bxc5 54 b6) 54 
d6+ tt:Jxd6 55 Sxe5+ fxe5 56 f 6+ or 50...tt:Je5 
51 ±xe5 dxe5 52 l:!.g4 'it>d6 (52...Sba7 53 l:i.g8 
Bc3 54 Sh 8 Saa3 55 d6+ tt:lxd6 56 Sxh7+ 
l2lf7 57 Sg7 is no better) 53 l:!.g8 l:!.e7 54 
lt:Jg7! 'it'd7 55 tt:lxe8 .l:!.xe8 56 .l:!.g7+ Se7 57 
d6! Sxg7 58 hxg7 S a 8 59 Wf3 Bg8 60 Sa2 
Wxd6 61 l:!.a7 h5 62 l:!.f7! (but not 62 'it>e4 h4 
63 gxh4? l:!.xg7! with a draw);
b) 49....l:!.a4 50 .Mxe4 tt:Je5, and here the 
march of the g-pawn proves decisive - 51 
g4! .l:!.xc4 52 .Mxc4 lt:Jxc4 53 g5 tt:le3+ 54 'it>g3 
lt:Jxd5 55 g6. A little ruse - 51...Sa3 - also 
does not help Black.
Analysis diagram
Now after 52 &xe5 dxe5 the white rook's 
path to g8 is blocked. But 52 g5! breaks 
through the defence: 52...l:!.xc3 53 g6 l:!.b8 
(53. ..l2lc7 54 tt:ld8!) 54 .Ma2, and, despite his 
extra piece, Black is helpless. 52. ..fxg5 is 
also bad because of 53 .l:!.xe5! l:!.xc3 
(53. . .dxe5 54 &xe5 .l:!.aa7 55 f 6+ Wf7 56 
tt:Jxg5+ Wg6 57 f7) 54 f6+! tt:lxf6 55 .l:xg5 
tt:le8 56 l:i.g7+.
All that then seemed to be needed was to 
polish up some sidelines, and to go long to 
the resumption for a certain point. But for 
this I had to wait a whole week. ‘Resuming' 
the game mentally, I suddenly thought: 
‘But what if Black should disrupt the coor­
dination of the white pieces after 46 ...e4 47 
tt:lf4 by advancing his doomed pawn -
47 ...e3 ?'
Analysis diagram
After 48 .l:!.fe2 (48 .l:!.fb2!?) 48...tt:ld7 49 
tt:le6 (at the time we underestimated 49 
'it>f3!? 'it>e7 50 tt:lg2 or 49 ...tt:le5+ 50 &xe5 
dxe5 51 lt:Jg2 and tt:lxe3 with good winning 
chances) 49...'it>e7 White has no favourable 
regrouping, whereas Black carries out his 
plan. We promptly got down to work, but 
everywhere a defence for Black was found. 
After analysing the variation 50 B a6 .l:xa6 
51 bxa6 l:!.a7 52 l:!.xe3 (if 52 l:!.a2l2le5 53 l:i.a4
205

Garry Kasparov on Garry Kasparov: Part One
Black is saved by 53. ..e2! 54 4f2 tZ:lg4+ 55 
^ 3  tZ:lxh6 56 g4 tZ:lf7 57 4xe2 tt:e5 58 i.xe5 
dxe5) 52...tt:e5 53 i.xe5 dxe5 54 S a 3 tt:Jd6
55 l:la4 tt:xf5, I began inclining towards the 
view that the adjourned position was 
probably drawn. There remained the hope 
that Torre had either sealed 42...i.g5, or he 
would not find 47...e3!.
But it is all very well hoping, and I still 
had an idea that White's play could be 
improved somewhere (seeing as there was 
ample time for analysis). And, indeed, soon 
it transpired that in the last variation after 
55. ..tZ:lxf5 White has the excellent move 56 
tZ:lc7!.
Analysis diagram
We again sat down at the board, not yet 
imagining where this new path would lead 
us. Black has three sensible replies -
56 ...tZ:ld6, 56 ...4d7, 56 ... tt:d4 - and each of 
them requires a thorough examination. 
Many hours of analysis, during which we 
had to make our way through a maze of 
intricate variations, gave the following 
results:
a) 
56...tt:d6 57 tZ:lb5 Sa8 (57 ...tt:xb5 58 
cxb5 f5 59 g4!) 58 tZ:lxd6 'itxd6 59 'it>f3 
(smoother than 59 g4 e4!? 60 4g3! 'it>e5 61 
a7! and wins) 59. ..Wc7 60 4e4 b5 61 cxb5
'it>b6 62 'it>f5 4xb5 63 I!.a1 c4 64d6 or 59. ..f5
60 g4 e4+ 61 'it>f4 fxg4 62 4xg4 4c7 
(62 ...We5 63 a7! 4d4 64 d6 e3 65 'it>f3! '1t>d3 
66 lia3+ 'it>d2 67 l!xe3 Sf8+ 68 'it>e4! Se8+
69 'it>d5, and the pawns are stronger than 
the rook) 63 a7! b5 64 cxb5 4b6 65 d6 4xb5 
(65...e3 66 d7 e2 67 Se4) 66 Sxe4 Sxa7 (or
66...'it>c6 67 2e7) 67 Se7 Sa6 (67 ...Ba1 68 
lixh7 'it>c6 69 d7) 68 d7 l1d6 69 l:txh7 c4 70 
l:te7 c3 71 h7 c2 72 h8W c1W 73 'iVh8+. This 
is the longest variation, although it is not 
obligatory: apart from 62 'it>xg4, both 62 
.l:.a2(a1) and 62 4xe4 g3 (62...4c7 63 Sa3!) 
63 'it>f3 'it>c7 64 Sa1 etc. are also decisive.
b) 56...'1t>d7 57 tZ:lb5 :ta8 58 a7 tZ:ld4 
(58...tZ:lxh6 59 Sa6 or 58 ...tt:d6 59 tZ:lxd6 
'it>xd6 60 'it>f3 is also hopeless for Black) 59 
tt:c3! (the line given by me in The Test of 
Time also wins: 59 :ta6 tZ:lxb5 60 cxb5 f5 61 
'it>f3 etc.) 59. ..tt:f5 60 tt:e4 tZ:lxh6 (60. .. 'it>e7 61 
^ 3  tt:xh6 62 d6+!) 61 tt:xf6+ '>t>c7 62 tt:Jxh7 
'it>b7 63 d6 Sxa7 64 Sxa7+ 'it>xa7 65 d7 tt:f7
66 tZ:lf8 and wins;
c) 56 ...tt:d4 57 tt:b5 lta8. The most resil­
ient.
Analysis diagram
58 d6+?! (later the winning 58 tZ:lc3! tZ:lf5 
59 a7 or 58 ...Sa7 59 g4 was found) 58 ...'it>d7
59 tZ:lc7 .Ua7 60 tZ:ld5 'it>xd6! 61 tt:Jxb6 4c6 62
206

Adult Games
tt:c8 Ha8 63 t'Lle7+. and here 63...'it>b6! 64 
tt:d5+ 'tla7 65 tt:xf6 Sb8! gives Black real 
saving chances. But in my analysis I over­
looked this, restricting myself to the coop­
erative variation 63 ...<it>d6(?) 64 tt:d5 l:ta7 65 
tt:xf6 tt:f5 66 t'bxh7 t'bxh6 67 t'bf6 t'bf5 68 
t'be4+ 'tlc6 69 Sa5 and the resume: ‘The 
white knight's acrobatic pirouettes make a 
strong impression'.
So 
I went along to the resumption confi­
dent now of victory, 
and eager that
42...'it>g7 should have been sealed, in order 
to demonstrate the beauty of our deep 
analysis. But alas...
42....11.gs?! 43 h6 .l:!e7
43 
...e4 44 t'bf4 ^xf4 (44...t'bd7 45 t'be6) 45 
gxf4 t'bd7 46 Sfe2 was no better for Black - 
then White picks up the e4-pawn, plays his 
king to d3 and his knight to h5, moves his 
rook from a2 to e2 and wins either by tt:h 5- 
g7, or by doubling rooks on the e-file.
44 Sfe 2 <M7 45 t'bdf2 & cl 46 t'be4 Sed7 47 
'it>f3
The exchange of all the rooks would also 
have been decisive: 47 Sxa7 Hxa7 48 fie l 
.l:ta2+ 49 'it>f3 ■: g5 (49...fic2 50 Se2) 50 H al 
H xal 51 jLxal i .c l  52 'it>e2 t'bd7 53 'it>dl 
i.a3  (53... &g5 54 i.b2 followed by 'it>e2-f3 
and at a convenient moment t'bxg5) 54 &c3 
jLb4 55 &b2 - the black bishop is shut out 
of the game, and White without hindrance 
prepares the g3-g4-g5 breakthrough (from 
g4 the knight goes to h5, the king to f3, the 
bishop to cl, and so on). But I decided to 
remove my king from a possible check on 
a2 and to set a pretty trap, which I had 
noticed during the resumption.
47...'tie7
47...&a3 was more resilient, after which 
the invasion on the a-file would have won -
48 Hal &b4 49 .l:!ea2 .l:!a5?! 50 .l:!xa5 bxa5
51 1i.xb4 axb4 52 b6! 'it>e7 53 Ha7, when 
Black is almost stalemated, for example:
53...b3 54 t'bgf2 b2 55 t'bc3 'it>d8 56 t'bfe4 
'tlc8 57 g4! and g4-g5 or 56 ...'it>e7 57 'it>e3 
followed by 'it>d3-c2 etc.
48 .l:.xa7 .l:xa7 49 .bel il.gs SO t'bxgs fxgs
51t'bxes! dxeS
Or 51 . ..l:.a3 52 t'bc6+ 'it>8 53 .l:te3 t'bxc6 
(53. ..g4+ 54 <it'f4) 54 ±g7+ lbxg7 55 hxg7+ 
ctlxg7 56 bxc6.
52 i.xeS t'bd6
There was no good defence against the 
threatened discovered check (52. ...l:ta3+ 53 
'tlg4 t"Dd7 54 i.b2+), but now the white 
pawns have the final say.
53 f6+ 'it>d7 54 ..ixd6 4xd6 55 .l:te6+ rj;c7 56 
f7 H al 57 'tle2 1-0
After adjourning this game, the next day 
I drew with Magerramov (who, incidentally, 
in the end achieved the international 
master norm). After six rounds, taking 
account 
of adjourned 
and 
postponed 
games, I was on +3. along with Beliavsky 
and Torre, while Mikhalchishin had +2. 
However, the latter two soon dropped out 
of the battle for the lead: Mikhalchishin 
drew all his remaining games, while, even 
before the day that our game was resumed, 
Torre suffered three defeats.
But before the 7th round the competitive 
intrigue was still very sharp, and a timely
207

Garry Kasparov on Garry Kasparov: Part One
win over Igor Zaitsev, who had begun the 
tournament with six draws, helped me to 
burst half a step ahead.
Game 41 
G.Kasparov-I.Zaitsev
USSR Central Chess 
Club Tournament, 7th round 
Baku 6.04.1980 
Queen’s Gambit D58
1 d4 ds 2 c4 e6 3 lt:Jc3 tt:Jf6 4 iL.gS iL.e7 5 e3 
0-0 6 ctJf3 h6 7 gh4 (7 iL.xf6 - Game Nos. 54, 
92) 7 ... b6 8 'iVc2 (2)
At that time searches for an advantage 
against 
the 
Tartakower-Makogonov- 
Bondarevsky Variation were mainly associ­
ated with 8 'iVb3 (Game No.20). But, as also 
in other Queen's Gambit set-ups, here I far 
preferred the double-edged plan 
with 
castling on opposite sides.
8...iL.b7 9 
xf6 ; ■
 xf6 10 cxds exds 11 0-0-0 
cs!
11...ctJd7 is more modest: 12 h4! c5 
(12...g6?! 13 h5 g5 14 'iVf5) 13 g4, beginning 
an attack, but after 13. . .cxd4 14 exd4 'iYc7! 
White has not yet discovered an advantage.
12 dxcs
Now after 12 g4 (or 12 h4) 12 ...cxd4 13
exd4 lt:Jc6 Black is even more successful in 
creating counterplay (the source game: 
Uhlmann-Spassky, Moscow 1967).
12...ctJd7!
This splendid pawn sacrifice was a fresh 
idea, which before this had occurred liter­
ally only twice. Usually Black played differ­
ently:
a) 12 . .. i.xc3 13 1txc3 ctJd7 14 c6 iL.xc6 15 
'it>b1 l:!.c8 16 #d4 (Polugayevsky-lvkov, 
Beverwijk 1966) or 13 .. .#e7 14 'iVe5 #xc5+
15 'ib 1 lt:Jd7 (Ovechkin-Bologan, Moscow 
2003) 16 #f4! with slightly the better 
chances for White;
b) 12. ..bxc5 13 tt:Jxd5 iL.xd5 14 i1.c4 lt:Jd7
15 fixd5 fib8 16 b3 - this position had been 
considered promising for Black, but by the 
time of the tournament in Baku White had 
refuted the earlier assessment: 16...#e7 17 
h4! tt:Jb6 18 l:!.e5! 1tc 7  (18...iL.xe5? 19 tt:Jg5!)
19 .l:i.e4!, retaining the extra pawn and 
maintaining the blockade at c4 (Lapenis- 
A.Petrosian, Moscow 1979), or 16 ...#c7 17 
'id 1  Hfc8, and now not 18 'it>e2? lt:Jb6 19 
S d 2 tt:Jxc4 20 #xc4l:!.b4 21 #a6 c4 22 bxc4 
±c3 23 l:!.c2 l:!.b6 24 tt'a4 l:!.b4 1/2-1/2 
(Gavrikov-Lputian, Riga 1980), but 18 ctJd2! 
(the blockade on c4!) 18...lt:Jb6 19 l:!.d3 and 
'it>e2 also with an advantage (I found and 
analysed all this before the games cited).
208

Adult Games
Naturally, Black began pinning all his 
hopes on the move 12...CDd7. When analys­
ing this position earlier, I had come to the 
conclusion that the capture of the d5-pawn 
would allow White to fight for the initia­
tive.
13 ct:Jxds (7)
A novelty. In the event of 13 cxb6?! i&'xb6 
Black's activity more than compensates for 
the pawn deficit (Lapenis-Klovans, Moscow
1979). Play against an 'isolani' - 13 c6 itxc 6
14 CDd4 k b 7 also did not appeal to me, 
since White could have quickly ended up in 
an inferior position:
a) 15 .lte2 a6! 16 'lt>b1 b5 17 kf3?! .l:.c8 
(Lputian-A.Petrosian, Yerevan 1980);
b) 15 'lt>b1 a6!? (15 . ..CDc5 is also good, Bo-
risenko-Adashev, Tashkent 1969) 16 g4 b5
17 =- g2 (17 h4 b4!) 17. ..fic8 (Nikolic-
Lputian, Sarajevo 1983);
c) 15 g4 CDe5! (15. ..CDc5 is also suitable, or 
even 15. ..a6 16 h4 b5 17 g5 b4 18 gxf6 
ct:Jxf6!) 16 ite 2 ct:Jc6! (Ubilava-Kharitonov, 
Tallinn 1983);
d) 15 h4 CDc5 (apart from 15. ..CDe5 or
15...a6) 16 g4 (Nguyen Chi Minh-Chau, 
France 2004) 16...itxd4! 17 exd4 (17 .l:.xd4 
ct:Je6 18 .l:.d1 d4) 17...CDe4, and Black is 
perfectly alright.
13. ..ct:JxcS
At home I had also analysed 13 ....l:.c8. 
Now 14 'lt>b1 ?! .l:.xc5 15 i¥f5 (Dreev-Leko, 
Moscow (blitz) 2007) is dangerous because 
of 15 ....l:.xd5 16 .l:.xd5 g6!, seizing the initia­
tive: 17 .l:.xd7 (17 'i&'xd7 i.xd5) 17...gxf5 18 
.l:.xd8 ..l:.xd8 or 17 iid 3 Wa8! 18 e4 CDc5 19 
iVc4 ct:Jxe4. It is stronger to play as follows: 
14 ct:Jxf6+ 'ixf6  15 J:xd7 k x f3  (15. . ..l:.xc5? 16 
i¥xc5) 16 gxf3 .l:.xc5 17 i.c 4  .l:.fc8 (after
17...i¥xf3? 18 .l:.hd1 Black loses a piece, and 
in the event of 17 . ..i¥c6?! 18 .l:.d4 b5 19 .l:!.g1
- a pawn), when an equal queen endgame 
is reached after 18 .l:.hd1 .l:.xc4 19 .l:.d8+ 
J:xd8 20 Sxd8+ 'i&'xd8 21 Wxc4 Wg5! V2-V2 
(Ghitescu-A.Petrosian, Bagneux 1982), but I 
was intending to follow a different, more 
risky course: 18 b3!? b5 19 .l:.hd1 bxc4 20 b4 
.l:.b5 21 .l:.7(1)d6 which leads to very sharp
play.
However, Black has no reason to go in for 
such excitement: after 13 ...CDxc5 he has a 
very promising position.
14 kc4  (22)
14 e4? .l:.c8 15 'lt>b1 .l:.e8 is bad for White, 
while the tempting 14 'iVf5 is parried by 
14 ...Wc8! 15 ct:Jxf6+ gxf6 16 'i/Vxc8 .l:.axc8 17 
'lt>d2 (17 'it>b1?! CDe4) 17 ...CDe4+ 18 'it>e1 fic2, 
when after 19 .l:.b1 White can draw at best.
14. .. b5l (14....l:.c8 15 '1t>b1 b5! is also possi­
ble) 15 ct:Jxf6+ (9)
209

Garry Kasparov on Garry Kasparov: Part One
The incautious 15 gxb5? .ixd 5 16 gc4 
runs into a spectacular queen sacrifice -
16...ge4! 17 Sxd8 Sfxd8 with a decisive 
attack: 18 #e2 li:Jd3+ 19 gxd3 gxd3 and 
...l:tac8+. Black also has an excellent game in 
the variation 15 gb3 Hc8 16 'it>b1lie8! 17 
l:!.he1 lt:Jxb3 18 it'xb3 Sc5 (evicting the 
knight from d5) 19 e411xe4 20 lixe4 gxd5.
15..."ixf6
16 &d5
After 16 gxb5? .l:.fc8 (not the only way)
17 gc4 ge4 18 #c3 lt:Ja4 19 "i*'xf6 1Jxc4+ 20 
'ic3  lt:Jxc3 21 bxc3 lib8 22 'it>d2 lib 2+ 23 
'ie1 l:!.xc3 24 li:Jd4 .l:.xa2 White cannot 
defend himself.
I6....l:.!.ac8 17 Wb1 (3)
17...^a4
Later I discovered that 17...lt:Je6!? is also 
favourable for Black: 18 ^ 3  .ixd 5 19 #xd5 
#g6+ 20 'i'd3 #xg2, or 18 "i*'e4 Sc4! 19 li:Jd4 
(19 Ve5 "it'g6+) 19 ... gxd5 20 #xd5 lt:Jxd4 21 
.Uxd4 l:!.xd4 22 exd4 1td8!.
18 'i'e 2 gxds 19 Itxds
The menacing position of the knight at 
a4 together with the not altogether secure 
position of the white king promises Black 
counterplay, with which, however, he has 
to hurry, as otherwise in a move or two 
White will consolidate his position.
19...l:!.c4!
A brilliant move, which immediately 
changes the picture. In my analyses I had 
considered only 19 ..."il'g6+ 20 e4 and I had 
judged 20...#xg2(?) 21 .l:.g1 iVh3 22 .l:.g3 
'i'e6 23 li:Jd4 iVf6 24 lt:Jf5 or 20. .JUe8 21 .Ue1 
'i'xg2(?!) 22 .Uxb5 to be in my favour, over­
looking, alas, 20...Sc4! 21 .f1d4 .l:.fc8 22 fig1 
a6 with excellent play for Black.
But now, while intensifying the threat of 
...#g6+, Black has also created two more - 
...l:tfc8 and, above all, ...Hb4. On seeing all 
this, I became despondent...
20 Sd4 (14)
This reply is forced. The pawn capture 20 
l:!.xb5? allows Black a terribly strong attack 
after 20...Sfc8 21 li:Je5 #a6! 22 lt:Jxc4 #xb5
23 Bc1 .Uxc4! (24 lixc4? li:Jc3+, winning the
210

Adult Games
queen). 20 tt:d4?! is also weak because of
20...'ig6+ and ... 'ilxg2.
20...5fc8
It is now completely clear that Black has 
full compensation for the sacrificed pawn. 
But despite the failure of my opening, I 
managed to take myself in hand - the 
battle was only just beginning, and Zaitsev 
had little more than 20 minutes left on his 
clock.
21l:i.hd1 (15)
Not 21 l:!.xc4? bxc4 and ... Bb8, while 21 
'iWd3? (with the idea of 21...Sc2 22 l:td8+) is 
strongly met by the unexpected 21...tLlcS!
22 #d1 (if 22 'tWe2 'i'g6+ 23 4a1, then
23....l:tc1+! 24 Axc1 tt:b3+! 25 axb3 !!.xc1+ 26 
4 a2  iVb1+ 27 'it>a3 a5! with unavoidable 
mate) 22 ...'ig6+ 23 4a1 #xg2 or 22 l:!.xc4 
tt:xd3 23 !!.xc8+ 'it>h7 24 !l.c3 (24 l:c2 ttJb4!) 
24. ..tt:xb2! 25 Shc1 tLlc4 26 S1c2 'Yig6, and 
White's position is unenviable.
Therefore with 21 2hd1 he agrees to give 
up his queen for two rooks. At first sight, 
the position after 21...Sc2! 22 'Yixc2 (forced: 
after 22 2d8+? 4h7 Black wins) 22.. .fixc2
23 'it>xc2 is clearly in Black's favour: he 
destroys 
the 
opponent's 
kingside 
-
23 ...#g6+! (the weaker 23...'i*'e6 24 l:i.1d3! 
#xa2 25 !!.b3 leads to equality) 24 e4? 1i'xg2
25 tt:Je5 tt:Jc5! 26 <&b1 'Yixf2+.
However, 24 <&d2! is correct: 24. ..tt:xb2 25 
.l:l:c1 'iWxg2 26 'it>e2 #g6! (if 26. . tt:c4, then 27 
a4! a6 28 axb5 axb5 29 Sb 1 'M:Vg6 30 .l:txb5 
with 
equality, 
Ghitescu-Lputian, 
Berlin 
1982) 27 Sc7! 'ia6! (27...a5 28 2d8+ and 
l:.dd7) 28 'i1 !  I'Wxa2 29 Sd8+ 'it>h7 30 !!.dd7, 
and White nevertheless gains a draw.
The critical moment of the game. Not 
seeing any real benefits after 21...l:i.c2, 
Zaitsev, who up until now has played 
splendidly, 
overrates 
his 
chances 
and 
commits a serious mistake.
21. . .% 6+ ? 22 'id 3  (3) 22. . .'ixg2
Black has restored material equality, 
but... Apparently the preceding part of the 
battle had cost the grandmaster too much 
effort, and he overlooked my reply.
23 * f5 ! (3)
Unexpectedly the position has again 
changed sharply: White has succeeded in 
lining up his forces, and things have be­
come uncomfortable for the black king, 
even behind its sound pawn defences.
23..l:i.f8?
To avoid my counterattack, Black should 
have exchanged the queens - 23 ...'ig6 24 
'tWxg6 fxg6, agreeing to an unpleasant 
endgame after 25 tt:Je5, in which his 
chances of a draw and a loss would have 
been roughly equal. Zaitsev avoids defend­
211

Garry Kasparov on Garry Kasparov: Part One
ing in an ending and decides to try his luck 
with the queens on, setting some clever 
traps on the way.
24 l:td8! (4)
24 
.l:g1(?) looked very tempting, hoping 
for 24. ..i¥xf2? 25 .l:d2 Wxe3 26 Bxg7+! with 
mate. But it was here that Black's first 
‘bomb‘ would have exploded - 24....l:c5! 25 
"ie4 W i3, and all dangers are behind him.
24. 
..flc7?
The decisive mistake. 24. . .tt:lb6 was nec­
essary, although after 25 .l:xf8+ (25 tt:le5!?)
25...'it>xf8 26 lbd4 Black would have faced a 
difficult defence.
25 flxf8+ (13)
The game would have been concluded 
more spectacularly by 25 "ie5! Wg6+ 26 e4
2c8 27 Sxc8 2xc8 28 2g1 'iYh7 29 tt:ld4 and 
tt:lf5.
2S. ..'it>xf8 26 tt:ld4! (the simplest) 26...2e7 
(or 26...'it>g8 27 tt:lxb5 g6 28 ii'f4) 27 tt:lxbs 
(3)
Avoiding the last trap, set by the oppo­
nent who was now in severe time-trouble:
27 Wxb5?? tt:lc3+!.
27...flxe3?!
A desperate chance: 27. ..g6 28 'i'f6! 'ife4+
29 <;t>c1 "ic4+ 30 lLlc3 Se8 31 Hd4 "i!Vfl+ 32 
lbd1 2c8+ 33 'it>d2 tt:lb6 34 ^ 8 +  ctie7 35 
.l:e4+ ctid7 36 ii'd4+ etc. was hopeless for 
Black.
28 tt:ld6 (28 l:.d8+! 2e8 29 2xe8+ 'it-xe8 30 
We5+ would have led to mate) 28...Sf3
After 28 ...'1t>g8 29 "ixf7+ 'it>h7 30 "if5+ 
ctig8 31 Wc8+ ctih7 32 'ifc2+ Black would 
have lost his stray rook.
29 "ic8+ ctie7 30 'it'e8+ ctif6
And Black resigned (1-0) in view of 31 
'it'xf7+ 'it>g5 32 Sd5+ with a quick mate. The 
once menacing knight on a4 remains 
merely as a reminder of that beautiful 
song, which Black cut short when he was 
tempted by the g2-pawn. Times: 1.52-2.28.
This game, along with a number of oth­
ers (with Beliavsky etc.), showed that my 
‘junior' opening preparation did not fully 
match up to the level of the ‘adult' tourna­
212

Adult Games
ments in which I was now participating. 
The transition period was to last two years 
and it ended in Tilburg 1981. By that time 
my opening repertoire was completely 
formed, I had a clear understanding of 
what and why I was playing, and from late 
1981 a new surge would begin.
After my win over Zaitsev I somewhat 
unexpectedly slowed down, making three 
draws (moreover, in the 8th round I only 
just saved a rook ending a pawn down in 
my game with Mikhalchishin: with one 
nervy time-trouble move my opponent lost 
all his advantage), and I was caught by 
Beliavsky. Five rounds before the finish we 
both had 7 points out of 10, with Chibur- 
danidze on 61/ 2. To achieve the grandmaster 
norm, I needed to win (and definitely not 
lose!).
The 11th round game with Maya Chi - 
burdanidze was one of my best, and in 
general one of the most interesting games 
in the tournament. That day I had to with­
stand an unusual psychological pressure: it 
was difficult playing the lady world cham­
pion in my native Baku, before the eyes of 
numerous fans who expected only victory 
of me.
Game 42 
G.Kasparov-M.Chiburdanidze
USSR Central Chess 
Club Tournament, 11th round 
Baku 12.04.1980 
King's Indian Defence E92
1 d4 Cbf6 2 c4 g6 3 Cbc3 kg7
At that time, under the influence of her 
trainer Gufeld, Maya used to employ the 
sharp King's Indian (my opening!), and 
playing against the lady world champion 
was psychologically difficult, since Gufeld
had warned everyone beforehand: ‘You will 
be afraid!' (and playing White against Maya 
in the last round, he himself appeared to be 
trembling with fear).
4 e4 d6 5 tt:lf3
Against me before this they had played 
this move, 5 h3 (Game No.10), 5 f3 (Game 
Nos. 12, 15), and 5 ke2 0-0 6 .tg5 (Game 
No.28), whereas my ‘White' experience was 
considerably more modest.
S...0-0 6 ke2 es
In a game with me (Banja Luka 1979) 
Vukic had problems after 6...kg4 7 ke3 
tt:lfd7 8 Cbgl! .txe2 9 tt:lgxe2 e5 10 0-0 a5?! 
(the immediate 10. . .exd4 is better) 11 jyd2 
Cbc6 12 f3 exd4 13 tt:lxd4 tt:lc5 14 l:!.adl 
tt:le6?! 15 tt:ldb5! with a clear advantage.
7 ke3 (3)
Not yet knowing exactly what to do as 
White in the main lines with 7 0-0 (Game 
No.21), I chose a set-up that I had discussed 
with Magerramov.
7 ..'Wie7
Later, after trying virtually all the possi­
ble replies against Karpov, I came to rec­
ommend the double-edged 7 ...tt:lg4 8 .tg5 
f6 9 kh4 (if 9 k c l, then 9..tt:lc6 or 9...exd4
10 
tt:lxd4 f5) 9 ... g5 10 '■ g3 tt:lh6 (Speelman- 
Kasparov, Madrid (rapid) 1988).
S ds
213

Garry Kasparov on Garry Kasparov: Part One
8 dxe5 dxe5 9 tt:Jd5! is better, as Karpov 
played against me in the 3rd game of our 
1990 match (Game No.10 in Kasparov vs. 
Karpov 1988-2009). It was because of this 
that 7...®e7 practically went out of use.
8...tt:g4 9 : gS f6 10 : h4 hS?!
A second-rate move, weakening the 
pawn structure. 10...'ie8 11 h3 tt:h6 has 
also been played (Tal-5ax, Olympiad, Malta
1980), but the immediate 10...tt:h6 is best, 
for example: 11 tt:d2 a5 12 a3 &d7 13 b4 g5
14 &g3 f5 15 exf5 axb4 16 f6 &f6 17 axb4 
Hxa1 18 iVxa1 e4 (Ivanchuk-Ehlvest, 55th 
U55R Championship, Moscow 1988).
11 h3 (3)
Later I played 11 tt:d2 immediately, with 
the idea of 11...tt:h6 12 f3 and then b2-b4 
(Tukmakov-Stein, 39th US5R Championship, 
Leningrad 1971) or 11. ..c5 (11...a5 is better)
12 dxc6! bxc6 13 b4 ..le6 14 0-0 tt:d7 15 
tt:b3 with unpleasant pressure for White 
(Kasparov-Morrison, Graz 1981).
11...tt:h6 12 tt:d2 c5 (trying to impede 
White's offensive on the queenside) 13 tt:f1 
(22)
Already then I was considering the inter­
esting 13 dxc6!? bxc6 14 b4, but as yet I was 
not ready for a sharp change in the pawn 
structure and I restricted myself to a good 
knight manoeuvre.
13. ..tt:f7?!
'An untimely move, assisting the ex­
change of bishops which is strategically 
favourable for White. 13 ...tt:Ja6 was more 
advisable, with the standard idea of ...tt:c7, 
. ..&d7, ...a7-a6 and ...b7-b5' (Nikitin). To this 
I would have replied 14 tt:e3, continuing to 
prepare g2-g4 and all the same retaining 
the better prospects.
14 g4 (11)
14...hxg4
Closing the flank by 14... g5 15 &g3 h4 16 
&h2 tt:lh8 would have left Black with a 
‘dead' bishop on g7, and after 17 tt:e3 tt:g6
18 f3 tt:f4 (here the knight looks well 
placed, but it is ineffective) 19 & fl followed 
by &g1, l:h2, a2-a3, b2-b4, l:rb2 and a 
possible tt:Jf5 the play would all have been 
one way. After tt:Jf5 White could have 
played &e3, 'ili>f2-g1-h2 and calmly attacked 
on the queenside.
15 &xg4! (this capture was underestimated 
by Maya and she clearly became rattled)
15...g5?
The decisive mistake - a fatal weakening 
of the light squares. 15...&xg4?! 16 'Y/Nxg4 g5 
was also bad in view of 17 tt:e3 tt:Jh6 18 
'Wih5 f
 19 'Wixf7+ .ftxf7 20 ±g3 (5tohl) or 
immediately 17 ..lg3 tt:h6 18 'Wie2(h5).
Also after 15. ..tt:Jh6 16 ; xc8 Sxc8 17 Bg1
214

Adult Games
'it>h7 (Stohl) 18 lt:Je3 followed by # e 2, o-o-o, 
Bg2 and Bdg1, or 15 . ..ctJd7!? 16 Bg1 'it>h7 17 
lt:Je3 i.h 6  18 #f3 Black's defence is difficult, 
but she could still have resisted.
16 i.xc8 (6)
Perhaps Maya was expecting 16 i.g3 f5 
(to activate the bishop on g7), when after 
the possible 17 exf5 e4 18 #c2 or 17 i..xf5 
J xf5 18 exf5 lt:Jd7 19 lt:Je3 e4 20 #c2(h5) 
things are also not easy for Black, but she 
has at least a gleam of counterplay.
However, I found a combinative solution 
to the position.
16. ...l:i.xc8
17 lt:Je3! (6)
‘What was staggering was not so much 
the boldness of this unexpected knight 
jump, but the speed with which the deci­
sion was taken to sacrifice the bishop' 
(Nikitin). Especially as the prosaic 17 ..ig3 f5
18 exf5 (18 lt:Je3!?) 18...e4 19 Vc2 was also 
unpromising for Black.
17...gxh4 (there is no longer anything else:
17...1t:Jh6 18 ..ig3 f5 19 exf5 e4 20 h4! - 
Stohl) 18 tt:JfS
I sensed that White's attack along the g- 
file would be irresistible: Black's downfall is 
caused by the uncoordinated state of her 
pieces. Incidentally, in the aforementioned 
game with Morrison the outcome was also
decided by a knight invasion at f5.
18...#d8
Or 18...#d7 19 'ifh5! lt:Jg5 20 o-o-o and 
#xh4, while if 20. .. ' f8, then 21 #g6+ kg7
22 f4! exf4 23 lt:Jb5 and tt:Jbxd6 with crush­
ing threats. Or if 18...#f8!? (without a loss 
of tempo) I was planning 19 Vg4 lt:Ja6(d7) 
or 19...Bc7 (in Informator I gave only
19...1t:g5 20 lt:Jxh4 lt:Ja6 21 lt:Jf5 
22 h4 
lt:Jh7, which is worse because of 23 h5! lt:Jg5
24 h6 and wins - Stohl) 20 l:!.g1 lt:Jg5 21 
lt:Jxh4 followed by lt:Jf5, h3-h4, o-o-o (or 
We2) and the doubling of rooks on the g- 
file, although here it would have been more 
difficult to breach Black's defences than in 
the game.
19 #g4 tt:JgS 20 lt:Jxh4!
In the event of the thoughtless 20 
tt:Jxd6?! lt:Ja6 21 tt:Jxc8? (21 lt:Jf5!) 21...#xc8
22 W 15 Ve8 White would have lost all his 
advantage.
20....1:i.c7 21 tt:JfS a6 (if 21...lt:Ja6 22 h4 lt:Jh7
23 Sg1 Vf8, then 24 lt:Jb5 - Stohl) 22 h4 
lt:Jh7 23 Bg1 (5) 23 . . . f
On this occasion the widely-publicised 
‘Gufeld bishop' makes a pitiful impression
- right to the end it does not move from g7.
24 'it>e2 (24 o-o-o!?) 24...Sa7 25 a4 (killing 
any counterplay) 2S...b6 26 # h s Wh8 27 
.l:i.g6 .l:i.d7 28 Sag1
215

Garry Kasparov on Garry Kasparov: Part One
After completing the mobilisation of my 
forces, I thought that I would win auto­
matically. However, to breach the oppo­
nent's defences a final effort is still re­
quired of White.
28 ... l:f.ab7 29 W g4lbc7 30fig2 
A rapid capitulation would have been 
forced by 30 h5! tt:lg5 31 h6 .txh6 32 .Mhl! 
.Mh7 33 tt:lxh6 l:tcg7 34 Sxf6! or 33. ..tt:ld7 34 
Sh5. But for some reason I decided first to 
safeguard my king.
30. ..Sb7 31 'it>f1 (once again 31 h5!?)
31... l:f.a7 32 'it>g1 flf7
33 tt:le2! (unexpectedly the second knight is 
also included in the attack - via g3)
33...'i¥c8
33. ..'i¥g8 would also not have helped: 34 
h5 tt:lf8 35 Sh2!? (one of many possibilities: 
h5-h6 is threatened) 35...'iVh7 36 tt:leg3 
Sad7 37 h6 tt:Jxg6 38 hxg7+ etc.
34 f4 (5)
'The harvest after 34 tt:Jxd6?! #xg4 35 
tt:lxf7+ .Mxf7 36 1!6xg4 is too miserly for 
such an overwhelming position' (Nikitin). 
With the move in the game I wanted to win 
with maximum comfort: to deprive the 
black knight of the g5-square before play­
ing h4-h5. However, the simplest was 34 
tt:leg3! with the threat of lt:Jh5, and if
34...tt:lf8, then 35 'it'h5+ tt:lh7 36 tt:Jxd6 f
37tt:lxf7+ and tt:lf5.
34... bs (34... exf4 35 tt:Jxf4 is even worse for 
Black) 35 axbs axbs 36 cxbs (it was for the 
sake of this opening of the position that I 
played my king to g l, in order to hide it at 
h2) 36. ..Sab7 37 hsl (2)
With the murderous threat of h5-h6. 
There follows a brief agony for Black.
37...tt:lf8 38 'Yih3 (once again ignoring the 
d6-pawn) 38...tt:lxg6
There is no salvation: 38...c4 39 h6 or
38 „Wd8 39 1't6g3! and h5-h6 (Stohl).
39 hxg6+ 'it>g8 40 gxf7+ (40 'i7 + ! 'it>f8 41 
gxf7 would have mated more quickly)
40...'it>f8
And Black resigned (1-0) without waiting 
for 41 .l:.xg7. Times: 1.33-2.28. ‘A terrible 
rout!' (Nikitin).
Inspired by this win, I won two more 
games in crushing style - against Silvino 
Garcia and Antoshin, took my score to 10 
out of 13, and two rounds before the finish 
achieved the grandmaster norm for the 
second time. The spectators applauded, and 
Gufeld, who came up to congratulate me, 
exclaimed: ‘Remember this historic mo­
ment - you have become a grandmaster!'
Now I had to avoid conceding 1st place: 
Beliavsky was just half a point behind. In 
the 14th round we both drew, and every­
216

Adult Games
thing was decided by the last, 15th round. 
With White, as expected, Beliavsky confi­
dently defeated Garcia, and I beat Martino- 
vic (in the variation 1 d4 tLlf6 2 lLlf3 g6 3 
kgS kg7 4 tLlbd2), which enabled me to 
become the sole winner of the tournament.
Gufeld: 'Towards the end ofthe tourna­
ment the gap between the leaders and the 
remaining participants increased with every 
round, Beliavsky all the time having to 
perform the role of pursuer, and in the end 
having to be satisfied with 2nd place. The 
winners achieved very high scores, and 
succeeded 
in 
remaining 
undefeated 
throughout 
this 
difficult 
tournament. 
Kasparov's name is well known in the chess 
world. In recent times the young player has 
achieved a number of remarkable successes, 
and in Baku he exceeded the international 
grandmaster norm. The play ofthe talented 
Baku player is characterised by a wonderful 
knowledge of opening theory (?! - G.K.), a 
broad arsenal of tactical and technical 
techniques, and notable progress in deeply 
penetrating into the secrets of strategy.'
Asriyan: ‘By winning the international 
tournament in Baku, the 17-year-old Kas­
parov became the youngest grandmaster in 
the world. On the evening when this re­
markable event occurred, I was able to 
report this by express telegram to TASS, and 
it was broadcast on the TV program Vremya 
two hours after the new grandmaster ap­
peared. Kasparov was staggered by such 
efficiency - I was congratulated as though I 
myself had become a grandmaster.'
Two months after the tournament I 
passed my final exams and left school with a 
gold medal (which the newspapers also did 
not fail to report). Nikitin: 'A significant part 
of this gold medal belonged to Garik's 
mother, who all these years was his main and 
very skilful trainer in his studies at school.'
Now, to enter the Institute, I only needed 
to pass one exam - on my main subject. 
And on 14th June 1980 (the day of the 
storming of the Bastille!) I passed this exam 
with an ‘excellent' mark and entered the 
Azerbaijan Institute of Foreign Languages. 
My school teachers vied with one another 
in advising my mother to choose their 
subjects for my further education, the 
mathematics and literature teachers being 
particularly insistent. We also considered 
the History and Law Faculties. But in the 
end we quite reasonably decided that a 
knowledge of foreign languages would be 
the most useful for my chess future.
Chess Prince
World Junior Championship (Dortmund, 
16th August - 1st September 1980): 1. Kas­
parov- 101/2 out of 13; 2. Short - 9; 3. Moro- 
vic, 4-5. Negulescu and Bischoff - 81/ 2; 6­
14. Akesson, Tempone, Danailov, Karolyi, 
Hjorth, 
Zuger, 
C.Hansen, Amason and 
Barua - 8, etc. (altogether 58 participants).
The invitation to take part in the World 
Junior Championship in the summer of 
1980 pleased me: that which I had failed to 
do at the World Cadet tournaments in 
Wattignies 
(1976) 
and 
Cagnes-sur-Mer 
(1977) might now be achieved in Dort­
mund.
However, this led to my first serious dis­
pute with Botvinnik, who, as usual, was 
categorically against my participation in a 
Swiss tournament. The maestro stated 
forcibly: 'You don’t need this! All the same 
you won't win any laurels, and in the event 
of a failure there will be any amount of 
unpleasantness. Why subject yourself to an 
unnecessary trial?!' And, indeed, there 
seemed to be no one there to compete with 
me: already with a rating of over 2600, I 
was rapidly approaching the top ten in the
217

Garry Kasparov on Garry Kasparov: Part One
world. But I had certain obligations to the 
Sports Committee and I did not want to let 
down Anatoly Bykhovsky, the trainer of the 
USSR youth team. It wasn't good to refuse, 
and I disobeyed the Teacher - I went to the 
championship.
For the first time in my life I tried keep­
ing a diary of a tournament. Alas, my 
enthusiasm sufficed only to describe the 
events before the start:
'Day one - 14th August. The flight from 
Moscow to Frankfurt passed off without 
any particular anxiety. There was only one 
memorable moment, when Bykhovsky took 
out of his bag the current issue of the 
magazine Yunost and invited me to read an 
article by Mikhail Botvinnik. “The strength 
of his combinative talent puts him (i.e. me) 
on a par with the great Alekhine", Bykhovsky 
once more savoured this line. "/ wonder 
what the Patriarch will say if you finish third 
in the world championship?’’ Later Byk­
hovsky himself picturesquely depicted the 
situation that was most probable in the 
event of my failure. The three hours passed 
imperceptibly, and we were already in 
Frankfurt...
'Day three - 16th August. From the very 
start the day promised to be interesting. In 
the morning at breakfast someone greeted 
Bykhovsky. The “people” gradually began 
arriving. Half of the participants were 
present at lunch. Most gazed at me in 
surprise: “What's he doing here?” (such 
puzzled 
looks 
would 
accompany 
me 
throughout the tournament). I also saw an 
“old acquaintance" - the Pole Weider, 
whom I had played in Cagnes-sur-Mer. 
After loitering about the whole day with 
nothing to do, at about 6 we went down 
into the foyer. We were led out of the hotel, 
loaded into buses and taken to some un­
known destination. On the way, in English
and German, we were briefly acquainted 
with some of the sights of Dortmund. From 
th e guide's description I understood only 
three words: beer, steel and corporation. 
Apparently the description was based on 
using these three words in various combi­
nations. Soon we arrived at some building. 
We were unloaded, and the bus set off for 
the "second party”. From the outside it was 
hard to determine the function of this 
building, but when we went inside it 
turned out to be a beer factory (the main 
sponsor of the championship - G.K.).
‘The opening ceremony took place in an 
enormous hall - probably the tasting-room. 
There was a lot of noise, rumpus - and 
beer. (They also provided lemonade, but 
most of the players preferred beer. How­
ever, I, as usual, tried to be different.). The 
tournament was opened by Lothar Schmid. 
After a mass of welcoming speeches (again 
beer, steel etc.), the pairings were made. 
From a drum some “Miss” drew numbers 
on which the names were written. I was 
assigned No.36, while No.35 went to some 
obscure Dutchman. “That means, White in 
the first game,” I remarked to myself. 
Incidentally, Schmid singled me out at the 
drawing of lots, emphasising my titles. 
When Benjamin was drawn, Bykhovsky was 
horrified: "Since he's so puny, he's bound to 
play brilliantly..." Then there were oceans of 
beer and cola and a buffet for 250 people. 
We went back in high spirits. I was eager 
for the fight, while Bykhovsky was looking 
forward to more bottles of Dortmund beer
- there are about 500 types in the city...'
Among the participants in the champi­
onship there were many future grandmas­
ters and international masters, well-known 
in the chess world. There were the experi­
enced 19-year-old 'old men': the Icelander 
Jon Amason (the world cadet champion of
218

Adult Games
1977), the Swede Ralf Akesson (European 
junior champion 1980/81 - 111/ 2 out of 13!), 
the Romanian Adrian 
Negulescu (who 
shared 3rd place at the 1979 world junior 
championship), the German Klaus Bischoff, 
the Yugoslav 
Branko 
Damljanovic, the 
Bulgarian Silvio Danailov (now Topalov's 
manager, and also President of the Euro­
pean Chess Union), and the Hungarian 
Tibor Karolyi (the author of some books on 
my games). And the audacious youth: the 
17-year-old Chilean Ivan 
Morovic (who 
played in five world junior champion­
ships!), the Argentinean Marcelo Tempone 
(world cadet champion 1979, who not long 
before had scored a sensational win over 
Petrosian at a tournament in Buenos Aires), 
the nearly 16-year-old Dane Curt Hansen, 
the Turk Suat Atalik, the 15-year-old Ameri­
can Joel Benjamin, the Indonesian Utut 
Adianto, the Englishman Nigel Short (the 
new hope of the West, who was to chal­
lenge for the world crown in 1993), and the 
14-year-old Indian Dibyendu Barua.
I too was only seventeen, but I was re­
garded as the clear favourite, and everyone 
was expecting me to win. However, such 
expectations can turn to nothing, especially 
if, after becoming used to the way in which 
adults play, you don't readjust in games 
with your contemporaries.
Bykhovsky: 'In the history of junior cham­
pionships there have been instances when a 
clear favourite underestimated his oppo­
nents and altogether finished outside the 
prize-winners. On this occasion this did not 
happen: Garik took the event very seriously. 
Before the tournament some advised the 
young grandmaster to play "on technique", 
exploiting his superiority in class. Fortu­
nately, Kasparov did not follow their advice 
and in all the games he went in fo r compli­
cated play with chances fo r both sides. His
games were always interesting, and usually 
most of the spectators crowded around his 
board (the seats were occupied long before 
the start of play).'
I began with three wins, and after four 
rounds I had 31/2 points and was leading 
together with Amason, Akesson and Ne­
gulescu, half a point ahead of Short, Tem­
pone and another three players. Then, 'by 
Swiss custom', the most important clashes 
between the rivals began. In the 5th round 
Akesson won against Negulescu, Tempone 
against Short, and after an adjournment I 
beat Amason in an interesting ending (two 
bishops and a-pawn against bishop, knight 
and f-pawn).
Thus Akesson and I reached 41/2 out of 5 
and our individual meeting occurred in the 
next round. This crazy game was probably 
my best creative achievement in Dortmund.
Game 43 
G.Kasparov-R.Akesson
World Junior Championship, 
6th round, Dortmund 22.08.1980 
Queen’s Indian Defence E12
1 d4 lLlf6 2 c4 e6 3 ctJf3 (3 ctJc3 - Game 
No.39) 3 ... b6 4 a3 (again my main weapon 
of that time; 4 g3 - Game Nos. 45, 46)
4...gb7
I 
was also not concerned about 4...ga6 
(Game Nos. 32, 68) or 4...c5 5 'Yic2 gb7 6 
CLJc3 c5 7 e4 cxd4 8 t2Jxd4, for example:
8 ... :. c5 9 tLlb3 lLlc6 10 ±g5 a6 11 0-0-0 
(Kasparov-van der Wiel, Amsterdam 1988).
5 t2Jc3 dS (5 .4Je4 - Game No.61) 6 cxds 
tLlxds
A popular response to the set-up with 
a2-a3. The capture with the pawn - 6...exd5 
is hardly any worse, but it is slightly more 
passive and it creates a different pawn
219

Garry Kasparov on Garry Kasparov: Part One
structure, which is not to everyone's taste; 
against Bukic (Banja Luka 1979) I success­
fully replied 7 kg5 ke7 8 .ix f 6!? ..txf6 9 g3, 
and against Antoshin (Baku 1980) and 
A.lvanov (Moscow 1981) - 7 g3 immedi­
ately. Now, however, White gains the 
opportunity to create a mobile pawn cen­
tre.
7 e3 (7 V c 2 - Game Nos. 73, 75, 98) 7...i.e 7  
The most natural move, but 7...g6!? is
more perplexing for the opponent - as 
Korchnoi played against me in the 1st game 
of our Candidates match (Game No.38 in 
Volume V of M y Great Predecessors).
8 kbS+ c6 9 .i d3 lZ:lxc3 (6)
After 9...0-0 White has the additional re­
source 10 'ifc2, while 10 e4 lZ:lxc3 11 bxc3 c5
12 0-0 cxd4 (12...h6? 13 ..if4, Kasparov- 
Marjanovic, Banja Luka 1979; Game No.100 
in Revolution in the 70s) 13 cxd4 lZ:lc6 14 
k e 3 l:c 8 transposes into the main line (cf. 
the note to Black's 10th move).
But the most radical solution to Black's 
opening problems is 9...c5!? 10 lZ:lxd5 exd5 
with 
a 
solid 
enough 
position. 
Even
10...# xd 5, a move criticised by theory, is 
acceptable (Petrosian-Smyslov, 28th USSR 
Championship, Moscow 1961; Game No.14 
in Volume Ill of My Great Predecessors), or
10...1.xd5 11 dxc5 bxc5 (Karpov-Najdorf,
Mar del 
Plata 
1982; 
Kasparov-Karpov, 
Zurich (blitz) 2006). This deprives White of a 
traditional trump - his mobile pawn centre, 
although each of the captures on d5 has 
some drawbacks, and 9 ... c5 has not had 
many supporters.
10 bxc3
10...lZ:ld7
10...c5 is more energetic: 11 0-0 lZ:lc6! 
(11...0-0 12 1Wc2 - Game No.52) 12 e4 (12 
i.b 2!? - Game No.8S) 12. ..0-0 13 ke3 cxd4
14 cxd4 l:c 8 15 l:a2?! (15 Ve2 - Kasparov- 
Najdorf, Bugojno 1982) 15 ... A f 6 16 i.b 1 g6
17 V d 3 V d 7 18 .l:!.d2 .l:!.fd8 with excellent 
play for 
Black 
(Kasparov-Karolyi, 
13th 
round). It was because of this game that I 
suffered a temporary crisis in the 4 a3 
variation, and three months later at the 
Olympiad I played only 4 g3.
11 e4 cS (3) 12 0-0 (4) 12...cxd4 (4)
12 
...0-0 is more accurate, maintaining 
the tension in the centre at least until 
White determines the position of his 
queen's bishop. After 13 'ire2 (13 d5?! exd5
14 exd5 c4! 15 kxc4  lZ:lf6, picking up the 
passed d-pawn) 13. ..# c7 14 k b 2 a fashion­
able tabiya arises (a joint one with the 7 
# c 2 variation), where Black has tried
14. ..l:ac8 (Kasparov-Kramnik, Linares 2004),
14. ..l:fe8 (Agrest-Akesson, Sweden 2006),
220

Adult Games
14...1:!.fd8 (Ponomariov-Leko, Moscow 2006), 
and 
Polugayevsky's old move 
14. ..c4?! 
(Carlsen-Aronian, 5th match game, Elista 
2007).
13 cxd4 O-O
14 l'ie2
A typical move with the intention of 
&b2, l:!.a(f)d1 and d4-d5. To me this seemed 
to be the optimal set-up, but I underesti­
mated Black's defensive resources. Little is 
promised by 14 e5 with the idea of i.e3 and 
lt:d2-e4 (this cramps Black, but relieves him 
of the potential threat d4-d5), or 14 i.e3 
l:!.c8 (Petrosian-Geller, Curacao Candidates 
1962).
However, as also in the 7 'Wic2 variation, 
with the knight on d7 serious consideration 
should be given to 14 ..if4!? Sc8 15 Wb3 
lt:b8 16 l:ad1 (Portisch-Korchnoi, Montpel­
lier Candidates 1985) or 15 ...lt:Jf6 16 11fe1 
(Khalifman-Blatny, Groningen 1985), re­
taining the initiative.
14...l:c8 (8) 15 i.b 2 (2)
A tempting post for the bishop (in view 
of the planned d4-d5). All the white pieces 
are ideally placed, whereas Black still has to 
find a comfortable place for his queen.
15 ...ic 7  (16) 16 We3 (6)
It is unclear whether White needs to take 
control of the f4-square. If 16 a4 there is
16 ...Jlb4 - therefore he should not be in a 
hurry to advance his a-pawn. In Informator 
I suggested 16 lt:d2!? (up until now this has 
only occurred in the game Mamedyarov- 
Sargissian, Reykjavik 2006). 16 l:ad1 'i'f4 17 
lbd2!? is also interesting, with the idea of 
e4-e5 and lbe4 (transposing into a position 
from the game Bareev-Lutz, Olympiad, 
Turin 2006).
16...lbf6 (10)
The alternative was 1 6 ...^ 8  (with the 
same idea 17 a4 &b4) or 16...&d6, in order 
by the threat of i.f4  to force e4-e5, al­
though after 17 l:fc1 'ib 8 18 e5 i.e7 19 
lLlg5 h6 20 lbe4 White's chances are some­
what better.
17lbeS (2)
Again if 17 a4 there is the good reply
17...1.b4 and ..."ile7 - this is how Black 
defended in my aforementioned game with 
Kramnik.
17...bS! (10)
Resourceful play: exploiting the weak­
ness of the e4-pawn, Black opens a loophole 
for his queen and deprives the white pieces 
of the c4-point. In The Test of Time I sug­
gested that Black shouldn't have reconciled 
himself to the knight on e5 - 17.lt:d7, but 
after 18 Hfc1! (18 f4?! lt:xe5 is equal)
18...'il'd6 19 lbc4 'iVb8 20 a4 and e4-e5
221

Garry Kasparov on Garry Kasparov: Part One
White would have retained the advantage 
(say, 20. ..h6 21 e5 'ia 8  22 f3 .Jtg5 23 f4 .Jl.e7
24 'Y/Ue2 etc.).
18 f4 (3) l8...'iVb6 (4)
The natural move, but l8....Jl.d6 would 
also have impeded White's attack.
19 'it'hl!
White is forced to engage in prophylaxis
- if immediately 19 f5, then 19... i  d6!, and 
after 20 l:tae1 exf5!? 21 Sxf5 gxe5 22 dxe5 
Wxe3+ 23 .l:i.xe3 l2Jd7 24 t xb5 ttJc5 (Stohl) 
he cannot count on anything.
19...b4?! (14)
Over-hasty. In striving to weaken the op­
ponent's attacking potential by exchanging 
a pair of bishops and obtaining counter­
play, Black loses control of the c4-point and 
opens the b-file, which proves advanta­
geous only to White. 19...Sc7, for example, 
was better, with the idea of 20 f5 exf5 21 
l:!.xf5 l2Je8 and . ..l2Jd6-c4.
‘On the last six moves Akesson spent 
more than an hour, which was far more 
than Garry. Such a disproportion is usually 
an indication of the difficulties encoun­
tered by the more pensive side in seeking 
counterplay.' (Nikitin)
20 axb4 (of course!) 20. .. : xb4 21 fiabl!
Preventing ... * b4-c3 and creating the 
threat of .Jl.b2-a3. Again nothing was given
by 21 f5 exf5! (but not 21...i.c3(?), as given 
in Informator, on account of 22 gxc3 .:txc3 
23 .l:i.fb1 and wins) 22 ,ig,xf5 i.c3 23 
xc3 
l:!.xc3 (Stohl) 24 S a fl gc8 25 gg5 tt:d7 or 25 
M.5f3 tt:g4 with equality.
21 
l2Jc4 was interesting, forcing a sacri­
fice of material: either the exchange for a 
pawn - 21...Sxc4 22 i.xc4l2J(.Jt)xe4 23 i.d3, 
or a pawn (this is better for Black) -
21..."ir'd8 22 e5 ttJd5 23 ^ 3  g6 24 Sxa7 'ic7
25 .l:.aa1, and White retains some advan­
tage. But the move in the game is stronger.
21. ..as (5)
22 We2! (9)
Also preventing ...i.b7-a6. The d3-bishop 
must be preserved - in the attack it will 
play a no less important role than the b2- 
bishop. 22 f5 .i. a6! 23 fxe6 fxe6 was harm­
less, for example: 24 Sxf6 :1xf6 25 l2Jd7 
±xd3 26 i2Jxf6+ gxf6 27 'iVg3+ '>i>h8 28 WJ/xd3 
gc3! 29 Wc2 'it>g7 with equality.
22...'Y!Ua7 (5)
Defending against ga3 and switching to 
a8 to put pressure on the e4-pawn, but the 
queen moves too far away from its king.
22...'il'd8?! 23 f5 l':.c7 would appear to be 
more solid, but after 24 l2Jxf7! c;t>xf7 25 
fxe6+ 'it'g8! 26 d5 White has excellent 
compensation for the piece. After 22...Sa8
23 f5 ga6 24 fxe6 fxe6, suggested by me in
222

Adult Games
The Test of Time, White has the unpleasant
25 Sxf6! (25 tt:lc4 'ifb7) 25...li.xf6 26 tt:ld7 
..txd3 27 tt:lxf6+ gxf6 28 'iVxd3 (Stohl) or
25 . .. gxf6 26 tt:ld7 ..Wd6 27 tt:Jxf8 ..txd3 28 
"t!Vxd3 l1xf8 29 d5 with a slight but enduring 
advantage, but 24 lt:Jc4! is even better.
The computer also considers a variation 
with an exchange sacrifice - 22....lfd8 23 
f5! exf5 24 l:!.xf5 .lxd4! 25 i.xd 4  'i¥xd4, but 
here too after 26 E d l White's chances are 
better.
23 fS (3) 23.. .'iVa8 (13)
Not 23. ..i.c3? in view of 24 fxe6 fxe6 25 
i.c4!, 
winning. 
Black's hesitation 
was 
probably caused by anxiety over the defen- 
sibility of his king's fortress.
The first critical position: how should 
White continue his attack?
24 dS?! (5)
‘Judging by the time spent, in his choice 
of move Garry was guided by intuition, 
rather than precise calculation. He decided 
to give up the attractive e4-d4 pawn pair, in 
order to clear the diagonals for his bishops. 
But this interesting idea does not give 
White any real advantage' (Nikitin). Let us 
consider the other possibilities:
a) 
24 lt:Jg4, and after 24. ..tt:Jxe4 25 d5! 
lLlc3! (the only defence, which I pointed out 
in Informator) 26 i.xc3! White's chances
are rather better: 26. ..li.xc3 27 f6 i.xd 5 28 
lt:Jh6+ 'ith8 29 fxg7+ \t>xg7 30 'i'g4+ 'it>h8 31 
tt:lxf7+ .l:!.xf7 32 li.xf7 i.xg2+ 33 'i!Nxg2 
'iVxg2+ 34 'Wt>xg2 li.xd3 35 l:1cl Wg8 36 l:!.b7, 
or 26...i.xc3 27 dxe6 Sc7 28 e7 li.xe7 29 
'fixe7 i.xg2+ 30 'it>gl i.d4+ 31 lt:Jf2 i.x f l 32 
'it>xfl 'ir'f3 33 'iVe2! 'if4  34 'it>g2. However,
24...tt:Jxg4! 25 'i!Nxg4 exf5 26 li.xf5 i.a 6  is 
sounder, maintaining the balance;
b) 24 lt:Jc4 Sc7 (24. ..Sc6!?; the exchange 
sacrifice does not promise full equality -
24...1.xe4 25 tt:lb6 i.xd3 26 'iVxd3 'iVe4 27 
'flxe4 lt:Jxe4 28 lt:Jxc8 Sxc8 29 fxe6 fxe6 30 
.l:!.fcl etc.) 25 e5 lt:Jd5 (25..tt:Je4 26 Sbcl!) 26 
tt:Jd6 a4! with the hope by accurate play of 
neutralising White's initiative;
c) 24 fxe6 fxe6 25 d5 (against Stohl's
move 25 lt:Jc4 there is the adequate reply
25 ....l:!.c7!) 
25 . .. exd5 
26 
lt:Jg4 
tt:Jxg4
(26 ...tt:Jxe4? 
27 
tt:Jh6+) 
27 
'ixg 4  li.c7! 
(27....l:!.xfl+? 28 li.xfl i.c3 29 i.xc3 li.xc3 30 
"t!Ve6+ 'ith8 31 'iVe7! Sc8 32 Sf7 dxe4 33 
..ic4! and wins) 28 e5, and White has good 
compensation for the pawn, but after
28 ...'iVc8 29 e6 i.a6! nothing more is appar­
ent. Therefore in The Test of Time I recom­
mended the pressurising 25 li.f4!? with the 
idea of 25...i.d6 (Stohl) 26 li.h4! or 25 ...a4 26 
lt:Jc4.
Thus it was possible to calmly build up 
the pressure on Black's position. The impa­
tient move in the game allows him to repel 
the first wave of the attack.
24. .. exds (3) 25 lt:Jg4 tt:Jxg4 (4)
If 25 ...tt:Jxe4? 26 ..txe4 dxe4 White would 
have won, not by the Informator line 27 
lt:Jf6+ 'ith8 28 'i!Vh5? (it is not yet too late for
28 'iVg4! Sc7 29 lt:Je8 or 28 ... i.a3  29 ..tal 
l:tc7 30 tfh3 h6 31 lt:Je8 and wins) 28...h6 29 
tt:lg4 in view of 29...f6 30 tt:Jxf6 e3!, but by 
the accurate 27 lt:Jh6+! 'it>h8 28 i.xg7+! 
'it>xg7 29 f6+ 'it>xh6 (29...'it>h8 30 'iVg4) 30 
.l:!.f5 with mate (Stohl).
223

Garry Kasparov on Garry Kasparov: Part One
26 'Wixg4 f6! (3)
To be honest, I overlooked this obvious, 
only reply, when I played 24 d5.
Now the thematic 27 e5 encounters the 
simple reply 27 ....11Lc3!, for example: 28 e6 
jLxb2 29 Bxb2 &a6 with a sound position. 
And in seeking a way to win, after a long 
think I decided to go in for extreme meas­
ures.
27 jLxf6!! (44)
By sacrificing the bishop, White clears 
the way for his pawns, which become 
formidably strong. 'White's attack can now 
be parried only by accurate defence, which 
is difficult to find. The bishop sacrifice 
changes the character and the tempo of the 
play, and above all - the value of every 
move is sharply increased. This, in view of 
Akesson's lack of time for thought (he had 
just 35 minutes left), was especially un­
pleasant for him.' (Nikitin)
27...Sxf6 28 eS Sh6? (16)
Black promptly makes a mistake, moving 
his rook to the wrong square. The best 
defence was offered by 28....l:i.f7 29 f6 Bcf8!. 
Here - both at the board, and in later 
analysis - I have been able to ‘calculate' 
only as far as a draw (such is the price of 
the impetuous 24 d5 breakthrough):
a) 30 Sf3 (the direct 30 jLxh7+? 4xh7 31
gf5 is weak in view of 31...^d2!) 30. ...1c8! 
(30. ..<4^8? 31 Sh3 gxf6 32 'Wig6! and wins; it 
is also less good to play 30. ..d4 31 .l:i.g3! g6
32 ^xg6 or 30. ..iVc8 31 .1f5 'Wic4 32 jLxh7+! 
4xh7 33 'Wih5+ 'it'g8 34 .Mh3 Sxf6 35 Wi7+ 
f
 36 exf6 4e8 37 'Wixg7 'Wie4 38 Sc1 d4
39 .l:i.h4!, etc.) 31 'i¥'g5! iVa7! (31....1e6 32 
Bg3 g6 is good enough for a draw, as is
31...<4h8 32 .Mxb4! gxf6! 33 iVh6 axb4 34 
.i.xh7 &g4!! 35 Hxf6! jLh5!) 32 fib fl!, and 
White has good compensation for the 
piece:
a1) 32...g6 (if 32...&e6 or 32...'Wid4 there is 
the drawing combination 33 fxg7 .l:i.xg7 34 
Exf8+ .1xf8 35 Sxf8+! 'ltxf8 36 'Wid8+) 33 
iVh6 fid8 (not 33. ..jLe6 34 Hg3 4h8?! 35 
.1xg6 fid7(c7) 36 h3!) 34 jLxg6 .i.f8 35 
jLxf7+ 'Wixf7 (Petrosian) 36 l rd2! or 33...<4h8
34 jLxg6 Hg8 35 .i.xf7 'Wixf7 36 'Wie3!, and 
the rook and pawn are at least as strong as 
the two bishops;
a2) 32...'i¥'c7 33 .l:i.c1! (but not immedi­
ately 33 .l:i.f4? g6! 34 .Mh4 .i.e6! 35 h3 4h8)
33 ... ^ 7  34 .Mf4! &h8 (34. ..g6 35 Hh4) 35 
fxg7+ .l:i.xg7 36 Exf8+ jLxf8 37 'Wid8 Sf7 38 
iVxc8 'Wixc8 39 .Mxc8 with a roughly equal 
endgame;
b) 30 Sf4!, a discovery by Nikitin.
Analysis diagram
224

Adult Games
Now 30...&c8? loses to 31 ; xh7+! \t>xh7 
32 'i¥h5+ 'itg8 33 .U.h4. This threat relieves 
White of any risk, for example:
b1) 30. ..d4 31 l:.bf1 ! (31 Sg1 is also possi­
ble, or else the immediate 31 k x h 7+ 'itxh7 
32 W 15+ 'lt>g8 33 Sh4 with a draw) 3 1 .'ith 8
32 ^xh7 k x g 2+ 33 Wgl k x f 1 34 Ae4! 
'Wixe4 35 J:xe4 gxf6 36 'it>xf1 fxe5+ 37 'ite2, 
and the black king is in danger;
b2) 30...'ti'c8 31 i.f5 ! 'Wic7 32 .:. xh7+ 
'itxh7 33 'il¥h5+ \t>g8 34 Sh4! fixf6 35 'ilfh7+ 
'>t>f7 36 exf6 \t>xf6 37 l!hxb4! axb4 38 .l:.f1+ 
'ite5! 39 'ilfh5+! 'lt>d6 40 'iVg6+! Wc5 41 S xf8 
or 39 ...'itd4 40 'Widl+ \t>c5 41 l!xf8, remain­
ing with the exchange for a pawn;
b3) 30....lid2!? 31 ^xh7+ Wxh7 32 'Wih3+! 
'itg8 33 fxg7! (Nikitin gives only 33 l:.h4? 
&h6 when Black wins) 33...l!xg7 (33 ....l:!.xf4
34 ^
8+ and gxf8'iV+) 34 :.h4! Wf7! 35 
'Wid7+ 'it>g8 36 W i3 with a draw, orthe more 
cunning 31 W i3!? h6 32 'i'g 3! iL.a6! 33 A f5 
(not Nikitin's move 33 :.g4(?) because of 
33. ..Ag5! 34 k g 6 Sb7) 33...k c 8! 34 i.d3 
with a draw.
Of course, many of the given variations 
are difficult to calculate (especially in time- 
trouble), and the move 28. ..1 h6? is easy to 
explain. ‘Akesson decided to conduct the 
defence on the basis of common sense: in 
the first instance he defended his h7-point 
(and in some cases, after e5-e6 and ...'ilkb8, 
Black can gain a tempo by threatening 
mate on h2). I think that this would have 
been played by the majority of players, not 
possessing a heightened sense of danger' 
(Nikitin). But my opponent underestimated 
the consequences of the breakthrough by 
the white pawns.
29 f6 Sc7 (29...iL.f8?! 30 e6! 'iV'b8 31 h3 and 
wins) 30 e6! (4)
With the seemingly tempting 30 .l:.bc1 ? 
White would have lost his entire advan­
tage: 30. „Sf7! (30. ..'i'd8 or 30...'ilkb8 is also
not bad) 31 
f5 d4! 32 S f2 4h8 or 31 'ie 6 
'Wib8 32 &b5 ^e7!.
30. ..'id8! (13)
After using almost all of his remaining 
time, Akesson found the only way of parry­
ing the direct threats - by giving up his 
rook for the two dangerous pawns. Other 
moves would quickly have led to a spec­
tacular rout:
a) 30.. . Wf8? 31 f7+ 4h8 32 Sxb4! axb4 33 
'Wixb4! with a quick mate;
b) 30. ...'i'Vb8 31 'tit'g3! (threatening e6-e7)
31....lid6 32 'i'xd6 S xf6 33 &b5! (Stohl), and 
the e-pawn decides matters;
c) 30...Wh8 31 'Wig3! d4 (avoiding the 
mate after 31...Wc8 32 Hbcl! iL.d6 33 fxg7+ 
'it>g8 34 'i-Vxd6 - Stohl) 32 'Wixc7 l  xg2+ 33 
'itg1 gxf6 34 e7 'it'g8 35 e8'Wi 'Wixe8 36 \t>xg2 
with an extra rook;
d) 30. ...lic6 31 e7 !l.xe7 32 fxe7 i.xe7 33 
W f5! 'ith8 (33 . ..&d6 34 Sbcl! Sxh 2+ 35 '>t>g1 
.l:!.h6 36 g3!) 34 Sf3! 'i1Ve8 35 'iWe5! &d6 36 
'i'xe8+ &xe8 37 ltb8 S e 6 38 Sd 8 and i.b5, 
picking upthe bishop.
31 e7 (3) 31....l:.xe7 32 fxe7 'ikxe7 33 Sbcl!
Not allowing the opponent any respite, 
especially with him being in time-trouble. 
The threat is S c 8+.
The last critical position: is Black able to 
save himself?
225

Garry Kasparov on Garry Kasparov: Part One
33. ..'id8? (3)
Other 'simple' defences against the 
deadly check 
would 
also have failed:
33.....tc6? 34 'il'c8+ Ae8 35 ..tb5 Se6 36 Sc7 
or 33....l:c6? 34 Sxc6 j_xc6 35 ^ 5  g6 36 
kxg6 etc. 33 ...Sd6 would also not have 
helped: 34 Wf4! g6 (34... g5 35 Wf5!) 35 ..tb5! 
(threatening Sc7 or Seel) 35. .g5 36 'it'g3 
and wins (Stohl).
With his flag about to all, Akesson failed 
to find the best reply 33 ...We6!, leading to 
an endgame favourable for White: 34 
'ifxe6+! (after 34 kf5? 'it'e5 35 h3 .id 6  the 
initiative is now with Black) 34....l:xe6 35 
Hc7 fie7, and here instead of my previous 
variation 36 Sxe7 .i.xe7 37 .ixh7+ Wxh7 38 
fif7 ..tb4 39 Sxb7 d4 40 Sd7 ..tc3 41 'it>gl, 
which is not altogether clear in view of
41...1.b2! (intending ...a5-a4-a3) 42 fla7 
.i.c3 intending ...d4-d3-d2, White has the 
much stronger 36 S fcl! 'it>f7! 37 Sxe7+ 
kxe7 38 Sc7 ..ta8 39 ..txh7 (Stohl) 39 ...'it>e6 
(after 39...a4? 40 Sc8! i.b 7  41 i.g8+ 'iti>f6 42 
Bb8 Black loses his bishop) 40 Sa7 .ic6  41 
l:txa5 with a technically won position.
Now, however, things do not get as far as 
an endgame.
34 "ifS! iVbS
Avoiding the spectacular 34. ....1l.d6 3 5 
'ili'f7+ Wh8 36 h3! (36 iVxb7 Sxh2+ 37 'it>gl
Hhl+! is not so clear - Stohl) 36.. ...tc8 37 
Sc7!.
35 ir'f7+ Wh8 36 l:i.c7 1-0
Times: 1.43-2.29.
A fighting game! Nikitin: 'A genuine vic­
tory fo r indomitable mind over matter. 
Already then by no means every grandmas­
ter could withstand the pressure of the 
young Kasparov. The two players displayed 
exceptional 
ingenuity and produced a 
highly complicated chess creation. 
The 
brilliance and freshness of their ideas were 
so attractive, that Garry several times re­
turned to an analysis of the mind-boggling 
events which occurred on the board. Among 
those who took part in the analytical 
searches were Petrosian and young candi­
date masters from the school I ran with him.
I also spent many hours trying to under­
stand the intricate turning-points of this 
wonderful chess spectacle.'
After this win I at last took the sole lead 
in the tournament - 5V2 out of 6, a point 
ahead of my three closest pursuers. Among 
them was the ambitious Tempone, with 
whom I was paired with Black in the next 
round.
Came 44 
M.Tempone-G.Kasparov
World Junior Championship, 
7th round, Dortmund 23.08.1980 
English Opening A38
1 CDf3 tt:Jf6 2 g3 (2 b3 g6 3 ..lb2 kg7 4 c4 - 
Game No.26) 2 ... g6 3 b3
In my youth I often encountered this 
‘venomous' set-up - my opponents also 
played 3 ..tg2 ..lg7 4 0-0 0-0 5 b3 d6 6 d4 e5 
(instead of 6...c5 7 i.b 2 tt:Jc6 8 d5, Ni- 
kolaevsky-Kasparov, Baku 1976) 7 dxe5
226

Adult Games
dxe5 8 gb2 e4 9 tt:g5 .af5 with equality 
(Kappe-Kasparov, Cagnes-sur-Mer 1977).
3 .. .&g7 4 gb2
Here theory promised Black equality af­
ter 4...d6 and then at a convenient moment 
...e7-e5, but my experience had shown that 
all was not so simple: in my game with 
Yusupov (Leningrad 1977) after 5 d4 0-0 6 
g g 2 e5 7 dxe5 tt:fd7 8 tt:c3 tt:xe5 9 ct:Jxe5 
gxe5 10 0-0 ct:Jc6 11 Sb1 .ae6 12 'id 2 l:te8
13 tt:d5 I definitely suffered. Therefore I 
devised and began employing another 
development set-up, which proved to be 
quite a good rejoinder to the ‘double fi- 
anchetto'.
4...cs (7)
With the intention of creating a strong 
centre by 5 ...d5 (if immediately 4... d5, then 
5 c4!). White prevents this.
5 C4d6
6 ;  g2 (2)
The attempt also to prevent 6...e5, re­
stricting the bishop on b2, is dubious - 
after 6 d4?! Black has the unpleasant
6...tt:e4!, for example: 7 gg2 (7 ct:Jfd2?! 
tt:g 5 !) 7...'Yia5+ 8 tt:fd2 C2lxd2 9 .ac3, and 
here not the dubious queen 
sacrifice
9 ...tt:xb3?! 
10 
gxa5 
tt:xa5 
(Psakhis-
Magerramov, Baku 1978), but 9 ...'i!6 ! (a 
move ofthe 1990s) 10 dxc5 ct:Jxb1! 11 gxg7
^ 4 +  12 'it>f1 .l:g8 13 gb2 (13 i.h 6  tt:a3!)
13...ctJd2+ 14 'it>g1 tt:xc4 15 'ir'd4 tt:a6!. Or 7 
"i'c1 #a5+ 8 C2lbd2 ct:Jxd2 9 'Yixd2 'ir'xd2+ 10 
'it>xd2 tt:c6 11 e3 gg4 12 i.e2, and White 
holds on (Korchnoi-Kasparov, Paris (blitz)
1990), but 8 ... 0-0!? deserves consideration.
6...es 
7 0-0 tt:c6 8 ct:Jc3 0-0 (two of my 
earlier games also reached this position) 9 
d3 (2)
In the event of 9 e3 .af5! 10 d4?! (10 d3! 
is better) 10...e4! 11 tt:g5 Se8 12 dxc5 dxc5
13 ct:Jb5 fie7! Black has a promising position 
(Webb-Kasparov, 5kara 1980).
9...ct:Je8l? (2)
An important link in the plan. The knight 
is better placed at c7 than at f6: it clears the 
way for the f-pawn, without losing control 
of the d5-point. 9 ...ct:Jh5?! 10 ct:Jd2 is less 
good for Black (Petrosian-Portisch, 
9th 
match game, Palma de Mallorca 1974).
10 ctJd2 (3)
Or 10 #d2 ctJc7 11 tt:e1 ge6 12 ct:Jd5 'id7
13 e3 Sab8 with equality (Kharitonov- 
Kasparov, Moscow 1977). Tempone chooses 
a similar course, but is unable to control 
comfortably the d5-point.
10...tt:Jc7 (5)
11 e3?1 (13)
An inaccuracy. The immediate 11 ct:Jd5 is 
better 
(Gipslis-Ftacnik, 
Tallinn 
1981)
227

Garry Kasparov on Garry Kasparov: Part One
11... t g4!?, or 11 a3, trying to provoke either 
the weakening 11...a5 (Cvitan-Gallagher, 
Geneva 1994), or 11...ke 6?! 12 b4! (instead 
of 12 .Sd5 Vd7 with equality) 12 ... cxb4 13 
axb4 .Sxb4 14 k x b 7 with the initiative, and 
therefore 1 1...jLg4! 12 h3 il.e6 is correct.
11. ..ke6 (3) 12 Sc1 (28)
White is forced to prevent the freeing 
advance ...d6-d5 in this artificial way: if 12 
tt:Jd5?, then 12...kxd5 13 cxd5 tt:b4, win­
ning a pawn.
12 ... #d7 (5)
13 S e 1 (2)
Not an essential move - White values his 
g2-bishop too highly. He should have con­
sidered, for instance, 13 .Sde4 h6 14 f4 exf4
15 gxf4 f5 16 tt:f2(g3), although here too 
Black has a comfortable game.
13...Sad8 (25)
In choosing from several attractive con­
tinuations, I decided in the first instance to 
complete my mobilisation and intensify the 
threat of ...d6-d5.
14 lt:Jde4 (10)
White is already in some difficulties. It is 
obvious that the variation 14 a3 d5 15 cxd5 
.Sxd5 16 tt:Jxd5 ?! (the lesser evil is 16 tt:Jce4 
b6) 16 ...kxd5 17 .l:xc5 (17 tt:e4?! b6 and 
...f7-f5) 17... ; xg2 18 'it>xg2 #xd3 cannot 
satisfy him.
14. ..h6 (2) 15 f4 fS (6) 16 tt:Jf2 exf4 (2) 17 
gxf4
One of the critical positions in the game.
17...#f7?!
By beginning preparations for ...g6-g5, 
Black deviates from the correct course - 
play in the centre. Nothing was promised 
either by the immediate 17...d5 in view of
18 cxd5 tt:Jxd5 19 tt:Jxd5 k x b 2 20 J:xc5 ..ta3
21 b4! tt:Jxb4 22 l:c7! (my earlier recom­
mendation 22 Sa5 is less good because of
22...tt:xd5 23 Sxa3 b6) 22...'iVd6 23 V a 1! 
Sd7 24 Sxd7 kxd 7 25 'i¥e5 with equality, or 
by the immediate 17 ...g5 18 #d2! (the 
exchange 18 fxg5 hxg5 would increase 
White's problems).
However, the prophylactic 17...b6! would 
have given Black very promising play, for 
example: 18 'li'd2 d5 19 cxd5 (19 tt:e2 Itfe8 
or 19...d4!) 19...tt:xd5 20 tt:Jxd5 ..txd5 21 
kxg7 '(/Vxg7 22 
' xd5+ Sxd5, intending 
... g6-g5.
18 '(!Vd2 gS (2)
It was safer to 'stand still'. Underestimat­
ing the opponent's possibilities, I made a 
series of routine and largely weak moves 
(perhaps the psychological tiredness told 
after the difficult game with Akesson), and 
step by step the situation changed in 
White's favour.
228

Adult Games
19 tt:Je2 (2)
19 
d4 looks more energetic, and if 19...d5, 
then 20 cxd5 tt:Jxd5 21 fxg5 hxg5 22 tt:Jh3! 
cxd4 23 exd4, emphasising what a risky 
venture ... g6-g5 was. But Tempone pre­
ferred to take control of the f4-point and 
exchange the dark-square bishops. After 
consolidating in the centre, White has 
achieved a flexible position. Now the open­
ing of the kingside may rebound on Black: 
his king's defences are less secure.
19...ds (18)
Black does not sense the danger, although 
he already needs to be cautious. Thus after 
the Informator suggestion 19 ...ltJe8?! White 
has the awkward 20 d4!. If I had been aiming 
only for a draw, I would possibly have played
19...^xb2 20 Wxb2 Wg7.
20 11.xg7 (6) 20...®xg7 21 'ih l (4)
It is sensible to avoid the complications 
after 21 cxd5?! gxd5 22 fxg5 tt:Je5! or 22 
I:txc5 1l.xg2 23 'it>xg2 gxf4+ 24 'ih l W/e7. In 
Informator and then in The Test of Time I 
recommended 21 tt:Jg3 with the cooperative 
variation 21 ...gxf4(?) 22 tt:Jh5 fxe3(?) 23 
I:txe3 and wins, but after the calm 21. ..b6 
there is nothing terrible for Black.
Here I at last examined the situation 
critically, and I drew some painful conclu­
sions.
21...dxc4?! (20)
It seemed to me that, because of the 
poor placing of his pieces and the vulner­
ability of his centre, Black's position was 
already 
difficult, 
and 
after prolonged 
thought I decided that the course of events 
could only be changed by the rapid return 
of the knight to f6. To carry out this idea I 
was forced to weaken my queenside and 
concede the centre, but I considered that 
the creation of counterplay on the kingside 
(instead of temporising, and manoeuvring) 
was the most important task.
Meanwhile, both 21...b6 and 21...#e7, or 
perhaps even 21...'it>h8!? (22 fxg5 hxg5 23 
cxd5 gxd5 24 I:txc5 gxg2+ 25 'ixg2 tt:Je6 
with counterplay worth a pawn) would still 
have enabled Black to maintain approxi­
mate equality.
22 bxc4 tt:Je8?!
From f6 the knight will take control of 
the central squares, forestall the unpleas­
ant manoeuvre tt:Jg3-h5 - and take part in 
the spectacular finish to the game! But the 
patient 22 ...l:td6 23 I:tg1 g4 was objectively 
better, or even 22 ...gc8 23 gxc6 (23 I:tg1 
Wif6) 23 ...bxc6 24 tt:Jg1 tt:Je6 25 tt:Jf3 'it>h7 26 
.l':tg1 # f6 and ...I:tg8, although I did not like 
the ‘brittle nature' of Black's pawn struc­
ture and this all looked rather suspicious.
23 #c3?! (4)
The unexpected 23 fxg5! hxg5 24 tt:Jf4! 
was far stronger, for example: 24...gxf4?! 25 
gxc6! 'it>f7! 26 exf4! bxc6 27 ltJh3 with a 
powerful attack, or 24...gd7 25 gd5+ 'it>h7 
(25 ... 'it>h8 26 I:tg1 tt:Jf6 27 I:tg3 or 27 ^ 2 !? )
26 I:tg1 with the initiative: 26 ...tt:Jf6 27 h4! 
g4 28 tt:l2h3 or 26...tt:Jc7 27 I:tg3 g4 28 h3.
23. ..tt:Jf6 (6)
I was continuing to play for a win, and I 
did not even contemplate the depressing
23...^xc3 24 I:txc3 gd7 25 d4!.
24 d4 (4)
229

Garry Kasparov on Garry Kasparov: Part One
White does not stand still - his chances 
are now better, and energetic measures are 
required of Black to create counterplay.
24...1L.c8
Previously I suggested 24...CDe7(?!) with 
the idea of 25 = xb7 tt:Jed5! 26 iL.xd5 tt:Jxd5
27 cxd5? ..txd5+ 28 e4 fxe4 and wins, but 
after 27 #d3! Black still has to demonstrate 
that he has sufficient compensation for the 
pawn. Moreover, in the variation 25 d5 (25 
#a3!?) 25. .. 1 c8(?!) 26 'i!Va3 tt:Jg6 I consid­
ered only 27 'i!Vxc5(?) CDh4 28 .Mg1 b6 29 
'iVd4 b5! or 29 'iVb4 .Mde8 ‘with fair counter­
chances', although after 27 'iVxa7! White is 
a sound pawn to the good.
The computer insistently recommends
24...CDb4 25 :ta l (25 'iVd2!?) 25. ..iL.c8 26 a3 
tt:Ja6, but it is hard for a human player to 
play his knight to such a 'bad' square, 
especially as after 27 d5 or 27 CDd3 all the 
same Black does not have equality.
25.l:tcd1?(10)
Losing the greater part of his advantage. 
I thought that the strongest was 25 dxc5(?!) 
with the idea of 25. . CDe7 26 ficd l tt:Jg6 27 
l:td6! or 25. ..CDd7 26 'i!Va3 'i!Ve7 27 CDd3, but 
after 25. ..'iNe7! 26 CDd4 iVxc5 Black would 
have extricated himself: 27 CDd3 Wa5 28 
tt:Jxc6 'iVxc3 29 Sxc3 bxc6 30 ..txc6 CDe4! 31 
i.xe 4  fxe4 32 tt:Je5 Sd2 36 .l:.a3 .Mfd8 with
equality. Therefore 25 d5! was correct:
25 ...CDb4 (25 ...CDe7?! 26 'iVa5 tt:Jg6 27 'iVxa7 
can hardly be correct) 26 'iVb3 with the 
better prospects.
However, Tempone did not want to part 
with his fine 'hanging' centre and, after 
making his move, he unexpectedly offered 
a draw. I stopped to think and while realis­
ing that for the moment Black had no real 
grounds for optimism, I nevertheless de­
cided to take a risk.
25...cxd4 (7) 26 exd4 (2)
It was this natural move that I was 
counting on, assuming that 26 tt:Jxd4 would 
have been better for White. However, even 
here after 26...tt:Jxd4 27 exd4 .Mfe8 he does 
not have anything at all serious.
By taking with the pawn, Tempone was 
hoping for d4-d5 followed by CDd4, when 
Black does not have even have a hint of any 
counterplay. But at this moment my oppo­
nent’s pleasant thoughts were interrupted 
by a manoeuvre which abruptly changed 
the evaluation of the position.
26...CDe7!
The most interesting stage begins. The 
manoeuvre of the knight to h4 may cause 
White serious problems: one of his most 
important pieces - the bishop on g2 - will 
be under attack.
230

Adult Games
27 ds (8)
Prophylactic measures (such as 27 #c1!, 
hindering ...lt:Jg6) should have been consid­
ered, but Tempone does not display any 
signs of disquiet.
27...1t:Jg6 28 li:Jd3?! (8)
White is already finding some difficulty 
in choosing his moves. The black pawns 
would have become dangerously active in 
the event of 28 fxg5 hxg5 29 d6 (29 li:Jh3? 
#h6!) 29. ..f4 30 c5 Sde8 31 li:Jd4 g4. But if 
Tempone had foreseen the coming events 
he would probably have played 28 a4.
28...1t:Jh4
The black knights are positioned menac­
ingly close to the white king's residence, 
and Black only needs to bring into play his 
last reserve - the bishop on c8.
29 .l:!.gl?
Not an obvious mistake, but apparently 
the decisive one. 29 li:Jd4 or 29 Sb1 was 
essential, although in both cases after
29 .. J:!.fe8 the initiative is with Black.
29...bS!
The triumph of Black's plan! The white 
centre collapses, and Black's minor pieces, 
which for a long time were huddled to­
gether in their own camp, become fearfully 
strong.
30 tt:JeS (4)
30 
cxb5 was hardly any more resilient: 
30. ..li:Jxg2 (30....l:!.fe8!?) 31 Sxg2 li:Jxd5 32 
Wxg7+ (32 #b3 ke6!) 32. ..'ixg7 33 Sg3 (33 
lt:Jc5 li:Je3) 33. ...l:!.fe8 34 lt:Je5 kb7 35 lt:Jc6 
lt:Jc7! 36 .l:Ixd8 .l:Ixd8 37 a4 .l:Id2 with a won 
ending.
30...bxc4 (2) 31 #xc4 kb 7  (9) 32 d6+ (9)
Equivalent to capitulation, but what else 
was there? 32 li:Jd4 is bad: 32. ..li:Jxg2 33 
li:Jxf5 ^ 7 !  34 lt:Jxh6+ Wh8! 35 Sxg2 .l:Ixd5 
and wins. White would also have lost, 
although not so quickly, after 32 #b3 Wh8 
or 32 li:Jc3 .l:!.c8 33 Vb3 'it>h8.
32...'It>h7 (3)
32...Wh8!? was tempting, since if 33 
kxb7 #xb7+ 34 Vc6 there was the spec­
tacular zwischenzug 34...lt:Je4!. Here 3 5 
Bge1 seemed unclear to me, but after
35 ...#g7! White would have been unable to 
save the game: 36 # c7 li:Jf2+ 37 Wg1 li:Jxd1 
38 #xg7+ Wxg7 39 Bxd1 Sfe8(f6) etc.
33 kxb7 'i¥xb7+ 34 #c6 #xc6+ 35 lt:Jxc6
3S. ..lt:Je4!
By creating a rare mating construction, 
Black picks up the d6-pawn.
36 I g f l
The last chance was 36 Bge1!? - this 
would have justified itself after 36....l:!.c8? 37 
li:Jed4! (but not the earlier suggestion 37 
d7? Sxc6 38 d81i  Sxd8 39 Sxd8 Sc2! 40
231

Garry Kasparov on Garry Kasparov: Part One
o1:ld4 Sg2! and wins) 37. ..o1Jxf2+ (37...o1Jxd6?
38 o1:le6!) 38 'it>g1 li:Jxd1 39 l:!.xd1 li:Jf3+ 40 
li:Jxf3 .l:!.xc6 41 li:e5. and the d-pawn will 
cost the rook, or 36 ...li:Jf2+?! (for the mo­
ment there is no need to exchange such a 
powerful knight for the passive rook) 37 
Wg1 li:Jxd1 38 Sxd1, but after 36...Sxd6! 37 
.l:!.xd6 o1Jxd6 38 o1Jed4 li:Je4 or 38...Sf7 Black 
would have retained an obvious advantage.
36. ...l:xd6 (here too 36...Sc8? was weak: 37 
li:Jed4! li:Jxd6 38 li:Je6) 37 Sxd6 li:Jxd6 38 
fxgS hxgS 39 S d l Se8!
A pretty rook manoeuvre. The retreat of 
the knight would have given White some 
chances, but Black does not even think of 
moving it, and he continues his attack.
40 li:ed4 Ii.e3! 41 'it>g1 (3) 41...li:Je4
The black pieces (especially the knights!) 
have taken up dominating positions, and 
have created an unusual cage around the 
white king. Now the win is achieved either 
by transferring the rook to the 2nd rank, or 
by advancing the f- and g-pawns.
42 S b l (9) 42...Sd3 (2) 43 a4 Yd2 o-l 
Times: 2.35-2.19.
After beating Tempone I reached 61/2 out 
of 7 and stretched my lead to one and a half 
points. Although there was still nearly half 
of the tournament to come, the destiny of
first place was practically decided.
The only player not to reconcile himself 
to this was Akesson: in the 8th and 9th 
rounds he scored two wins and reduced the 
gap to the minimum, since I made two 
draws. But in the 10th and 11th rounds our 
paths conclusively diverged: Ralf faded, 
losing to Short and Morovic, whereas I 
crushed Hjorth and won a textbook ending 
against Danailov.
At the end I made two more draws and 
finished first, one and a half points ahead 
of the silver medal winner Short. Five years 
later Nigel said that he still remembered 
the impression that I made on him across 
the board (we played a draw in the 9th 
round): ‘I have neverfaced such an intense 
player, never felt such energy and concen­
tration, such will and desire to win burning 
across the board from me.'
Incidentally, in our preparations for the 
tournament my trainers and I considered 
Short to be one of my main rivals and we 
carefully analysed his games. At the age of
12 Nigel became the youngest-ever partici­
pant in the adult British Championship, at
14 he shared 1st-3rd places in it, and then 
also 1st-2nd places in the World Cadet 
Championship 
(conceding 
the title to 
Tempone only on the tie-break). Some 
English chess commentators even predicted 
that the then youngest international mas­
ter would be a future adult world cham­
pion. In Dortmund, initially Short was 
pretty lucky on a couple of occasions, but 
then he warmed up and showed that he did 
indeed possess great chess potential.
Bykhovsky: ‘Before the championship it 
was said that Kasparov should not take part 
in it, since the player from  Baku was obvi­
ously stronger than his opponents. Now it 
can definitely be said (and Garik himself is of 
the same opinion) that the tournament was
232

Adult Games
useful fo r him. And it is not just that Kas­
parov's name has now joined the ranks of 
the “chess princes". It was important to rid 
himself ofthe complex arising from  his not 
so successful performances in the world 
cadet championships. Thosefailures are now 
not so bitter. In the creative respect too the 
tournament was instructive - Kasparov's 
strengths became clearer, and deficiencies 
came to Tight, on the elimination of which 
he needs to work. The young grandmaster 
has all the attributes to be one o f the top 
chess players in the world: talent, capacity 
fo r work, and sense of purpose. Butfor great 
victories you also need strength of character. 
Whether Garik can develop this will be 
decided in the nextfewyears.’
Nikitin: 
‘Kasparov's 
superiority 
was
enormous. At times it appeared that he was 
playing a different kind of chess, of which his 
contemporaries were not yet capable. The 
chess world realised that the new chess 
prince was on course fo r the chess summit. 
At the time grandmaster Hort wrote: “Of the 
well-known players, the only one who can 
realistically threaten Karpov is Kasparov, 
and that within a few  years when he gains 
experience of participating in top-level 
international events." To questions about his 
long-term plans, Garry himself would avoid 
these with pre-determined protestations 
that he only planned one year ahead.'
And, indeed, in one of the interviews in 
September 1980, to the question ‘do you 
believe that at some point you will contest a 
match fo r the world crown with Anatoly 
Karpov - in a match which the world is 
awaiting?’, I replied as follows: 'Alas, such a 
possibility lies beyond the range of my 
foresight. Serious obsessions rarely come 
true. Let us see how things go, how circum­
stances tum out. Too many obstacles still 
need to be overcome, and besides my play
depends on a mass of factors - form, mood 
and the weather. In a couple of years, if all 
goes well in the Interzonal, it will be worth 
returning to this question.'
I 
was also asked if I would play in the fol­
lowing 
world junior championships. 
I 
replied: 'It is tempting to play once more 
and, if I am successful, to become the first 
two-times champion. But I think that this 
tournament was my last one in junior 
chess. I don't want to give up, but it would 
appear that this stage has come to an 
end. .. ’
Now I was the chess prince! I was over­
joyed. My relatives and trainers were 
happy, as were my school teachers and my 
former class-mates. It is probable that 
Botvinnik was also happy, although he was 
terribly angry that I had disobeyed him, and 
for a time we weren't even on speaking 
terms. But then my mother had a word 
with his wife Gayane Davidovna, and 
relations gradually returned to normal.
Olympiad Debut
24th World Chess Olympiad (Malta, 20th 
November-7th December 1980): 1. USSR 
and 2. Hungary - 39 out of 56; 3. Yugoslavia
- 35; 4. USA - 34; 5. Czechoslovakia - 33; 6­
7. Poland and England - 321/2; etc. (alto­
gether - 82 teams). This difficult Olympiad 
gold was procured by Karpov (9/12), Po­
lugayevsky (3/7), Tal (31/2/6), Geller (61/2/9), 
reserves Balashov (71/2/10) and Kasparov 
(91/2/12).
That remarkable 'gold' year concluded 
for me with the Olympiad in Malta, the first 
in my career. 'Which of our grandmasters 
does not dream of becoming one of the 
cherished six Olympiad players!' I declared 
two months before this in an interview.
Nikitin: 'The place allotted to the novice
233

Garry Kasparov on Garry Kasparov: Part One
in the country’s main team was the most 
modest one, but the youngster was happy 
and proud. Before this so important appear­
ance, fo r the first time we were able to hold 
a training session in a government sanato­
rium in Zagulba - a small resort 40 kmfrom 
Baku. Starting from  that time, fo r ten years 
Zagulba became Kasparov's training base. 
The wonderful sandy beaches of the Caspian 
Sea, the shady avenues in the parks, the 
general stillness - all this helped us to pre- 
parefor the most serious chess battles.’
This is from the notebook of Rimma 
Bilunova, the trainer of the USSR women's 
team (she was entrusted with looking after 
the youngest players - Maya Chiburdanidze 
and me): 'Rome, en route to Malta, 16th 
November. The most interesting member of 
our team is, of course, Garik Kasparov. For 
all his chess virtues, he is also a very interest­
ing person. You only need to excite him a 
little, and he pours forth poetry, stories, and 
interesting lectures on the most varied 
topics. For the women's team he is the 
general favourite, entertainer and saviour 
during the tiresome bustle of travelling. 
Today I would define his essence as follows: 
passion itself, in the very best sense of the 
word. Also interesting are Maya Chibur­
danidze and the beauty Nana Alexandria, 
and the matron-like Nona Gaprindashvili, 
but Garik is our treasure, our sparkle, our 
joy. The other members of the men’s and 
women’s teams are just people. But during 
these two days, fo r me Garik has proved 
even more striking than Rome, the Vatican 
and the Coliseum.'
Malta is a beautiful island, of course, but 
playing there was very difficult: apart from 
the weight of responsibility, I was also 
oppressed by the unusual living conditions. 
For instance, to have dinner you had to 
stand in a queue for something like an hour
and a half. We played in the old castle of 
the Maltese Order, in a gallery 200 meters 
long by 14 meters wide, along which were 
arranged the chess tables, with a narrow 
corridor in the middle for spectators (who 
by no means always kept quiet). The 
rounds, and there were 14 of them, took 
place from 15.00 to 20.00, with adjourn­
ments from 22.00 to 2400 and, if neces­
sary, the following morning.
The main intrigue ofthe men's Olympiad 
was whether the strong Hungarian team 
would repeat its sensational success of two 
years earlier, when it displaced the invari­
able champions - the USSR team - from the 
top of the pedestal. True, on that occasion 
Karpov and Tal, resting after the exhausting 
match in Baguio, were not playing ... Now 
they were, as well as two ‘dark horses' - 
debutants Balashov and Kasparov. Of course, 
we both did our utmost to justify the hopes 
placed in us, especially since not all the team 
was in good form and the tournament race 
proved exceptionally difficult.
For the starting match with Venezuela 
the Soviet team fielded its main line-up - 
Karpov, Polugayevsky, Tal and Geller. It is 
incredible, but true: this stellar quartet 
achieved only a 21/2-11/2 score (Karpov won). 
But the Hungarians crushed the Scots 4-0, 
and a further 18 matches ended this way! 
From the 2nd round Balashov and I success­
fully joined the battle, and our team confi­
dently defeated the Greeks and the Austri- 
ans (both 31/ 2-1/2). However, the Hungarians 
also did not slow down, overcoming the 
Norwegians (31/ 2-1/2) and the Swedes (3-1).
In the 4th round the USSR team met the 
Yugoslavs, who were always among the 
contenders for the medals. Our opponents 
did their utmost not to lose the match - 
and they achieved three draws, but they 
were unable to implement their plan in full.
234

Adult Games
Came 45 
G.Kasparov-S.Marjanovic
World Chess Olympiad, 
4th round, Malta 23.11.1980 
Queen’s Indian Defence E17
1 d4 tt:lf6 2 c4 e6 3 tt:lf3 b6 4 g3 (6)
As I have already said, at that time I had 
a temporary crisis in the 4 a3 variation, and
I began adopting 4 g3 (which came in 
useful later in my matches with Karpov).
4....Jtb7 5 i.g 2 .fi.e7 6 0-0 (6 tt:lc3 tt:le4 7 i.d 2
- Game No.46) 6... 0-0 7 ds!? (2)
A pawn sacrifice, which came into fash­
ion three months before the Olympiad - 
after Polugayevsky's fine win in the 12th 
game 
of his 
Candidates 
match 
with 
Korchnoi (1980). The usual 7 tt:lc3 tt:le4 is far 
more modest.
7...exds 8 tt:lh4!
A fresh idea, leading to sharp positions, 
in which the character of the play was to 
my liking and seemed favourable for White. 
The earlier move 8 tt:ld4 went out of use 
after 8 ...i.c6! 9 cxd5 .Jtxd5 (Polugayevsky- 
Korchnoi, 8th match game, Buenos Aires
1980).
S...c6
In the event of 8 ...tt:le4 9 cxd5 tt:ld6 10
tt:lf3 (as in the source game Guimard-Pilnik, 
La Plata 1944) or 9....Jtxh4 10 i.xe 4  i.f6  11 
'Wic2 (Gheorghiu-Unzicker, Wijk aan Zee
1981) White retains somewhat the better 
chances.
9 cxds tt:JxdS
If 9...cxd5, then 10 tt:lc3 tt:la6 11 tt:lf5 tt:lc7
12 .Jtf4 with some advantage (Beliavsky- 
Spassky, Baden 1980).
10 tt:JfS tt:lc7 (2)
A sound reply. The sensational Po- 
lugayevsky-Korchnoi game went lO...i.c5?!
11 e4 tt:le7 (Black still has problems after
11...'if6 12 tt:lxg7 'it>xg7 13 exd5 .Jta6 14 
i.d2!, Dorfman-G.Kuzmin, Tashkent 1980)
12 ct:Jxg7! 'it>xg7 13 b4! .Jtxb4 14 'i*'d4+ f6 15 
'Wixb4, and White scored a spectacular win 
(Game No.27 in Volume Ill of My Great 
Predecessors). And after 10. ..tt:lf6 11 e4 d5 12 
tt:lc3 dxe4 (Polugayevsky-Stean, Olympiad, 
Malta 1980) 13 tt:lxe4! with the threat of 
i.g 5 is good.
11 tt:lc3
11 e4 d5 12 fle1 is currently popular, but
11...d6 seemed better to me, and therefore I 
considered 11 tt:lc3 to be more accurate (as 
played by Sveshnikov - cf. the following 
note).
11 ...ds (6)
White is better after 11...d6 12 i.f4  tt:le8
235

Garry Kasparov on Garry Kasparov: Part One
13 'ifd2 tt:Ja6 14 Efd1 (5veshnikov-Platonov, 
Tashkent 1980) or 11...tt:Je8 12 i.f4  tt:Ja6 13 
# d 2 d5 (13 . ..tt:Jc5 14 Sad l) 14 e4 tt:Jac7 15 
B ad l i.f6 , and now not 16 exd5 tt:Jxd5 17 
tt:Jxd5 cxd5 18 tt:Je3 ctJc7 19 Ji.xc7 'i'xc7 with 
a draw in view of 20 tt:Jxd5 i.xd5 (Timman- 
Karpov, Tilburg 1983), but 16 'ir'c2!? or 16 
Bfe1!? with a very promising game.
12 e4
By transposition a position from the 8 
ctJd4 variation has been reached (Razuvaev- 
Makarychev, 
46th 
U55R Championship, 
Tbilisi 1978).
12...i.f6 (39)
After lengthy hesitation Marjanovic fol­
lows in the footsteps of Makarychev. If
12 ...dxe4?! 13 Ji.xe4 White has strong 
pressure. In the game Kishnyov-Kholmov 
(Jurmala 1981) Black immediately returned 
the pawn - 12 ...tt:Jd7 13 exd5 tt:Jxd5 14 
tt:Jxd5 cxd5 15 Ji.xd5 Ji.xd5 16 #xd5 and 
soon equalised, but 13 Se1! was better.
The theory of this variation was only just 
making its first steps, and so it is not sur­
prising that both players spent a long time 
in thought.
13 exds (51)
Here is the improvement. Razuvaev tried
13 Vg4, and after 13 ...ctJd7 (intending 
...tt:Je5) 14 f4?! g6 15 tt:lh6+ 'it>h8 16 e5 kg7
he did not gain sufficient compensation for 
the pawn.
But 13 kf4!? came into consideration 
(Hort-H.Olafsson, Buenos Aires 1980) - as I 
played in the 2nd game of my first match 
with Karpov (Moscow 1984/85) and, al­
though I encountered the novelty 13 ...Ji.c8!
14 g4!? tt:Jba6 (Game No.6 in Kasparov vs. 
Karpov 1975-1985), I killed my opponent's 
desire for 4...gb7: he then switched to
4...Aa6.
13...cxdS (5)
After 13...tt:Jxd5 14 tt:Jxd5 cxd5 I was in­
tending to regain the pawn - 15 tt:Je3 and 
ctJxd5, but 15 kf4!? is interesting (5hirov- 
Adams, 4th match game, Elista 2007). Not 
surprisingly, Marjanovic prefers to keep the 
extra material, especially since for the 
moment no particular dangers for Black are 
apparent.
14 k f4  (7) 14...tt:Jba6 15 Se1 (20)
The most natural developing move, 
which since then has occurred three times 
more often than the alternative 15 Ec1.
1S...I'id7!? (15)
A perfectly acceptable reply, but not the 
only one. Initially 15. ..tt:Jc5 seemed better, 
but before the 1984/85 match we discov­
ered that after 16 ...td6 Se8 17 Exe8+ tt:Jxe8
18 Ji.xc5 bxc5 19 tt:Jxd5 Sb8 20 tt:Jxf6+ "Wxf6
236

Adult Games
21 gxb7 #xf5 (21 .. .Sxb7? is bad in view of
22 #d5! Sxb2? 23 .lie1 Sb8 24 lUe7+ and 
lUc6) 22 #d5! Vxd5 23 gxd5 l:!.xb2 24 .l:!c1 
Black has an unpleasant endgame: the 
white bishop is clearly stronger than the 
knight. 18 Ji.xd5!? is also very interesting.
However, neither after 15...i.c8!? 16 lUd6 
(16 lUd4 gb7) 16...gxc3 17 bxc3 ge6, nor 
after the move in the game were we able to 
devise anything promising, and in 1984 I 
rejected 13 exd5.
16 iL.h3! (10)
There is little point in playing 16 'ig 4  in 
view of 16...gc8! 17 Se5 (17 lUe7+? 'i!Vxe7)
17. .. ; xe5 (17...<.t>h8!?) 18 i xe5 f6 19 j_xc7 
lUxc7 20 lUxd5 'it>h8 21 lUxc7 'i/xc7 22 j_xa8 
gxf5 23 'i'xf5 l:!.xa8 with equality.
I6...'it>h8? (12)
A fatal mistake: the opponent ‘loses con­
trol'. 16...#c6? was bad: 17 Sc1 (threaten­
ing lUe4) 17...tUc5 18 j.e5! 2fe8 (18...d4 19 
lUe4) 19 lUd4, and the queen is lost. But if 
Marjanovic had had the sense to move his 
queen back - 16...>&':Vd8!, the battle would 
only just have been beginning: 17 #g4 gc8
18 # f3  ge6 or 17 Sc1 d4 18 lUe4 iL.xe4 19 
Bxe4 lUe6 20 gd6 Ee8, maintaining the 
balance.
17 lUe4! (now White's attack develops 
unhindered) 17 ...gxb2 (14)
Was there a better defence? Hardly:
17...Bae8 18 lUxf6 Exe1+ 19 #xe1 gxf6 20 
i-d6 Sg8 21 'Wie7 'Wixe7 22 kxe7 l:!.b8 
(22 ...Sg6 23 lUd6) 23 ; xf6+ 'ig8 24 l:'le1 
lUe6 25 gg2 and wins.
18 tUgS! (3)
The concentration of white pieces on the 
kingside clearly exceeds the black king's 
defensive possibilities.
When I was showing the game to my 
team colleagues that evening, I emotionally 
exclaimed: ‘Look, all his pieces are on the 
queenside, whereas mine are on the king- 
side, but that's where his king also is!' This 
was also the theme of my junior game with 
Privorotsky (Game No. 7) and it occurred 
many times in my later games, for example: 
Kasparov-Yurtaev (Moscow 1977), 5.Garcia- 
Kasparov (Baku 1980), or the 6th game of 
my first match with Karpov (Game No.94). 
18. ..#c6 (15)
If 18. . .lUe6 White would have won with 
both the simple 19 lUd6, and the combina­
tive 19 lUxg7! 'it>(g)xg7 20 'iWh5 etc.
19 lUe7 (2) 19.. .Wf6 (2)
20 fUxh7! Wd4 (4) 21 #h5 g6 22 1¥h4 - ix a l
(8)
Instead of resigning, Marjanovic unex­
pectedly removed my queen's rook - the 
only white piece which was spoiling the
237

Garry Kasparov on Garry Kasparov: Part One
overall picture, by not participating in the 
play. I breathed a sigh of relief: this negli­
gent rook was getting on my nerves.
23 tZ:lf6+ 1-0
Black resigned in view of 23 ...Wg7 24 
"ti'h6+ 'lt>xf6 25 -&g5 mate. Times: 1.50-2.10.
This game was later named one of the 
most brilliant in the Olympiad. We won the 
match 21/ 2-11/ 2, but by the same score the 
Hungarians defeated Israel.
In the 5th round match with Bulgaria I 
was involved in an unfortunate incident. 
Playing Black against Krum Georgiev, I 
chose a sharp tactical variation of the 
Sicilian Defence (Karpov: ‘We advised him 
against doing this: in a quiet technical 
battle Kasparov would have had more 
chances'), but my opponent found a ‘hole' 
in it.
Roshal: 'The round lasted longer than 
usual, because a crowd gathered around the 
board of Garry Kasparov and Krum Geor­
giev, disturbing the other games (the English 
even made a protest), and the clocks on the 
neighbouring boards had to be stopped. 
After gaining a big advantage in a forcing 
variation, the Bulgarian master grew nerv­
ous in anticipation o f victory and he unex­
pectedly committed, as chess players say, a 
“fingerfehler" - he picked up the wrong 
piece. Chaos ensued.'
Indeed, on the 21st move Georgiev 
wanted to regain the piece by ; g5xe7 and 
only then capture the d6-pawn, but instead 
of this he immediately touched my d6- 
pawn, after which he should have taken it 
with his rook - and promptly resigned. But 
Krum did not do this: he quickly took his 
hand off the d6-pawn and played i.xe7. 
Karpov, who was playing on a neighbouring 
board, later recalled:
‘Kasparov rightly demanded: touch -
move! Georgiev denied it. A row broke out. 
Although there were no witnesses, the 
Bulgarian team unanimously took the side 
o f their compatriot: one would think that 
they had all been looking only at this board. 
But I was in fact looking to one side and I 
saw nearly everything (besides, Georgiev is a 
poor actor - he sat hunched and uncom­
fortable, but on sensing support he gradu­
ally straightened up), but I was an interested 
witness, and a neutral one was demanded. I 
repeat: there weren't any. And suddenly 
grandmaster Kirov brought up the Brazilian 
Lucena, the president of the Central Ameri­
can Zone. Here, he said, is a neutral witness 
who saw everything. And Lucena, without 
batting an eyelid, stated: yes, I saw every­
thing; Kasparov is wrong. But I saw that at 
the moment when the rules were violated 
Lucena was a long way away and he could 
not have seen anything!'
To be honest, I did not remember who 
testified in my opponent's favour, but to 
make a correct judgement on the situation 
it wasn't necessary to have any witnesses: it 
was sufficient to look at Georgiev himself - 
it was all written all over his face! Roshal: 
‘After lengthy discussions, Lothar Schmid, 
the chief arbiter of the Olympiad, let this 
mistake go unpunished. In my view, the 
Soviet team acted with tact and magnanim­
ity, but it protested against this decision by 
the arbiter.' And this despite the poor start 
and problems in every match ... After a 
lengthy, but, alas, hopeless resistance I lost.
Fortunately, Tal crushed Radulov, and 
the match ended in a 2-2 draw. But the 
Hungarian grandmasters defeated USA 3-1 
and increased their lead over the USSR 
team to two points.
After this set-back, Baturinsky, the leader 
of the Soviet delegation, did not want to 
play me in the 6th-round match against the
238

Adult Games
Dutch, but I was eager to get even. Then 
Karpov said that I should play - and he was 
proved right.
Game 46 
G.Kasparov-G.Ligterink
World Chess Olympiad, 
6th round, Malta 26.11.1980 
Queen's Indian Defence E18
1 d4 tt:lf6 2 c4 e6 3 tt:lf3 b6 4 g3 (7) 4.....tb7
Ligterink usually used to employ 4.....ta6
- in the 8th round Speelman played this 
against me, and after 5 tt:Jbd2 (later I 
switched to 5 b3) 5 ... i  b4 6 ^ 3  tt:lc6?! 7 d5 
..txd2+ 8 kxd 2 tt:le7 9 i.c3 White seized the 
initiative.
5 kg2 ke7
6 tt:lc3 (12)
It would appear that my opponent 
wanted to repeat some position from my 
game with Marjanovic (6 0-0 0-0 7 d5!? - 
Game No.45), and so I chose a different 
path.
6...tt:le4 7 ..td2
A quiet, positional set-up, new for me, 
which that day I played simply by intuition.
7... 
f
 8 0-0 (2)
An alternative is 8 'ic2  (Game No.99 in
Volume V of My Great Predecessors). And 
soon an unclear gambit also appeared: 8 
Bc1 ..ltxd4! 9 tt:lxd4! tt:Jxc3 10 kxb7 tt:lxd1 11 
Bxd1 e5 12 tt:lf5 g6 13 tt:lg7+ <i;e7 (Yusupov- 
Andrianov, Moscow 1981) or ll... c6 12 ..ltf4 
0-0 13 ..td6 Be8 14 i.xa 8  'i'c8! (Karpov- 
Salov, Rotterdam 1989).
8...0-0 9 B c1
9-.cS
To me this line seems strategically risky, 
as is 9 ...d6 10 d5 tt:lxc3 11 i.xc3 (Gheorghiu- 
Ligterink, Le Havre 1977) or 10...tt:lxd2 11 
tt:lxd2! (Rashkovsky-Leibovich, Daugavpils 
1978). More solid alternatives are 9...tt:lxd2
10 'i!Vxd2 d6 11 d5 e5 (Tone-Karpov, Brus­
sels 1987; Kasparov-Salov, Skelleftea 1989) 
or 9...d5 10 cxd5 exd5 11 i.f4 , and here not
11...tt:lxc3?! 12 bxc3 tt:la6 13 e4! dxe4 14 
tt:ld2 (Kasparov-Ponomariov, Linares 2003), 
but the typical ll...tt:la6 and ...c7-c5.
10 dS (2)
The harmless 10 tt:lxe4 i.xe 4  11 ..ltc3 tt:lc6 
leads to equality (Petrosian-Portisch, 1st 
match game, Palma de Mallorca 1974).
10...exdS 11 cxdS tt:lxd2 12 tt:Jxd2 (7) 12...d6
(2)
Black seems to have coped successfully 
with his opening problems. He has the two 
bishops and quite good prospects on the 
queenside. But with the next new and
239

Carry Kasparov on Carry Kasparov: Part One
unexpected move White reveals his trumps.
13 t'Llde4!
White establishes his knight in the cen­
tre, in order to exploit its strength to pre­
pare a pawn offensive and bind on the 
kingside (to some extent this resembles the 
game with Csom - Came No.39).
In the event ofthe standard 13 CDc4 ii.a6
14 '!b3 .1Lxc4 15 Wxc4 a6 16 a4 ctJd7 Black 
is indeed alright and there is a complicated 
battle in prospect (Karpov-Portisch, Tilburg 
1988).
13....1:!.e8?! (31)
Not the best reaction: Black allows the 
exchange of his important bishop. 13 ...JLe7 
was more critical, although Ligterink possi­
bly did not like the attack 14 f4 CDd7 15 g4! 
tZ:lf6 16 ctJf2! or 15..a6 16 a4 (Psakhis- 
A.Sokolov, Moscow 1981) - this theme was 
later developed by Karpov (Game No.97 in 
Volume V of My Great Predecessors).
In the 1990s, following the example of 
van der Wiel, they also began playing
13... 
'. e5!?. But 13 ...t'Lla6, which I recom­
mended in The Test of Time, did not in fact 
become established in practice.
14 'iVd2 (2) 14...a6?! (10)
Again the move 14...^e7 should have 
been preferred. Ligterink does not sense the 
impending danger and he considers his
position to be sufficiently solid. But, in 
defending the d6-pawn against attack by 
tZ:lb5, he has taken away a convenient 
square for his knight and weakened the b6- 
point. These drawbacks are emphasised by 
White's following move.
15 b4! (15)
Unexpectedly White begins play on the 
opponent's traditional part of the board. 
This idea was suggested to me by the poor 
coordination of the black pieces and the 
possibility of an attack on the d6-pawn.
15 ... i_e7 (14)
A rather belated retreat, but nothing bet­
ter is apparent, as the alternatives are 
weaker: 15...cxb4?! 16 tt:Jxf6+ Wxf6 17 tZ:le4 
'Wie7 18 Wxb4 .1Lxd5 19 'i'xd6 'i'e6 20 .l:i.fd1 
&xe4 21 'i'xe6 fxe6 22 .1Lxe4 Sa7 23 l:!.d6, or
15 ....Jixc3?! 16 Sxc3 cxb4 17 !'!.e3 with the 
threats of tt:Jxd6 and Wxb4.
16 bxc5! (4) 16...bxc5 17 'if4  (5)
The main aim is not to allow the knight 
at b8 to come out.
17...'Wic7? (10)
Not yet realising what is going on, Black 
tries to bring out his knight to d7: if this 
should succeed, things will immediately be 
better for him. However, it was essential to 
play 17....1Lc8! (17...Ha7 and ...ii.a8 is more 
passive - there is nothing for the bishop to
240

Adult Games
do on the long diagonal) 18 h4 h6, restrain­
ing White’s offensive. Now, however, there 
follows a lightning attack.
18 ctJa4! (3)
With the threat of ltJaxc5. Black's posi­
tion is beginning to crack, and it all con­
cludes amazingly quickly.
18...'1i'a5 (11)
18. 
..Wd8 would not have brought any 
relief: 19 Sb1 :.a7 (19 .....txd5 20 S fd l) 20 
2b6 g5 21 Wd2 ctJd7 22 Sxd6!.
19 Bb 1 ! kxd5 (9) 20 ltJb6 .\1xe4 21 
xe4 
fla7
It appears that things are not so bad for 
Black, but a powerful combinative stroke 
puts everything in its place.
22 ltJc8!
Unexpected and very pretty: nearly all 
the opponent's pieces are under attack
22...ltJc6 (6)
22...Sxc8 2 3 1Vf5 ..td8 24 'i¥xc8 ltJd7 2 5 
kc6 or 22 ...l:.c7 23 Sxb8 .if8  24 B fb l was 
also hopeless.
23 ctJxa7 ltJxa7 24 kd5
Or 24 Wf5! g6 25 Wd7. But as it was Black 
resigned (1-0), in view of 24. ..l:if8 25 .l:b7. 
Times: 1.07-1.44.
We confidently defeated the Dutch (3-1), 
but the Hungarians overcame the English 
(21/ 2-11/ 2) and retained a lead of one and a 
half points.
In the 7th round the central match of the 
tournament, USSR-Hungary, took place. 
Our opponents fought to the death and 
quite quickly gained three draws (Csom 
accurately neutralised my attempts to 
complicate the play in a King's Indian 
Defence), while Tal tried to disrupt the 
balance in his game with Sax and nearly 
lost. Alas, the match ended in a draw. At the 
previous Olympiad we had even beaten the 
Hungarians - and all the same we finished 
a point behind them. ..
In the 8th round I won against Speelman 
and we defeated the English (21/2-11/2), 
while the Hungarians drew 2-2 with the 
Yugoslavs. But in the 9th round they 
crushed the Finns (31/ 2-1/2), while we drew 2­
2 with Czechoslovakia (I was rested that 
day). Five rounds before the finish the gap 
behind the leaders became critical: Hun­
gary - 26 out of 36, USSR - 231/2. The ques­
tion of first place seemed decided.
But here the serious pursuit began! At 
last Karpov ran into form (at the start he 
had been slightly unwell), and our team 
genuinely united, whereas the Hungarians 
suffered something of a slump.
lOth round: Hungary-Holland - 2-2;
241

Carry Kasparov on Carry Kasparov: Part One
USSR-Iceland - 31/ 2-1/2 (I beat Petursson with 
White).
11th round: Hungary-Czechoslovakia- 2­
2; USSR-USA - 21/2-11/2 (I managed to over­
come the highly experienced Shamkovich).
12th round: Hungary-Romania - 3-1; 
USSR-Argentina - 31/ 2-1/2. That day I again 
had Black - against the 25-year-old master 
Sergio Giardelli.
Game 47 
S.Giardelli-G.Kasparov
World Chess Olympiad, 
12th round, Malta 312.1980 
English Opening A11
1 c4 c6 (5)
My opponent regularly used to choose 
one and the same set-up with White: c2-c4, 
g2-g3, ..ig2, tt:lc3, e2-e3 and tt:lge2. And I 
tried to exploit this, by displaying unusual 
flexibility.
2 tt:lf3 (3)
A minor success for me: now the knight 
will not go to e2 (after 2 g3 d5 this would be 
altogether pointless).
2...g6 3 g3 ..ig7 4 ..ig2 tt:lf6 (4) 5 0-0 0-0 6 
tt:lc3 (13) 6 ...dS (8) 7 cxdS (5) 7 ...cxdS (2) 8 
d3?! (6)
8 
d4 tt:le4 would have led to a reasonable 
version for Black of the Grunfeld Defence. 
Not being an expert on theory, Giardelli 
preferred to proceed along unexplored 
paths.
8...tt:lc6 9 #b3
White tries to create pressure on d5 and 
b7, but this turns out to favour Black, who 
exploits the early development of the 
queen. 9 ..id2 was more sensible, although 
here too after 9.e5 10 ..ig5 ..ie6 Black has 
no reason for complaint.
9...d4 (38) 10 tt:lbS (8)
The 'sideways' move 10 tt:la4 would have 
run into 10...b6!, after which the knight has 
no future, and the pressure on the long 
diagonal can be neutralised by .....ie6-d5.
10. ..a6 (5) 11 tt:la3 (7)
If 11 -ea4. then 11...tt:ld5 is strong, forcing
12 tt:la3 h6 13 Ji.d2 ..ie6 with excellent play 
for Black.
11...bS (8)
The white knight has nevertheless ended 
up out of play, and the weakness of the 
long diagonal cannot be exploited (12 #c2 
..ib7! 13 lUe5 tt:lb4 14 ^ 3  tt:lfd5) - the 
opening has definitely gone in Black's 
favour.
12 ..if4 (8) 12.....ie6 (8) 13 #c2 l:Ic8 14 #d2
..ids 15 fifc! tt:ld7 (9)
242

Adult Games
The preparations for the battle are com­
plete. Now White has to hurry: if Black 
should succeed in playing ...e7-e5, ...'iflie7 
and ... C2Jb6, his position will become strate­
gically won. But it would have been even 
better to leave the knight on f6: 15 ....Me8!? 
16 C2Jc2 e5 17 .i.g5 'Wid6 with a very com­
fortable game.
16 C2Jc 2 (8) 16...es (15)
The direct attempt to prevent the white 
knight from going to b4 by 16 . ..a5 is not so 
successful, if only in view of 17 ctJa3 ^ 6  18 
ttJe5!.
17 .i.h6 (13)
17 .i.g5?! f6 18 ..th6 is weaker in view of
18 ...ili.xh6 19 'iWxh6 CiJb6 (when 20 e3? CDa4! 
is bad for White) or 19...CDc5!?.
17. .S e 7  18 .i.xg7 (4) 18...lt>xg7
19 e3! (13)
5ince CDb4 is not possible, White brings 
his knight into play by another way, un­
dermining the enemy centre. Marking time 
would not have worked well, for example:
19 a3 ?! ttJc5 20 ltJb4 .Jtxf3! 21 .i.xf3 ttJa5 
with an obvious advantage.
19. ..dxe3
If 19...'Wif6 there could have followed 20 
e4! ili.e6 21 ltJb4 (21 ttJg5!?) 21...CDxb4 22 
'iWxb4, when the weakness of Black's queen­
side is rather perceptible - say, 22...Jtg4 23
CiJd2 'i:Vb6 24 CDb3 or 23..iVg5 24 h4! and 
ctJb3 with counterplay.
If Black didn't want to capture on e3, 
then 19...'Wid6!? was better, retaining the 
initiative after both 20 e4 Jte6 21 ttJg5 ttJc5, 
and 20 exd4 exd4, despite the d4-pawn 
being somewhat weak.
20 C2Jx e 3 (not 20 fxe3? .Mfd8) 20...ili.xf3 21 
..txf3 ltJd4 22 .Jtg2
At first sight the backward d3-pawn and 
the powerful knight on d4 give Black a clear 
advantage, but White also has his pluses: a 
strong bishop, the weakness of Black's 
queenside, and the possibility of exchang­
ing knights (C2Jc2) or beginning a fight for 
the c-file (.Mc3). In short, the position is not 
altogether clear: with only one weakness 
for the opponent, the game cannot be won! 
And I began looking for tactical ways of 
solving the problems.
22. ..C2JcS (5) 23 .1Ie1?! (5)
Now 23 C2Jc2 would have been parried by
23. ..'Wid6, and 23 .l:!.c3 by 23 ...CDa4. Consid­
eration should have been given to 23 ttJd5!? 
'Wie6 24 b4 ctJd7 25 <lt>h1(f1). But Giardelli 
tries to exploit the weakening of the e5- 
pawn.
23...hs?! (4)
The desire to exclude the threat of CDg4 
was understandable. However, the imme­
243

Garry Kasparov on Garry Kasparov: Part One
diate 23. .JHd8! was more accurate, since 
neither 24 li:Jg4 f6 nor 24 <;t>h 1 li:Jc6 
(24. ..#g5!?) 25 li:Jd5 'i'e6 26 li:Jf4 'i'd7 27 
li:Jd5 'iWg4 was at all promising for White.
24 l:!:acl?! (5)
This natural move, which also contains a 
trap (24...li:Jcb3? 25 axb3 li:Jxb3 26 li:Jd5! 
'i'e6 27 'iWe3), is nevertheless not the best.
24 li:Jd5 was preferable: 24. ..'iWd6 25 l:!:ac1 or
24. ..'iVe6 25 f4 li:Jd7 26 l:tac1, and Black's 
advantage is smaller than in the game.
24...l:!:fd8 (6)
With the strong threat of 25...li:Jxd3 or
25 . ..li:Jc(d)b3.
2S l:!:c3 (7)
White does not have a great choice. If 25 
<;t>h1? Black has the decisive 25. . li:Jc(d)b3! 26 
axb3 li:Jxb3 27 li:Jd5 l:txd5! 28 l:!:xc8 (28 'iWe3 
l:!:xd3) 28 ...li:Jxd2 29 ..txd5 'iVd6! 30 k g 2 
Wxd3 31 l:tc3 'i'd4 32 l:td1 'i'a4!, while 25 
li:Jd5?! is now insufficient in view of
25.. 
.'if/e6, and the knight has to retreat.
25 ...i¥f6?! (13)
Not succumbing to provocation: 25. ..b4?!
26 .l:!.c4 li:Jxd3?! (26...'¥!\Ve6 27 .l:tec1!) 27
'¥Wxd3! li:Jf3+ 28 il.xf3 .l:txd3 29 .l:!.xc8 '¥We6 30 
l:!:c7 '¥Wxa2 31 
e2, when the three pieces
are rather stronger than the queen, or
25. ..e4?! 26 li:Jc2 '¥Wf6 27 li:Jxd4 '¥Wxd4 28 
i xe4 (but not 28 l:!:ec1? exd3) 28...li:Jxe4 29
.Mxe4 tfxe4 30 dxe4 .Mxd2 31 .Mxc8 fixb2 32 
a3 l:!:b3 33 a4 bxa4 34 .Mc6 with a drawn 
rook endgame.
However, only 25. ..li:Ja4! 26 li:Jd5 'iVe6 
would have retained an appreciable advan­
tage.
26li:Jc2 (8)
At last. Before this I spent a long time 
calculating 26 .l:!.ec1(?).
Analysis diagram
26. 
..li:Jxd3!!, and the black knights dem­
onstrate miracles of mutual assistance: 27 
Hxc8 li:Jxc1 28 li:Jd5?! l:!:xd5! 29 kxd 5 'iVd6! 
with gain of material, or 28 l:!:xd8 'iVxd8! 29 
<;t>h1! (29 f
 li:Jxa2 30 b3 'ifc7! or 30 kd5 
li:Jc6!) 29. ..Wc8! 30 a3 li:Jce2 31 h4 a5 etc.
In the event of 26 b4?! li:Jce6 Black would 
also have retained the advantage: 27 .i:!.xc8 
Hxc8 28 'Y!\Yd1 i¥e7! or 27 li:ld5 li:Jf3+ 28 t xf3 
'Y!\Yxf3 29 .Mxe5 li:Jd4 with a powerful attack -
30 '¥Wb2 h4! or 30 'ife3 l:txc3 31 li:Jxc3 h4!.
26 
li:Jd5 li:Jf3+ 27 ..txf3 Wxf3 28 li:Jb4 
looked 
tempting, 
but here 
too 
after
28 ...'iVg4 29 a3 li:Je6 30 'iVe3 li:Jg 5 White's 
position is in danger.
26...b4?! (4)
Previously, not seeing a subtle defence 
for White on the 28th move, I attached an 
exclamation mark to this move. In fact it is
244

Adult Games
a mistake, conclusively throwing away the 
advantage. Too little was also promised by
26...e4?! (cf. the note to Black's 25th move), 
or 26 . ..t'bf3+ 27 ; xf3 'ixf3  28 l:txe5 ltJxd3
29 k!e3! t'bf4 30 l:txf3 k!xd2 31 gxf4 k!xc2 32 
.Uxc8 .Uxc8 33 .Ua3 k!c6 34 'ig2 with a 
probable draw.
Apparently I should have reconciled my­
self to a small plus after 26 ...ltJce6 27 h4 
tbxc2 28 Wxc2 ltJd4 29 'i¥d1 'ie6.
27 ltJxb4! (4)
5trictly the only reply. After 27 2c4(?), 
which I recommended in The Test of Time, 
the thunderous 27 ...ltJe4!! would have been 
immediately decisive (28 .i.xe4 l:txc4, and
29 dxc4? is not possible because of
29 ...t'bf3+).
27...e4
Here I was already in severe time- 
trouble: 6 minutes for 14 moves. If 27. ..a5, 
then 28 'iVc1! looks quite good. But now, as 
it seemed to me, Black has complete domi­
nation: his pieces control all the key points, 
and White would appear to be defenceless 
against the combined attack of the queen, 
rooks and knights...
28 We3? (3)
Giardelli cracks under the pressure and 
commits a decisive mistake. 28 'iYf4? was 
also bad: 28 ...'iYxf4 29 gxf4 exd3, as was 28
Ie c 1 ? exd3 (28...'iVb6!?) 29 2e1 (29 k!xc5 
ltJe2+ 30 f
 lbxc1 or 29 ltJxd3 ltJxd3 30 
'iVxd3 liJb3! is even worse) 29...liJe2+ 30 
l:txe2 dxe2 31 'iVxe2 t'ba4! 3 2 l:txc8 .Uxc8 3 3 
liJd3 .l:tb8 with a technically won ending.
The only way to save the game was by 
the paradoxical 28 dxe4!! (we didn't see 
this either in our calculations at the board, 
or in analysis after the game) 28...t'bf3+ 29 
.Uxf3 k!xd2 30 2xf6 'ixf6  31 .Uc1! .Udd8! 
(White is better after 31...k!xb2? 32 tbxa6 
2b5 33 .i.h3! l:tc6 34 .i.d7) 32 ttJd5+ with 
two pawns for the exchange and an imme­
diate draw after 32...'ig7 33 ltJe7 k!c7 34 
t'bd5 .l:tcc8 35 ltJe7.
28...as! (now Black's onslaught becomes a 
hurricane) 29 t'bc2
White would not have been helped by 
either 29 l:ec1 exd3 30 ttJd5 (30 t'bxd3 .Ue8!)
30. ..liJe2+ 31 f
 'i¥e6 or 29 t'bd5 .Uxd5 30 
dxe4 2dd8 31 l:tec1 'iVb6.
29...11.xd3 (2) 30 Sxc8 k!xc8
The simplest. In all variations Black cap­
tures the more 'senior' piece.
31 'iVxd4 (or 31 ttJxd4 lbxe1 32 .i.xe4 11c4!)
31...'iYxd4 32 ltJxd4 ltJxe1 0-1
Here too the e4-pawn is invulnerable: 33 
..ixe4 l:c4. Times: 2.27-2.27.
By crushing the Argentines, we per­
formed a minor miracle - we caught up 
with the Hungarians! For the first time in 
the tournament there were two leaders. 
The status quo was maintained in the 13th 
round: the U55R-Romania and Hungary- 
Bulgaria matches produced the same 
result: 21/2-11/2. Before the 14th, last round 
the leading group looked like this: US5R and 
Hungary - 351/2 out of 52; Yugoslavia - 33; 
U5A - 311/2; England and Czechoslovakia -
31.
On the concluding day public attention 
was focused on the matches in which the
245

Garry Kasparov on Garry Kasparov: Part One
fate of the gold medals would be decided: 
USSR-Denmark and Hungary-Iceland. At 
first the Hungarians went ahead - Pinter 
won against Hjartarson. Geller restored the 
balance by spectacularly crushing Hoi, but 
Portisch again gave his team the lead. Alas,
I was unable to gain more than a draw, but 
Balashov won. However, Ribli beat Amason. 
And just before the time control Sax 
cracked under the pressure and lost his 
advantage against Petursson.
Thus the Hungarians won their match 
31/ 2-1/2 and after 'normal time' they were a 
point ahead. But we still had the adjourned 
game Karpov-Jakobsen. The world cham­
pion's opponent had real drawing chances, 
but he sealed an incorrect move. After the 
adjournment Karpov accurately converted 
his advantage into a win, and we again 
caught out rivals.
Now it all depended on the Buchholz 
scores and, strangely enough, the destiny of 
first place was decided by the Greece- 
Scotland match. One team had earlier lost 
to us, and the other to the Hungarians, and 
the only thing that would suit us was a win 
for the Greeks by at least 3-1. I discovered 
this myself when, after finishing my game, I 
studied the table with the last round pair­
ings. And I set off in search of this match, 
which was taking place in another corner of 
the endlessly long hall.
A genuine drama was then played out. 
The Greeks were leading 11/ 2-1/2, but in one 
of the remaining games they stood no 
better, and in the other things were alto­
gether hopeless. In time-trouble, however, 
everything changed and in the adjourned 
games the Greeks could now hope to score 
11/2 out of 2. During the interval I helped 
them with their analysis, which provoked 
dissatisfaction on the part of our rivals. But 
I think that the Greek masters would have
been able to cope even without myhelp. On 
the resumption they won one of the ad­
journed games, after which everyone's 
attention was focused on the other. There 
was a moment when all of our team mem­
bers, led by Karpov, were standing by the 
board of Georgios Makropoulos (inciden­
tally, a future FIDE vice-president) and, with 
the most inscrutable faces of which they 
were capable, were mentally praying to 
themselves that he would advance his d- 
pawn. And he did so! The Greeks even won 
31/ 2-1/2, and by a minimal margin we fin­
ished with a better Buchholz score than the 
Hungarians (4491/ 2-448).
From the press: 'Kasparov's Olympiad 
debut proved extremely successful: the 17- 
year-old grandmaster demonstrated excel­
lent fighting qualities and he made a sub­
stantial contribution to the team's overall 
success.'
After playing, along with Karpov, more 
games than anyone in the team - 12, I 
achieved the best score among our players
- 'plus seven'. It could have been even 
more, but, after scoring 81/2 out of 10, I felt 
terribly tired and at the finish I made two 
draws with opponents who were obviously 
inferior in standard. Because of this I was 
just half a point short of taking first place 
on my board with the overall best result.
Nikitin: 'When Garry returned to Moscow 
he agreed with me that his performance at 
the Olympiad did not merit an assessment 
of more thanfour out of five. On the play he 
could well have scored another one or one 
and a half points, but the feeding and 
sleeping regime, to which adult profession- 
aIs were accustomed, proved d ificu ltfo r the 
young debutant. This factor, which had 
nothing to do with chess, led to increased 
excitability and, as a consequence, to a loss 
of easiness in his play and to time-trouble. In
246

Adult Games
addition, Garry did not always choose the 
correct opening... But on the whole he un­
doubtedly moved on to a new level. Kas­
parov's brilliant performances provoked a 
chess boom in Azerbaijan. At the same time 
the epochal year of 1980 was the last quiet 
one fo r Garry. when he was able to think 
only about battles on the chess board.'
First Battle with the Champion
Double-round match-tournament of USSR 
teams (Moscow, 22-28 February 1981): 1. 
First Team - 281/2 out of48; 2. Youth Team - 
231/2; 3. Senior Team - 23; 4. Second Team -
21. Tournament of top boards: Kasparov - 4 
out of 6; Karpov - 31/ 2; Smyslov - 21/2; 
Romanishin - 2.
By January 1981 I was already rated sixth 
in the world and third in my country - 
2625, whereas the rating of the leader, 
Anatoly Karpov, was 2690. A month later 
the international 
association 
of chess 
journalists awarded Karpov the annual 
‘Oscar' - the prize for the best player over 
the past year; second was Korchnoi, the 
challenger to the crown, and for the first 
time I was placed third. We were rapidly 
converging - the world champion and the 
world junior champion . Flohr wrote about 
this: '/ think that in the near future Karpov 
and Kasparov will be meeting frequently, 
and sooner or later they will battle in a clash 
at the very highest level.'
The obvious reduction in the gap be­
tween us was apparently beginning to 
concern Karpov and his entourage. The first 
signs of this appeared in January. Nikitin: 
'From Moscow there came a sudden chill in 
the air: they demanded from  us a detailed 
plan of Garry's activities fo r the year, includ­
ing those not concerned with chess. Never 
had the interest in his affairs been so com­
prehensive! Obviously it was not only the 
Sports Committee that had taken an interest 
in them... '
Something came to light at the end of 
February, at the match-tournament of USSR 
teams 'in honour of the 26th Congress of 
the USSR Communist Party', held in the 
enormous athletics hall of the Central Army 
Sports Club. Each of the four teams - first, 
second, veteran and youth - consisted of 
eight players. Among the participants were 
the 
world 
champion 
and 
four 
ex­
champions! The line-up of the first team 
was Karpov, Spassky, Polugayevsky, Petro­
sian, Tal, Beliavsky, Balashov and Geller, the 
veterans were led by Smyslov, Bronstein 
and Taimanov, and the second team by 
Romanishin, Tseshkovsky and Vaganian.
Naturally, I was expecting to play on 
board 1 for the youth team, and this was 
also anticipated by most of the players. 
Unexpectedly 
the 
Federation 
officials 
began insisting that the player on board 1 
should be either Psakhis, who had just 
shared victory with Beliavsky in the 48th 
USSR Championship (I did not take part in 
it: the Olympiad had taken too much out of 
me), or Yusupov - a prize-winner in two 
USSR Championships. But my rating was 
higher than all the members of the first 
team, apart from Karpov and Spassky, and 
significantly higher than any of my col­
leagues on the youth team. So what was 
the problem?
And I realised that Karpov, playing on 
board 1 for the main team, simply did not 
want to play against me. There could be no 
other explanation! It ended in the members 
of our team demanding a democratic vote, 
to decide who should lead it. The officials 
did not like this, but they had no choice. In 
the voting it was important to formulate 
the question correctly: if we had been
247

Garry Kasparov on Garry Kasparov: Part One
invited to arrange all eight players by board 
and decide the first board on the sum of 
places, my rivals could have 'killed' me by 
putting me on a low board. But the trainers 
of the youth team, Anatoly Bykhovsky and 
Vladimir Tukmakov, asked a clear question: 
who should play on board 1? In the end I 
received five votes 
(Kasparov, 
Kochiev, 
Mikhalchishin, Lputian and Chiburdanidze) 
against three (Psakhis, Yusupov and Dolma­
tov).
Nikitin: ‘Fortunately, this flash of youth­
fu l ambition did not have any unpleasant 
consequences: by the end o f the match- 
tournament no one remembered that not 
long before Garry and his young colleagues 
had been at loggerheads.'
Thus Karpov and I nevertheless ended up 
facing each other on the chess board. But 
this occurred in the 3rd and 6th rounds, 
and at the start the 'youths' played the 
second team. My game with the Lvov 
grandmaster Oleg Romanishin, the author 
of numerous paradoxical opening ideas, 
took a very tense course and in the time 
scramble it resembled a battle on the edge 
of a precipice.
Came 48 
G.Kasparov-O.Romanishin
Match-Tournament of 
USSR Teams, 1st round, 
Moscow 23.02.1981 
Criinfeld Defence D85
1 d4 lZ:Jf6 2 c4 g6 3 lZ:lc3 d5 4 cxds tt:JxdS 5 e4 
tt:Jxc3 6 bxc3 .ig7 7 lZ:Jf3
In the early 1980s this attractive system 
almost supplanted other continuations, 
including even 7 .ic 4  (Game No.72).
7 ...cs (7.. .b6?! - Game No.38) 8 .ie3
I also employed 8 2b1!? o-o (8...tt:Jc6 9
dS!) 9 .ie2 tt:Jc6 10 dS! (Game Nos. 76-80 in 
Revolution in the 70s), but I myself de­
fended with 9...cxd4 10 cxd4 'WiaS+ (Game 
NoAO in Kasparov vs. Karpov 1986-87; 
Game No.82 in Revolution in the 70s).
8.. .'ia s  (5)
In my game with Razuvaev (47th USSR 
Championship, Minsk 1979) I encountered 
the novelty 8 .....\tg4 and instead of improvis­
ing with 9 'lia4+ I should have fought for an 
advantage by 9 2c1! o-o 10 dS! 'ika5 11 'iVd2 
(Game Nos. 65, 66 in Revolution in the 70s).
9 'i'd2 tt:Jc6
The most accurate move order, as it tran­
spired later, only after numerous searches. 
In the event of 9...0-0 10 Sc1 Black does not 
equalise fully with 10 ... ..\tg4 11 d5! (cf. 
above), or 10...cxd4 11 cxd4 'lixd2+ 12 
lZ:Jxd2! (Game No.68 in Revolution in the 
70s), or 10. ..e6?! 11 .&h6! tt:Jc6 12 h4! (Game 
No.22 in Kasparov vs. Karpov 1989-2009), or 
the modern 10...l!d8 11 d5 e6 12 .ig5!?, 
when the threat of an attack (12....l:e8?! 13 
d6 il.d7 14 ..lth6! and h2-h4, Palo-lvanchuk, 
Skanderborg 2003; Anand-Leko, Miskolc 
2009) forces the weakening 12...f6 13 .ie3 
(after 13 .if4  'ika4! for the moment Black 
holds on) 13...exd5 14 exd5 (Kramnik- 
D.Howell, London 2010).
Also after 9 .....\tg4 10 2b1! (threatening
248

Adult Games
fib5) 10...a6 11 1:l.xb7 ..txf3 12 gxf3 tt:Jc6 13 
kc4! o-o 14 o-o cxd4 15 cxd4 ..txd4 16 kd5 
Black has merely a poor choice from several 
inferior endings (Kramnik-Kasparov, 2nd 
match game, London 2000; Yermolinsky- 
Azmaiparashvili, Hyderabad 2002). How­
ever, 10...etJd7!? is not so clear (Giri-Nijboer, 
Eindhoven 2010).
10 Sc1 (2)
If 10 I:l.b1, in order after 10...a6 11 I:!.c1 to 
exploit the weakening of the b6-square in 
the endgame, a clever queen sacrifice is 
possible: 10...0-o!? 11 l:l.b5 cxd4 12 fixa5 
dxe3 13 'i!i'xe3 tt:Jxa5 (Game Nos. 72, 73 in 
Revolution in the 70s).
10...cxd4 (3)
Later Black sometimes also tried the 
rather artificial 10. ..kg4 11 d5 l:l.d8 12 'lib2 
(12 k e 2 o-o 13 o-o e6 is equal) 12 .....txf3 13 
gxf3 etJd4 (Yusupov-Anand, 6th match 
game, 
Wijk 
aan 
Zee 
1994; 
I.Sokolov- 
Topalov, Sarajevo 2001).
11 cxd4 #xd2+ 12 'it>xd2
Now White is forced to keep his king in 
the centre, and Black exploits this factor to 
create counterplay: after all, nearly all the 
pieces are still on the board!
12...0-0 (2)
Obviously the next few moves should 
show what there are more of in White's
position - pluses or minuses.
13 ds (5)
Strictly speaking, this and essentially the 
next move is an interesting novelty, which 
Magerramov and I prepared in Baku just 
before this match-tournament (the idea 
itself had occurred to me the previous year).
Against the developing 13 gb5 Black re­
plies with a pawn sacrifice - 13 ...f5! (Sme- 
jkal) 14 exf5 g xf5 15 gxc6 (15 Ehd1 ke6 is 
equal, 
Chekhov-Romanishin, 
48th 
USSR 
Championship, Vilnius 1980/81) 15. ..bxc6
16 .l:!.xc6 Sab8 17 Wc3 ke 4  (Platonov- 
Tukmakov, Tashkent 1980) or 16..J"Ub8 17 
'.t>c3 .l:!.b6 (Seirawan-Mecking, 5th match 
game, Sao Paulo 1992) with sufficient 
counterplay thanks to the two bishops and 
the insecure position of the white king.
13...fid8 (4)
14 'it>e1!
The crux of my plan! This unexpected 
move opened a new trend, one which is 
topical even today. White disconnects his 
rooks and loses a tempo, agreeing to a 
slight (temporary!) lack of harmony in the 
placing of his pieces, but he forces the black 
knight to leave c6 immediately, and each of 
its moves has drawbacks.
14...tt:JaS! (25)
This reply, which at the time staggered
249

Garry Kasparov on Garry Kasparov: Part One
me (in my home analysis I had discarded it 
'on general grounds' - the knight moves to 
the edge of the board!), is today judged to 
be best, neutralising White's plan. From a5 
the knight deprives the white bishop of the 
c4-square and assists the undermining 
moves ...e7-e6 and ...f7-f5.
After the ‘logical' 14...tt:Je5?! things are 
much easier for White: 15 tt:lxe5 Axe5 16 f4 
..id6 (or 16. ....ig7 17 Wf2!) 17 <&t>f2 e5 18 
..ic5! ..ixc5+ 19 r!.xc5 exf4 20 'it'f3 with 
advantage (Kramnik-Leko, 1st match game 
(rapid), Budapest 2001). And in the event of
14...tt:lb4 15 ..id2! all the same the knight is 
forced to move to the edge of the board 
(15... tt:lxa2? 16 .l'!c2 is bad for Black), al­
though practice has shown that after
15 ...tt:la6 White's achievements are only 
slight.
15 ..igs (35)
After a solid think I found a way of con­
fusing Black by attacking the e7-pawn. 
Nothing was promised by 15 ..ib5 f5! or 15 
'f1c7 e6 16 ; g5 11d7, nor by the more justi­
fied 15 ..id2 b6 16 Ab4 e6! 17 Ae7 l:td7 18 
d6 a6 19 ..id3 ; b7 20 'fic7 l!xc7 21 dxc7 
..if8 (Cyborowski-Krasenkow, Warsaw 2002) 
or 15 ..id3 b6 (15 ...e6!?) 16 ..ig5 (16 'ie2 e6!)
16. 
..f6 17 ..if4 f5 18 Ac7 'id7 19 ..ib5 ..ih6! 
(Ftacnik-Naiditsch, Bundesliga 2008).
15. ....if6 (17)
An enterprising move, leading to sharp 
play. However, it soon transpired that
15 .....id7! is better, since 16 ..ixe7?! is not a 
threat in view of 16. . .Se8 17 d6 tt:lc6 18 ..ib5 
..if8!, while after 16 ..id3 'idc8 (it would 
appear that Dvoyris's move 16...f5!? is even 
stronger, with the idea of 17 Sc5 r!.dc8! or
17 e5 ..ie8!) 17 'ie2 e6 Black is quite alright 
(20 years later I myself played this against 
Kramnik - Game No.7O in Revolution in the 
70s).
5ince then and to this day White has 
been actively seeking an advantage in other 
directions - say, 10 l:tb1 or 8 'ib l.
16 ..id2!? (27)
16 
..ixf6 exf6 17 tt:ld2 was quieter. Here 
Black's doubled pawns could have twice 
attacked the centre - 17...f5 18 f3 fxe4 19 
fxe4 f5, but White would have completed 
his development with 20 ..id3 fxe4 21 tt:lxe4 
..if5 22 'it>e2, retaining slightly the better 
chances.
16...b6
White has gained a brief respite. By lur­
ing the bishop to f6 he has forestalled the 
advance of the f-pawn and hindered ...e7- 
e6, but after the development of the bishop 
at b7 or g4 this undermining move will 
become a reality. 5o, for consolidation 
White has one tempo available. This is 
quite sufficient if he acts energetically!
17 Hc7!
At first sight White shows a frivolous lack 
of concern for his development problems, 
but in the struggle for the initiative he has 
already embarked on a slippery path, where 
it is not rules that have to be reckoned with, 
but exceptions to them. If 17 ..ib5 both 
17. ....ib7 followed by ... e7-e6 and the im­
mediate 17. ..e6! are good (18 e5? is not 
possible because of 18...'ixd5!). The rook 
move is aimed against both these possibili­
250

Adult Games
ties (17. ...Ji1.b7?? 18 .JtxaS; 17 ...e6 18 eS).
17.....tg4! (20)
With the obvious desire to punish the 
opponent. In The Test of Time I suggested 
that Black should have displayed caution 
and played 17 ... Bd7, although after 18 Bc2 
or 18 Bxd7 ..txd7 19 ..ta6 White would have 
retained a small plus.
18 ..ta6! (17) 18...e6! (19)
The retribution seems imminent, but 
from this point the white pieces, although 
in a minority (without the rook on h l), 
display amazing resourcefulness.
19 tt:JgS! (3)
Dynamic play: here the fight for an ad­
vantage is closely connected with safety 
concerns (after all, White is behind in 
development!). In the event of 19 ..tg5 
.txg5 20 tt:Jxg5 exd5 21 tt:Jxf7 Bd7 or 19 
dxe6 ..txe6 20 e5 ..tg7 21 4e2 .txa2 22 
.txa5 bxa5 23 Ba1 .td5 24 Bxa5 fiab8 the 
initiative would have passed to Black.
19....tes! (17)
After 19...exd5? 20 tt:Jxf7 Bd7 21 LLlh6+ 
4g7 22 Bc8! Black would lose material.
20 flxf7! (4)
White's ‘inflatable castle' has unexpect­
edly proved to be made of highly durable 
material. I think that this came as a sur­
prise to Romanishin.
20...exds!?
Black does not restrict himself to the 
modest 20...h6 21 ctJf3 ..txf3 22 Bxf3 exdS
23 exd5 l:txd5 with hopes only of equalising 
after 24 .Jtxh6 Be8! 25 Be3 bS and ...tbc4, or
24 Sd3 (Stohl) 24. ...l:txd3 25 ..txd3 'lt>g7, or
24 4e2 l:te8 25 Se3 .l:txd2+! 26 4>xd2 il.f4.
21 f4! (12)
This pawn is destined to play a leading 
role in the destruction of the black king's 
fortress. 21 f3 ..tc8! or 21 1:txh7 dxe4 22 Bh4 
..tc8 (Stohl) would have been inaccurate.
21... 
, g7! (5)
21...il.d4? was weak because of 22 fixh7, 
for example: 22...tbc4 23 e5 Be8 (with the 
threat of ...il.xe5) 24 h3!, and the rook on h l 
is ready to join the battle without moving 
from its post (24. . .il.xe5 25 fxe5 Bxe5+ 26 
\tf2 Bf8+ 27 4g3 tt:Jxd2 28 hxg4! etc.), or
22 . ..dxe4 23 .txa5 bxa5 24 il.c4+ 'it>f8 25 
Sf7+ 4e8  26 ..tb5+ .i.d7 27 Bxd7 .l:txd7 28 
tt:Jxe4 l:tb8 29 il.xd7+ 4xd7 30 <&e2! I b 2+
31 f
 4e6 (31....l:txa2? 32 S d l) 32 S d l 
4dS 33 l:td2, and again White wins.
22 fS! (10)
An energetic move, intensifying the 
pressure. In The Test of Time I gave prefer­
ence to the variation 22 h3 h6 23 hxg4 hxgS
24 fic7 1:te8 (24. ..dxe4? 25 il.xa5 bxa5 26
il.c4+ is bad for Black, as is 24. ..gxf4? 25 
exd5 l:txd5 26 ..txa5 or 25....i.e5 26 d6!) 25 
4f2! fixe4 26 il.d3 with the initiative:
26...fie6 (less good is 26...l:!.d4 27 Bxg7+ 
<&xg7 28 .tc3 tbc6 29 .i.bS or 26..J:!.a4 27 
*. xg6 Sxa2 28 il.f7+ f
 29 4 e l! tt:Jc6 30 
l:th7) 27 f5 Bc6 28 Bd7 tbc4 29 il.xg5 tt:Je5
30 Bxd5 etc. But here I forgot about my 
own recommendation in Informator -
22 .....tc8! 23 il.xc8 1:tdxc8!, and White has to 
seek a way to equalise (24 l:!.d7!?).
Up until now Romanishin has played ex­
cellently, but here, already short of time, he 
makes a mistake.
251

Garry Kasparov on Garry Kasparov: Part One
22. ..dxe4? (10)
It is easy to stumble in such a compli­
cated, highly tactical position without any 
clear guidelines. After the best move
22...gxf5! I was intending to play 23 h3! 
i.h 5  24 Sxg7+ 'ixg7 25 ll:Je6+ 'if6  26 exf5 
Ile8 27 g4 with good compensation for the 
material deficit after 27...!fi.f7 28 !fig5+! 
'it>e5 29 ti'Jc7 Sg8 30 !li.h4 Saf8 31 'if2  and 
Ile1+; however, as one of the readers of the 
magazine 
Shakhmaty 
v SSSR correctly 
pointed out, 27...Sxe6+! 28 fxe6 i.g6 and 
...'ixe6 would have got Black out of his 
difficulties. And in the endgame after 26 
ll:Jxd8 Ilxd8 27 exf5 ti'Jc4! 28 g4 Ee8+! 29 
Wd1 i.f7  White's chances of an advantage 
are also slight.
The capture of the e4-pawn looks more 
promising, but nothing comes of it for 
Black.
23 i.xaS! (5)
23 
f6? did not work because of 23.....txf6! 
(23...i.h 6!?) 24 Sxf6 e3! 25 !fi.xe3 lid 1+ 26 
'lt>f2 Ilxh1 27 ll:lf7 'ig 7 28 ..td4 ti'Jc6! 29 
Ilxc6+ 'ix f7  30 Sc7+ 'ie6! 31 Sxh7 l:c1.
23...bxaS?! (2)
Another error. The desperate 23...e3? 
would have been refuted by 24 Sxg7+! 
'ixg7 25 i.c3+ 'it>h6 26 ll:Jf7+ 'ih 5 27 ll:Jxd8 
Sxd8 28 'if1 ! with the idea of 28 ...Ed1+ 29
j. e1. However, things would already have 
been difficult for Black even after a more 
resilient defence:
a) 23 . ..Ild1+ 24 'if2  Sxh1 25 i.c 4  Sc1 26 
Ilxa7+ Sxc4 27 Sxa8+ !fi.f8 28 ti'Je6 'if7  29 
2xf8+ <i;e7 30 i.xb 6  .v xf5 31 Sxf5! gxf5 32 
ti'Jd4, and the bishop and knight will over­
come the rook;
b) 23...gxf5 24 Se7!, forcing the variation
24..J:td1+ 25 ^ 2  bxa5 26 Sxd 1 !li.xd1 27 
i.c4+ 'i;h8 28 ti'Jf7+ 'ig 8 29 ll:Jd8+ 'if8  30 
Ilf7+ We8 31 !fib5+ 'ixd8 32 .la.d7+ 'it>c8 33 
l:txg7 l:tb8 34 i.d7+ 'id 8 35 Sg8+ 'ic7 36 
Ilxb8 'ixb8 37 i.xf5  with a won bishop 
endgame.
24 i.c4
24...1.c3+ (4)
In time-trouble Romanishin finds an 
amazing resource. He would have lost after
24....1:ac8? 25 Sc7+ or 24...Sd4? 25 Sxa7+ 
(25 i.b3!?) 25....la.xc4 26 Sxa8+ !li.f8 27 ll:le6, 
while 24...l!d1+ 25 'i£tf2 e3+ 26 'ig3 !fi.e5+ 
27 'i;xg4 Ild4+ would have led to a position 
from the game.
25 ^ 2  e3+! 26 'ig 3 (but not 26 'ixe3? 
i.d2+ 27 ' i f 2 i.xg 5 28 fxg6 hxg6 29 !!f4+ 
Wg7 30 Ilxg4 Sd2+ 31 'i£tg3 i.f6  with equal­
ity) 26...i.eS+ 27 'ixg 4
It was not possible to preserve the bishop 
on c4: 27 'ih4? Itd4! 28 Sxa7+ 1xc4 29
252

Adult Games
.l:!.xa8+ 'it>g7 30 Sa7+ Wg8!, forcing 31 Ba8+ 
with a draw.
27...l:!.d4+ 28 Wh3! Sxc4 (Black appears to 
have beaten off the attack, but the f-pawn 
has not yet had its say) 29 f6
29.....1xf6
White's mating threats can be eliminated 
only at the cost of the bishop. There are also 
few chances of saving the game after
29....1:f.c7 30 J:xc7 Ji.xc7 31 f7+ f
 (31...'ih8
32 .!De6 ..id6 33 B e l is even worse) 32 .!De6+ 
'it>xf7 33 .!Dxc7 l:d 8 34 l:e1 etc.
30 l:!.xf6 Se8 31 S e l
At this the line could have been drawn - 
but the miracles have not yet finished! 
Thinking my position to be won, I relaxed 
somewhat.
31. ..e2 32 &g3?!
A delay - it was simpler to pick up the e- 
pawn immediately: 32 l:e 6 J:xe6 33 .!Dxe6 
M.c2 (33....l:!.e4? 34 .!Dg5) 34 a4 f
 35 .!Df4 
l:!.c4 36 'it>g4 Bxa4 37 Bxe2 and wins.
32...1:!.a4 33 'it>f2 .l:!xa2 34 .!De6
34 
l:!.f4 or 34 l:!.e6 l:xe 6 35 .!Dxe6 'it>f7 36 
etJd4 also deserved consideration.
34...a4
35 S b l? (2)
And this is already a serious mistake: the 
e2-pawn should not have been left alive. I 
was continuing to have illusions of mating 
finishes. .. 35 .!Dd4 would have won without 
any particular problems, for example:
35. ..a3 (it is the same after 35. .. a5) 36 J:xe2 
.l:taxe2 37 .!Dxe2 a5 (37...a2 38 B a6) 38 Bf3 
or 35. ..'it>g7 36 .l:!a6! (my earlier recommen­
dation 36 l:!.f3 is worse because of 36...a3 37 
l:!.xe2 l:!.axe2 38 tt:lxe2 B f8!) 36...Bf8+ 37 etJf3 
.l:te8 38 .l:txa7+ etc.
35...a3! 36 l:b7 (5) 36...el'ilf+
Allowing White some practical chances. 
It was safer to force a draw from a position 
where Black is even slightly stronger:
36...1:!.b2 37 Sg7+ 'it>h8 38 Be7 Bbb8 39 
Bxa7 J:!.a8 40 Bxa8 fixa8 41 tt:ld4 a2 42 etJb3 
J:!.b8 43 l:!.a6 l:xb3 44 J:xa2 or 36....Ua1 37 
\t>xe2 a2 38 .l:!g7+ 'it>h8 39 l:xa7 l:g1 40 
.l:tff7 (or 40 B f1 - Stohl) 40 ... al'iV 41 .l:!xh7+
253

Garry Kasparov on Garry Kasparov: Part One
'it>g8 42 .l:tag7+ 'ixg7 43 Sxg7+ 'it>h8 44 
.l:txg6 'lth7 45 Sf6 Sxg2+ 46 'it>f3, and 
Black’s two rooks are unable to overcome 
the rook and knight.
37 'ltxe1 !:xg2 38 l:g7+ 'it>h8 39 I:.gf7
Threats to the king in time-trouble are 
especially dangerous, even if there is a 
possibility of parrying them.
39. ..h5
With his flag hanging, Black decides to 
clear the way for his king, not having time 
to notice that misfortune will strike from 
the g5- and h6-squares. 39 ... h6 was simpler, 
with a draw.
40 Wf1
40.. 
Jxh 2 ?
A tragic oversight: suddenly the mating 
threats are transformed into reality. And 
yet only one move separated Black from 
safety, the last one before the time control
- 40...a2!. After 41 Itxa7 he could have 
unhurriedly decided that 41...ltb2? was bad 
because of 42 tt:Jg5! Sb1+ (42 ...l:l:e7? 43 .l:tf8+ 
'ltg7 44 tt:Je6+ 'it>h6 45 Sh8+ and mate) 43 
'it>f2 Sb2+ (43 ...a1'i? 44 I:.h7+ 'it>g8 45 
.l:xg6+ and mate) 44 'it>g3 Sb3+ 45 I1f3, 
winning, but that 41....txh2! 42 Sxg6 a1'if+ 
43 l:txa1 Eh1+ 44 Sg1 would lead to a draw.
41 .l:txg6 (41 tt:lg5! l:l:h1+ 42 'it>g2 was more 
forceful, with a rapid mate) 41. ..Il.xe6
41...a2 42 l:h6+ or 41...Sh1+ 42 'it>g2 Sg8
43 .l:txg8+ 'it>xg8 44 l:l:g7+ and 'it>xh1 wins.
42 l:xe6 'ltg8 43 l:xa7 1-0
Times: 2.29-2.30.
I may have messed up the finish of the 
game, but this win over a strong opponent, 
achieved in a fierce, uncompromising battle, 
inspired me. The mood in the team was also 
good - we won that difficult match 41/ 2-31/ 2.
The next day, for the first time, I played 
one-to-one with ex-world champion Vasily 
Smyslov - previously we had met only six 
years earlier in a clock simultaneous display. 
During the years that had elapsed I had 
managed to surpass this legendary player on 
rating, but certainly not on experience. And, 
of course, I felt anxious when I sat down 
opposite him at the chess board.
Came 49 
V.Smyslov-G.Kasparov
Match-Tournament of 
USSR Teams, 2nd round, 
Moscow 24.02.1981 
English Opening A30
1 liJf3 C5 (3) 2 C4 liJf6 (6) 3 g3 (5) 3... b6 (3) 4 
^g2 ^b7 5 0-0 e6 6 tt:lc3 it.e7 7 b3 (3)
254

Adult Games
7 
d4 cxd4 8 iYxd4 d6! would have led to a 
tabiya of the newly-fashionable 'hedgehog' 
system, which at that time, with the encour­
agement of Magerramov, I used to employ 
often and quite successfully (Game No.59). 
But in the later period of his career Smyslov 
endeavoured to play solidly, avoiding varia­
tions that were too unclear and tense.
7...0-0 (4) 8 ..ib2 d6
Rejecting the 'classical' 8...d5, as occurred 
in the Smyslov-Karpov game played in the 
same match-tournament.
9 e3 (4) 9...CiJbd7 (4)
10 d4 (3)
First 10 'ie2 a6 11 Sfd1 is slightly more 
flexible, for example: 11... 5e8 (11 ...'i'c7 12 
flac1) 12 d4 tt:e4 13 tt:Jxe4 .i,xe4 14 tt:d2 
xg2 15 'it'xg2 tt:f6 16 Sac1 .t!.a7 V2-V2 
(Smejkal-Kasparov, Moscow 1981) or 13 
flac1 tt:df6 14 tt:xe4 ..ixe4 15 dxc5 bxc5 16 
tt:d2 i xg2 17 'it>xg2 Sa7 18 'iVf3 i¥b8 with 
approximate equality (Gelfand-lvanchuk, 
Monte Carlo (rapid) 2004).
10...a6 (4) 11 'i'e2 (3)
Black is happy with both 11 .Uc1 b5! 
(Game No.55). and 11 d5 exd5 12 tt:e1 b5!
13 tt:Jxd5 tt:Jxd5 14 cxd5 ..if6 (Taimanov- 
Yudasin, Leningrad 1987) or 14 ; xd5 ; xd5
15 
Wxd5 
tt:b6 
(Malakhatko-Bunzmann, 
Zagan 1997).
1 1. ..tt:e4! (20)
Control over the light squares in the cen­
tre is the most effective means of counter­
play.
12 l:tfd1 (6)
Such positions promise a lengthy ma­
noeuvring battle. This makes all the more 
surprising the changes which occur on the 
board within a short space oftime.
12...t\Vb8?1 (16)
Here, apart from 12. ..Se8, transposing 
into a position from my game with Smejkal 
(cf. above), Black also has the simple
12. ..'tli'c7 13 l!ac1 tt:Jdf6 with equality. But I 
suddenly wanted to ‘be a dare-devil’ - to 
enliven the game somehow! - and I allowed 
my opponent to carry out a combination 
with the win of the exchange. The conse­
quences of this seemed to me to be not 
unfavourable for Black, but Smyslov quite 
reasonably judged the complications to be 
in White’s favour - and he accepted the 
challenge.
13 tt:xe4 (8) 13.....ixe4 14 tt:JeSl
The critical decision. 14 tt:e1 ..ixg2 15 
tt:xg2 tt:f6 16 l:!.ac1 'i!Vb7 would have trans­
posed into the analogous drawn game 
Ehlvest-Portisch (Reggio Emilia 1989/90).
14.....ixg2 15 tt:Jxd7 V&'b7 16 tt:Jxf8 _i,f3! 17 
'i!Vd3! l:txf8
255

Garry Kasparov on Garry Kasparov: Part One
Of course, not 17....ixf1? 18 'Wixh7+ and 
mate. In sacrificing the exchange, I was 
counting on the strength of my light- 
square bishop, reckoning that it would play 
a leading role in the forthcoming battle.
18 Sd2 (12)
18 
d5 was more cautious, but why return 
the exchange when no immediate dangers 
are apparent?
18...fs!
The critical position, which is important 
for evaluating the 
exchange 
sacrifice. 
Objectively the situation favours White, but 
to demonstrate this, very energetic play is 
required of him. On reaching this position 
in my preliminary calculations, I thought 
that it would not be easy for Smyslov to 
readjust from unhurried manoeuvring to 
specific, calculating play. And that is what 
happened: the sharp change in the charac­
ter of the play discomforted my illustrious 
opponent, and he catastrophically underes­
timated the potential strength of Black's 
threats.
19 Se1?! (3)
With the obvious intention ofplaying e3- 
e4 at a convenient moment, returning the 
exchange, but getting rid of the dangerous 
bishop and gaining some advantage thanks 
to my pawn weaknesses. However, this is a
loss of time, and it would have been better 
to immediately open a ‘second front' by 19 
.ic3!? 'Wia8 20 dxc5 bxc5 21 b4 or 19 a3!? 
with the intention of dxc5 and b3-b4. In 
this case it would have been more difficult 
for Black to transfer his pieces so quickly for 
the attack on the king.
19...'il'c8 (24)
I 
was terribly proud of this move (the 
threat is ...'Wie8-hS) and I attached an ex­
clamation mark to it, thinking that 19 . ..'Wia8 
was weaker because of the breakthrough
20 dxc5 bxc5 21 b4(?!) cxb4 22 c5(?). How­
ever, the cool-headed 22 ...dxc5 23 'Wid7 'it>f7! 
would have left White empty-handed. 
Therefore 19...'Wia8(c6) was at the least no 
worse, and may possibly have been better, 
since it would not have allowed the freeing 
advance 20 e4. True, after 20 a3! a5! (the 
immediate 20 .. ,il'e8 is weaker in view of 21 
dxc5 bxc5 22 b4 '1/Nh5 23 bxc5 dxc5 24 W fl)
21 
c3 White would have continued to 
claim an advantage, but Black could have 
maintained the intensity of the play, rely­
ing on his powerful bishop.
20 #c3? (24)
White loses another important tempo 
and - most importantly - he allows the 
enemy rook to go to f6. If he did not want to 
open the queenside by 20 a3! etc., at the
256

Adult Games
least he could have secured clear equality 
by a breakthrough in the centre - 20 e4 
fxe4 
21 
Sxe4. 
for 
example: 
21...e5
(21...i.xe4?! 22 Wkxe4 is unfavourable for 
Black) 22 .l:.e3 e4 23 !!xe4 ^ 3  24 Vxf3 
Sxf3 25 Bxe7 or 21.....tg5 22 :ie3! (22 .l:de2? 
e5!, threatening ...^ 3 ) 22. ..kxe3 23 fxe3 
and .l:.f2 with a probable draw.
But it was this that constituted the psy­
chological paradox: it was not easy to give 
up voluntarily the material advantage and 
immediately force a draw!
20„.5f6! (2) 21 a3? (7)
Here there is no longer time for this. In 
his confusion Smyslov makes a third suc­
cessive weak move, and Black's attack 
becomes irresistible. 21 #d3? 'iVe8 22 h4 
(22 dxcs .l:h6) 22. . . ^ 5! was also bad for 
White, but after 21 dxc5! bxc5 22 'i'd3 e5 
23 h4 he would have avoided an immediate 
rout, although 23 ...h6 and ...g7-g5 would 
have left me with a dangerous initiative.
21...We8! (2)
It transpires that the awkward placing of 
the white rooks deprives their king of the 
last hope of escaping from the burning 
house, andthe effectiveness of the 'i'c3 and 
£Lb2 is equivalent to zero. The concerted 
actions of the black pieces make for a swift 
rout.
22 dxcS (7) 22...'\+l'hS! (with the obvious 
threat of ..,'i'xh2+) 23 h4 (2) 23 ...Wkg4 (or
23 . ..l:g6! 24 e4 £Lxh4 and wins) 24 'ih2 (13)
24...bxcS! (2)
Black does not rush: there is no defence. 
25 Sh 1 (18) 2S. ..Sg6! (12) 26 Wg1 ..ixh4
27 #aS (4)
Also after 27 Sxd6 ..txg3 28 Bd8+ rtif7 29 
Wf1 £Lh4 it would all have ended.
27...h6 0-1
This is no worse than 27.....txhl or
27... Ve4. Times: 2.19-2.00.
This game made a great impression both 
on the spectators, and on the participants. 
Taimanov asked in surprise: ‘How was it 
that, a clear exchange up, White lost so 
quickly?!' Such dynamic play was unusual 
even for experienced fighters. This spec­
tacular win made me the leader of the 
tourn ament on the top boards, and our 
team crushed the senior team by the record 
score 61/ 2-11/ 2.
On the third day my long-awaited meet­
ing with Karpov occurred. The auditorium, 
which accommodated about three thou­
sand spectators, was overcrowded: chess 
fans were impatient to see how our first 
encounter would end. Burning with a 
desire to genuinely test myself and my
257

Garry Kasparov on Garry Kasparov: Part One
powers, I arrived in a state of extreme 
concentration, ready for a difficult battle.
Came 50 
G.Kasparov-A.Karpov
Match-Tournament of 
USSR Teams, 3rd round, 
Moscow 25.02.1981 
Petroff Defence C42
1 e4
At that time I rarely made this move, and 
in my preparations I thought that a little 
surprise in my first one-to-one battle with 
the world champion would not do any 
harm: I wanted to catch him unawares. 
However, it was I who was in for a sur­
prise...
1... es 2 l2Jf3 l2Jf6
Nikitin and I had prepared for the 'Span­
ish'! As for the Petroff Defence, precisely at 
that time it had unexpectedly become very 
popular. Karpov was also beginning to 
master it - two rounds later he also played
2 ... l2Jf6 against Romanishin. Evidently he 
was testing this opening for his forthcom­
ing match with Korchnoi (who occasionally 
employed the Petroff), and at the same he 
was beginning a gradual transition to 
different, simplifying systems, more solid 
than the ‘Spanish' and fully in accordance 
with his style.
3 lLlxeS d6 4 l2Jf3 l2Jxe4 5 d4 
e7
Also after 5.d5 6 .id3 l2Jc6 7 0-0 i.g 4  the 
most energetic is 8 c4! (Game No.67 in 
Kasparov vs. Karpov 1975-1985; Game No.6 
in Kasparov vs. Karpov 1986-87).
6 i.d3 dS 7 0-0 (5) 7...Ct:Jc6 8 Se1
Here I did not yet have any new ideas, 
and the modern theory of this system was 
only just beginning to take shape. As it later 
transpired in our first match (1984/85), the
immediate 8 c4! is better (Game No. 100).
8...AfS
While my opponent was thinking, I tried 
to remember our old analyses of the 
‘obligatory' variation 8...i.g4 9 c4 l2Jf6 10 
cxd5 (10 l2Jc3!? - Game No.34 in Kasparov 
vs. Karpov 1975-1985) 10...Ct:Jxd5 11 Ct:Jc3 
with a slight advantage to White. We 
examined these positions a great deal in 
the 1970s, when preparing for games with 
Yusupov and Dolmatov. The idea 10 ... i.xf3!
11 'iVxf3 't+Vxd5 (Game No.32 in Kasparov vs. 
Karpov 1975-1985) was not yet known: 
Smyslov introduced it in 1983.
But Karpov made a newly fashionable 
move, which had been successfully em­
ployed by Hubner in his Candidates match 
with Adorjan (Bad Lauterberg, 10th game, 
1980). Black's idea is to provoke as much 
simplification as possible.
9l2Jbd2 (38)
After a long think I decided to play solidly 
and follow Adorjan, although at the board I 
also studied 9 c4 Ct:Jb4 10 i.f1 , a possibility 
which I later mentioned to Nikitin. Already 
then I guessed that this was where chances 
of an opening advantage should be sought. 
This is slightly more favourable for White 
even than 8 c4 l2Jb4 9 i.e2: the position of 
the bishop on f1 gives him half a tempo. ..
258

Adult Games
The plan with 9 c4! ctJb4 10 i.f l!  was soon 
brought into practice by Karpov himself, 
who in 1982 won three opening duels 
against Portisch (cf. Game No.88 in Volume 
V of My Great Predecessors), and the move
8.....1f5 lost its attraction.
9...1t:Jxd2 10 'iWxd2 ±xd3 11 'i!Vxd3 0-0 12 c3 
#d7 (10) 13 i.f4
White has a minimal advantage, but in 
such a symmetrical position he has nothing 
in particular, of course. Karpov probably 
thought that he would easily gain a draw: 
all that is required of Black is accuracy.
13 ...a6
An improvement. After 13 ....l:!.fe8 14 h3 
a6 15 I:!.e3 i.d6 16 lt:Jg5 g6 17 &xd6 'iWxd6
18 I:!.ae1 #d7 19 ctJf3 f!xe3 20 #xe3 Hubner 
did not gain clear equality, although the 
game ended in a draw.
14 I:!.e3 (17)
14 
lt:Je5 is no better: 14...lt:Jxe5 15 ..1xe5 
f6 16 ..ig3 Bfe8 17 Be2 f
 18 !tae1 V2--/2 
(Anand-Gelfand, Monte-Carlo (rapid) 2005). 
14. ..I:!.ae8 (7) 15 Sae1 ±d8!
Another accurate move. After defending 
his c7-pawn, Black intends to begin ex­
changing the heavy pieces on the e-file. At 
this point Karpov offered me a draw, but 
after some thought I declined. And after the 
game I explained: 'I never hear the audi­
ence, but here I suddenly noticed how 
many people had arrived for our game. And 
I realised that I did not have the right to 
betray their hopes - no, not of victory, but 
of an uncompromising struggle.'
16 h3 (8) 16...1:i.xe3 17 Sxe3
After 17 #xe3 again 17 ...f6 was possible, 
but I did not like the activation of the black 
queen - 17...^f5. In any case, it is hard for 
White to count on anything.
17...f6 (10)
Seeing that after 17. ..2e8 there is the 
unpleasant reply 18 'ikf5! :t.e6 19 h4, Karpov 
takes a more subtle decision - to exchange 
rooks by ...l:i.f7-e7. The advantages of it are 
obvious: the e5-square is now inaccessible 
to the white pieces, and the king has ob­
tained a non-standard escape square. And 
the drawback - the weakening of the e6- 
square, where the black knight might have 
settled in order to suppress the pressure on 
the e-file - can hardly be exploited.
17...lt:Je7 was also recommended, and it 
too would have led to inevitable equality, 
for example: 18 lt:Je5 'ikf5 19 ltf3 '*'*'e6 20 
#d1 lt:Jg6 21 lt:Jxg6 fxg6 22 Se3 '*'*'d7 23 
..1g3 &g5 24 le 5  &f6 25 f!e2 f!f7 26 a4 
I:!.e7.
18 I:!.e2 (29)
Many years later, in a game with Leko
259

Garry Kasparov on Garry Kasparov: Part One
(Dortmund 1999). Karpov again went in for 
this position with Black and demonstrated 
its viability after 18 l2Jd2 l2Je7 19 l2Jb3 'i!Vf5 
with a quick draw.
18... Sf7 (14)
If 18...l2Je7 I was planning 19 b3 and c2- 
c4 (incidentally, in this way Karpov later 
broke up Korchnoi's position in the 4th 
game of their match in Merano), for exam­
ple: 19...c6 (19..."i!Vf5 20 'i*'xf5 l2Jxf5 21 g4!)
20 c4 'if5  21 'i*'e3!, but 20. ..l2Jg6 21 ..ltg3 
Ji.c7 22 ..ltxc7 'ixc7 23 g3 'i*'d7 and ... l:te8 is 
more consistent, gradually equalising.
19 liJd2! (4) 19...1i.e7 (12)
Black evidently did not fancy the end­
game with doubled pawns after 19 ... He7 20 
l2Jb3 l:txe2 21 "iVxe2 ..lte7 22 'fig4! 'ixg 4  23 
hxg4 ..ltd6 24 ..ltxd6 cxd6 25 l2Jc1 ctJf7 26 
tbd3, although here his chances of a draw 
are very considerable. But without necessity 
Karpov does not double his pawns - it is 
not in his style!
20l2Jfl (4)
Black has covered the c5-point, and so 
the knight changes course and goes to e3, 
where it will put the d5-pawn under fire. 
However, only with the opponent's help is it 
possible to breath life into this symmetrical 
position ...
20.....Itf8 (6) 21 Wf3 (6) 21.. .Ie7? (4)
A blunder - Black overlooks 23 ^xc7! (or 
in the variation 22 l2Je3 Se4 - the move 23 
'it>fl!). I remember that this staggered me: 
the world champion, and he made such an 
error?! Of course, he should have begun 
with 21 . ..l2Jd8 22 l2Je3 c6, maintaining 
approximate equality. Now, more than a 
quarter of a century later, I find my former 
optimism regarding White's 'active possi­
bilities' to be inexplicable: after 23 ..ltg3 Se7 
followed by ...l2Jf7 Black has no problems.
22 
l2Je3 
(suddenly 
White's 
advantage 
becomes apparent) 22...l2Jd8
Forced. There is no other defence against 
the threat of Wf1, winning a pawn: 22 ...1:te4
23 Wf1! (not 23 li.xc7 Sxd4! or 23 #g3 
l2Je7!) 23 ... l2Je7 24 1i.xc7 2xe3 (24...'ixc7 is 
no better: 25 l2Jxd5 l2Jxd5 26 iVxe4 l2Jf4 27 
.l:.e3) 25 'i'xe3 'Wixc7 26 'ie6+ 'it>h8 27 "i!Vf7 
'iHd8 28 l:te6 h6 29 c4, and a decisive break­
through is unavoidable: 29 ...dxc4 30 d5 or
29. ..'Wic8 30 c5 etc.
23 ..ltxc7! (5) 23 ..."i!Vxc7 24l2Jxd5 'id 6 (9)
This gives better chances of a defence 
than 24...l:txe2 25 l2Jxc7 Se1+ 26 Wh2 ..ltd6+
27 g3 ..ltxc7, since here the coordination of 
Black's forces is disrupted and White begins 
advancing his pawns with 28 c4!, virtually 
forcing the win of a piece.
2S l2Jxe7+ 1i.xe7 26 'i*'e4 ■: f8
260

Adult Games
A critical moment in the game. Now 
much 
depends 
on 
what 
plan 
White 
chooses. Alas, lack of time (and, of course, 
experience!) did not allow me to choose the 
best arrangement of my forces.
27 #e8?
Intending to restrict still further the mo­
bility of the black pieces by the advance of 
the a- and b-pawns. However, this seizure 
of space is a fundamentally incorrect plan, 
since it makes c3-c4 more difficult, does not 
change the pattern of the position and in 
the end merely reduces White's advantage. 
As often happens, the window of real 
opportunity for playing for a win was very 
narrow - exactly one move!
White should have played 27 c4! and ad­
vanced his c- and d-pawns (not the a- and 
b-pawns). The creation of a strong passed 
pawn would have placed Black on the verge 
of defeat, for example: 27 ...b6 28 g3 Cfjf7 29 
'it>g2 g6 30 Sc2 (30 'iVd5!?) 30...f5 31 Wf4! 
# xf4  (3 1 . 't!Vc6+ 32 Wf3) 32 gxf4 Cjd8 33 c5 
bxc5 34 dxc5 Cje6 35 c6! ii.d6 36 Sd2 ii.xf4
37 l:f.d7 and wins, or 27 ...Cjc6 in the hope of
28 #e6+ #xe6 29 Sxe6 Wf7!, but after 28 
l:td2! Black has a difficult position - 28...b6 
(28...'ib4?! 29 Vd5+ 'ih 8  30 S e 2) 29 a3 a5
30 l:td3! with the threat of c4-c5, while if 
30. ..'it'd7 or 30. ..Cjd8, then 31 Sb3!.
27. 
..g6 28 a4
After the belated 28 Se4 'ig7 29 c4 there 
was the resource 29 ...b6!, when it is now 
difficult for White to break through: 30 d5 ?! 
a5 31 g3 l!Vc7 32 Wg2 ..tc5 or 30 a3 a5 31 
' i 5  Cfjf7 etc.
28...'ig7 (10) 29 b4 #c7 (5) 30 Se3 Cfjf7 (5) 
Black 
has 
competently 
regrouped, 
stealthily activating his knight. In this game 
Karpov once again showed himself to be an 
excellent defender, especially since, as it 
seems to me, he always preferred playing 
with minor pieces against rook and pawns.
31 #e6 nd8 (7)
31...11.d6 was also possible, but Karpov 
methodically carries out his plan, at the 
same time denying the white queen an 
excellent post at d5.
32 as hS (4) 33 'i!Ve4 #d7 34 #e6 #d8
34...1!Va4 is dangerous in view of the sim­
ple 35 g3!.
White has carried out in full his planned 
program, and his pawns look well placed, 
restricting the black pieces, but now their 
advance involves the risk of losing material.
3 5 'it>f1
A delay. However, it was hardly any bet­
ter to play 35 .l:!.e1 kd 6 or 35 h4 Cjd6 36 g3
- here after 36. . Cjf5 37 Se4 'iVc7! (an im ­
portant nuance) 38 't!Vd5 Cjxg3! 39 fxg3
261

Garry Kasparov on Garry Kasparov: Part One
'ilVxg3+ 40 f
 'iYf3+ 41 &e1 'Y/;Vxc3+ 42 f
 
±xb4 43 'i¥xb7+ 'lt>h6 44 'ixa6  fs 45 'if6  
'id2+ 46 l:(e2 'if4+ it all ends in perpetual.
35 ...tt:Jh6 36 g4?!
I very much didn't want to allow the 
knight to go to fs. but if such weakening 
moves have to be made, it is clear that the 
worst is over for Black. However, also noth­
ing special was given by 36 g3 tt:JfS 37 Sd3 
tt:Jh6 38 dS &d6! (38 ...tt:Jf7? 39 d6!), for 
example: 39 c4 &xb4 40 d6 4Jf7 41 d7 i.xaS
42 'id s  'ib 6 , and the d-pawn is halted.
36. 
..hxg4 37 hxg4 tt:Jf7 38 &e2
In the centre, behind the barricade of 
pawns, things are more peaceful for the 
king than on the exposed kingside. But now 
the advance of the pawns becomes ex­
tremely difficult and one can talk about a 
situation of dynamic balance.
38...tt:JgS 39 'iYb6 'i¥d7 40 4d3 &d6 41 &02
Here, instead of adjourning the game, I 
offered a draw: there had already been too 
much excitement! I regretted that I had not 
exploited the chance winning opportunity 
(although 
Karpov 
could have 
avoided 
allowing me it). My opponent also decided 
not to take a risk and he accepted my offer 
(Yi-Yi). Times: 2.33-2.31.
Nikitin: 'The first reconnaissance in force 
was a wonderful success. The world cham­
pion's young opponent was not at all his 
inferior in a complicated, tense struggle.' 
But that day our team was comprehen­
sively beaten 6-2 by the first team.
My second duel with Karpov also took a 
tense course and for all five hours it kept 
the spectators on the edge of their seats 
(Game No.3 in Kasparov v. Karpov 1975­
1985). Flohr: 'The game was played in the 
6th 
and 
last 
round 
of 
the 
match- 
tournament. Karpov's team - the USSR first 
team - was already assured of victory, and
Kasparov's team - the youth team - was 
also assured of second place. But on this 
occasion too the tournament hall o f the 
Army Central Sports Club was crowded with 
chess fans, and the outcome of the match, 4­
4, was the result of an interesting struggle 
on nearly all the boards.’
The public's enormous interest in the 
clash of the leaders was further raised by the 
fact that it would decide who would finish 
first in the individual competition on board 
one. I was leading in the mini-tournament, 
half a point ahead of the world champion: 
he was on 'plus one' thanks to a win oveT 
Romanishin, while I was on 'plus two', 
having exchanged wins with Romanishin 
and twice defeated Smyslov. Thus Karpov 
could overtake me only by winning this 
game. But after interesting complications 
the result was again a draw. As soon as the 
game ended, spectators poured on to the 
stage, forgetting that on some of the other 
boards play was still in progress...
Thus, somewhat to my surprise, I man­
aged to score the most points on board one. 
Now Karpov could have been left in no 
doubt that in me he had a potentially 
dangerous opponent. At the closing of the 
match-tournament, the chairman of the 
USSR Chess Federation Vitaly Sevastyanov 
said (without, however, any particular 
enthusiasm): 'We have witnessed the start 
of an interesting chess dialogue'.
Viktor Vasiliev: 'By any standards Anatoly 
Karpov is still young: the age of 30 is a 
golden one fo r a chess player. But already 
eyeing the champion’s crown are opponents 
who are still young, even fo r the age of 
acceleration. Who knows, perhaps in talent 
and ambition - also an important trait - 
18-year-old Garry Kasparov is not inferior to 
Fischer? But in education and breadth of 
intellectual development he has certainly
262

Adult Games
surpassed the 18-year-old Fischer Both 
formidable opponent - all this made a big
games between Karpov and Kasparov were 
awaited as the central events ofthe match- 
tournament, and both fully justified the 
waiting... 
Kasparov's boldness, 
his self­
confidence, liveliness of thought andfinally, 
his audacious eagerness fo r a fight with his
impression, to say nothing about the hon­
ourable outcome. Two draws in two tense 
battles with the world champion, fo r whom 
a win in one of them would have given the 
best result on board 1 - the youngster can 
be proud of this.'
Moscow ‘Tournament of Stars'
International grandmaster tournament (Moscow, 4-24 April 1981)
3.
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
0
3.
2
3
4
1
Karpov
*
y,
y,
1
y,
y,
1
1
y,
y,
y,
1
y,
1
9
2
Polugaevsky
y,
*
y,
y,
y,
y,
y,
y,
1
y,
y,
y,
1
y,
7V*
3
Kasparov
y,
y,
*
y,
y,
y,
1
y,
0
y,
y,
y,
1
1
7V*
4
Smyslov
0
y,
y,
*
y,
y,
1
y,
y,
y,
y,
1
1
y,
7V*
5 Gheorghiu
y,
y,
y,
y,
*
y,
y,
y,
y,
y,
y,
1
y,
y,
7
6
Portisch
y,
y,
y,
y,
y,
+
0
y,
y,
1
1
0
1
y,
7
7
Beliavsky
0
y,
0
0
y,
1
*
y,
1
1
y,
y,
y,
y,
6Vz
8
Balashov
0
y,
y,
y,
y,
y,
y,
*
y,
y,
1
0
y,
1
6Vz
9
Petrosian
y,
0
1
y,
y,
y,
0
y,
*
y,
y,
y,
y,
y,
6
10
Andersson
y,
y,
y,
y,
y,
0
0
y,
y,
*
y,
y,
y,
1
6
11
Smejkal
y,
y,
y,
y,
y,
0
y,
0
y,
y,
*
1
0
y,
5 V*
12
Timman
0
y,
y,
0
0
1
y,
1
y,
y,
0
*
0
1
5V*
13
Torre
y,
0
0
0
y,
0
y,
y,
y,
y,
1
1
*
y,
5 V*
14
Geller
0
y,
0
y,
y,
y,
y,
0
y,
0
y,
0
y,
*
4
My success in the February parade of 
USSR teams became the decisive argument 
in favour of my inclusion in the 'Tourna­
ment of Stars', held in the spring of 1981 in 
the prestigious International Trade Centre 
in Moscow. This super-tournament, with 
the participation of the world champion, 
two ex-champions and a further eleven 
well-known 
grandmasters 
from 
seven 
countries, was my first serious test at world 
level.
At the start I was paired with Black 
against one of the favourites - the two­
time USSR champion Alexander Beliavsky. 
And although it all ended well for me, this
game (and then the games with Portisch 
and Timman) highlighted the problems 
that were still present in my opening 
repertoire, which was not yet fully devel­
oped.
Game 51 
A.Beliavsky-G.Kasparov
Grandmaster Tournament, 
1st round, Moscow 4.04.1981 
King's lndian Defence E83
1 d4 tZ:lf6 2 c4 g6 3 tZ:lc3 il.g7 4 e4 d6 5 f3 0-0
(5...tZ:lc6 - Game Nos. 12,15) 6 ke3 tZ:lc6
263

Garry Kasparov on Garry Kasparov: Part One
These moves were made rapidly: my op­
ponent always chose the 5amisch Attack, 
and at that time I played the variation with 
the development of the knight at c6. But 
two years later I surprised Beliavsky with 
the gambit 6... a6 7 .Jtd3 c5 (Game No.81), 
while in the 1990s I gave preference to
6...e5 7 d5 c6 or 7 t'Llge2 c6 8 'i!d2 t'Llbd7 
(Game Nos. 36, 38 in Kasparov vs. Karpov 
1989-2009).
5trangely enough, on the next two 
moves White spent more than 40 minutes.
7 'iVd2 (21)
An alternative is 7 t'Llge2 a6 8 'Llcl e5 9 
d5 'Lld4 
10 'Llb3 t'Llxb3 11 'iVxb3 
c5 
(l1...CDd7!? 12 0-0-0 f5. 5alov-Dorfman, 51st 
U55R Championship, Lvov 1984) 12 dxc6 
bxc6 13 o-o-o 'ie7  (13 .....ie6?! is worse: 14 
'ia3 ! t'Lle8 15 h4!, Spassky-Korchnoi, 7th 
match game, Kiev 1968) 14 'iYb6 .itb7 15 g4 
l:ab8 (15...li!.fd8!?) 16 h4 l1fc8? (16. ...l:fd8 is 
correct with the idea of 17 h5 d5! 18 .ic5 
#e8) 17 h5.
Analysis diagram
17...'Lld5 ?! (a desperate chance; 17...d5 18 
..ic5 favours White) 18 exd5 cxd5 19 Bxd5? 
(19 cxd5! would have refuted Black's idea:
19.....ixd5 20 'ixb8! and t'Llxd5, or 19...e4 20 
hxg6 hxg6 21 1Va5 exf3 22 ..ia7 l:ta8 23 .if2
etc.) 19. ...Jtxd5 20 t'Llxd5 Ve6 21 'ia 7  (21 
#a5 Sb5!) 21...1:i.a8 22 #b7 (White almost 
played 22 'Llc7?, but at the last moment he 
noticed the stunning 22...'i'xc4+!) 22...Sab8 
with a draw (Timman-Kasparov, 5th round).
7...a6 (2)
7 
....l:b8 8 t'Llge2 Be8 is hardly any better - 
in the event of 9 tt:Jc1 e5 10 d5 'Lld4 11 'Llb3 
c5 12 dxc6 bxc6 13 tt:Jxd4 exd4 14 .Jixd4 d5 
(both black rooks are involved!) or 9 d5 t'Lle5
10 'Llg3 e6!? 11 .ixa7  li!.a8 12 .ite3 exd5 13 
cxd5 c6 14 dxc6 bxc6 15 &e2 h5! (Akopov- 
Kasparov, Baku 1978) Black has good play 
for the pawn, but 9 0-0-0!or 9 h 4 !is 
stronger.
8 t'Llge2 (21) 8...Ie8?I (17)
I 
wanted to take the game away from the 
familiar paths, but this, as it later tran­
spired, is a dubious manoeuvre. It looks to 
be a waste of a tempo and does not give 
any pluses compared with the usual con­
tinuation 8...1:i.b8 9 tt:Jc1 e5 10 d5 'Lld4 or 9 
h4! b5 (9 ...h5 is more risky) 10 h5, where I 
have had experience for both sides (Game 
No.87).
9 tt:Jc1 (8)
A solid positional move, opening the way 
for the bishop on fl. However, here too the 
sharp 9 h4! is good: 9 ...h5 (now 9 ...b5 is a 
dubious pawn sacrifice) 10 0-0-0 b5 11
264

Adult Games
tt:'ld5! bxc4 12 tt:Jxf6+ .ix f 6 13 g4! hxg4 14 
h5 g5 15 ..ixg5 e5 16 .ix f 6 't!Nxf6 17 fxg4! 
exd4 18 g5 'if3  19 g6! with a dangerous 
attack (Lautier-Piket, Cannes 1990).
9...eS (3) 10 dS (10 tt:'lb3 is weaker: 10. .. exd4
11 tt:Jxd4 ctJe5 12 .ie2 c5 13 tt:Jc2 i.e6)
10...ctJd4 11 t2l1e2 (10)
In his desire to exchange the knight on 
d4 in the most convenient way, White 
grants the opponent an additional possibil­
ity. After 11 tt:'lb3! Black would have had to 
choose between the dubious pawn sacrifice 
11. ..c5 12 dxc6 bxc6 (12 ... tt:Jxc6?! 13 Sd1! - 
Stohl) 13 tt:Jxd4 exd4 14 i.xd 4  d5 (at the 
time it appeared that Black had quite good 
compensation for the pawn, but I did not 
greatly believe this) 15 cxd5 cxd5 16 &xf6 
..ixf6 17 tt:Jxd5 .ixb2 18 Sb 1 i.e5 19 ..ic4, 
and an inferior game after 11...tt:Jxb3 12 
axb3 c5 13 g4 or, according to Stohl, 13 b4! 
cxb4 14 ctJa4.
However, after 11 t2l1e2 White's chances 
are also slightly better - for the reason that
8...:!.e8?! was played instead of 8 ... .l:tb8. 
l l .  ..cS (24) 12 dxc6 tt:Jxc6 (2)
This reply, which is bad with the knight 
on b3, is logical here: because of his re­
tarded development it is hard for White to 
quickly exploit the defects in Black's posi­
tion.
13 tt:JdS! (17)
The most energetic the threat of ..ib6 
sets Black a difficult choice. The routine 13 
.l:d1 would have allowed him to develop his 
forces comfortably with 13...ii.e6.
At this moment Beliavsky looked very 
happy with his position. For my part, I 
established a personal record for the think­
ing time over one move, which I broke only 
in the 2nd game of my fourth match with 
Karpov (1987). In the event of 8 ...Sb8 there 
would have been the simple reply 13...b5 
with equality, but what to do now?
13. ..bs!? (68)
I needed more than an hour to convince 
myself that passive defence (with the rook 
on e8!) was unpromising after 13...tt:Jxd5?!
14 cxd5 tt:'lb8 (14. ..t2le7 15 tt:'lc3) 15 h4 h5 16 
0-0-0 or 13. ..t2ld7?! 14 h4!, and to decide on 
an exchange sacrifice with the hope of 
exploiting White's retarded development.
Alas, although this audacious move, to 
which I previously attached only an excla­
mation mark, did disconcert my opponent, 
a move underestimated by me was objec­
tively better: 13... ..ie6! (natural develop­
ment!) 14 &b6 'id 7 15 
i.xc4 16 l2lc3 
±e6! 17 &e2 ctJd4 18 tt:Jxa8 lixa8 19 0-0 
'i'c6 with quite good piece play, although 
after 20 &xd4 exd4 21 t2ld1 White retains a 
minimal plus: he is after all the exchange 
up!
14 &b6 (14)
Beliavsky picks up material, assuming 
that Black's activity will prove temporary. In 
The Test of Time I recommended that White 
should ‘decline the Greek gift, and, in view 
of Black's approaching time-trouble, follow 
a positional course - 14 ctJec3, although 
after 14...tt:Jd4 15 ..id3 (15 tt:Jxf6+ &xf6 16 
cxb5 axb5 17 &xb5 &h4+! with good com­
pensation for the pawn) 15 .....ie6 Black 
would have retained a good game.' How­
265

Garry Kasparov on Garry Kasparov: Part One
ever, 15 cxbS! axb5 16 .itxbS! is stronger:
16...1t)b3 17 k b 6, or 16...^xd5 17 kxd4! 
exd4 18 tt:Jxd5 with advantage to White 
(Stohl). On the other hand, after 14. ..tt:Jxd5!
15 ct:Jxd5 .:.bS 16 i.d 3 tt:Jd4 17 0-0 .ite6 18 
fla c l # d 7 and ...Sec8 Black does indeed 
have an almost equal game.
14. .."ir'd7 15 tt:Jc7 (2)
At first sight, 15 cxb5 axb5 (15...tt:Jxd5?
16 bxc6 "i.Vxc6 17 #xd5! and wins) 16 
i.b7(?) 17 l:Id1! is much stronger, when 
Black will definitely not have sufficient 
compensation for the exchange. However,
16...1:tb8! 17 tt:xe8 #xeS leads to an unclear 
position, which could also have arisen in 
the game (cf. the note to White's 17th 
move, variation 'c').
15...1:i.b8 (12) 16 ct:Jxe8 'ifxe8
Here Beliavsky thought for a long time: 
White has a wide choice of tempting con­
tinuations, but everywhere Black has con­
siderable resources.
17 ke3?! (23)
Trying to avoid all dangers, White de­
cides in the first instance to evacuate his 
king from the centre, but during this time 
Black picks up a pawn and activates his 
pieces. Let us consider the other options:
a) 
17 c5 l:Ib7!? (17. ..dxc5 18 - xc5 ..te6 is 
simpler, but not 17...tt:d7?! 18 Ji.c7 dxc5 19
kxb8 ct:Jdxb8 because of 20 h4!) 18 'l!Vxd6 
k f8  19 Vd2 (19 'ifxf6? Ji.e7, and the queen is 
trapped) 19 ...Ji.e6 20 tt:c3 tt:Jd7! (but not my 
earlier move 20...Sd7(?) because of 21 'ife3!)
21 ct:Jd5 kxd5 22 exd5 ct:d4 23 Ji.a5 tt:Jxc5 24 
b4 ct:a4 25 i.d3 Sd7 26 0-0 Sxd5 with a 
pawn for the exchange and excellent play;
b) 17 i.c7!? Sb7 18 i. xd6 bxc4 19 Ji.a3 
(19 Itd ll? and "ir'c1) 19...i.e6, and now not
20 ctJc3?! .Md7!, but 20 .ndl or 20 0-0-0 with 
a material advantage - but still with 
development incomplete;
c) 
17 cxb5!? when I thought that
17 ....Mxb6(?!) 18 bxc6 d5 (18...Sxc6 19 tt:c3) 
'gives Black counterplay', but after 19 exd5 
e4 20 l:tc1! (Stohl) he cannot cope with the 
white pawns.
There only remains 17 ...axb5 18 Ji.e3 (18 
kf2  b4 19 Sc1 is possibly more accurate)
18...d5! 19 exd5 ct:d4 20 'lt>f2!? (20 Ji.xd4 
exd4 21 'i'xd4 kb 7 or 20 ct:c3 b4 21 CDe4 
tt:Jxd5 22 .id3 tt:Jxe3 23 #xe3 b3 is no better 
for White) 20. ...ti:Jf5 21 tt:lc3 e4!? (a bayonet 
thrust; if first 21...'iWd8, then 22 a3!) 22 ke2 
(at last; 22 k f4  tt:lh5l?) 22. ..exf3 23 Ji.xf3 b4
24 tt:e2 kb7, and the 'holes' in the oppo­
nent's position promise Black counterplay, 
for example: 25 ..tg5 tt:le4+ 26 kxe4 i¥'xe4 
27 'iWf4 "i.Ve8 28 g4 h6 etc.
17...bxc4 18 ctJc3 (2) 18...k e 6 (2)
266

Adult Games
19 Ji.e2 (5)
A 
psychologically 
difficult 
moment: 
White reconciles himself to the loss of his 
advantage. From afar my opponent had 
been intending the critical 19 CZJdS, but 
here he noticed a spectacular further 
sacrifice: 19...tZ:lxds! (19...Ji.xd5 20 exds c3!
21 bxc3 tZ:ld4 22 ..ic4 Vc8 or 21...tZ:le7 22 
Ji.c4 V a4 is also acceptable) 20 exd5 e4 21 
dxe6 #xe6. For the rook Black has just two 
pawns, but he has a big lead in develop­
ment, a pawn avalanche in the centre and 
strong concrete threats: 22 .l:i.b1? is bad 
because of 22 . .. c3, it is also dangerous to 
play 22 Sc1?! d5 (Stohl) 23 b3 exf3 24 'it'f2 
c3! 25 fixc3 d4, while after the counter­
sacrifice 22 ,xc4  #xc4 23 .Mc1 ^ 5  White 
is thinking only of maintaining the balance.
This unexpected discovery disturbed Be- 
liavsky, and he preferred the quiet 19 Ji.e2.
19...tZ:ld4
Now Black has a pawn for the exchange 
and a comfortable game.
20 0-0
Not 20 ..ixd4? exd4 21 #xd4 ct:Jd5! 22 
'iWd2? fixb2 and wins (Stohl). 20 .Mc1 (an 
attempt to prevent ... d6-d5) is hardly any 
better than the move in the game: 20....l:i.b7
21 o-o ^ 8  22 Sb1 d5 (nevertheless!).
20...ds 21 exds (4) 21...CZJxd5 22 ct'lxds
..ixds
Black has the more active pieces, espe­
cially the knight on d4, which is not so 
easily dislodged from its powerful outpost 
(23 f4? ct'lxe2+ 24 'iVxe2 exf4 25 Sxf4 Sxb2). 
However, White has some material advan­
tage and there are no obvious weaknesses 
in his position, and so the situation is one 
of dynamic balance.
23 .Mf2 (7) 23...h5 (3)
Not bad, although 23. ....ie6 24 .Mc1 # a4 
was also possible, after which there could 
have followed 25 ..ixc4 ..ixc4 26 b3 tZ:lxb3
27 axb3 Wxb3 28 i. h6, or even 25 ..ixd4 
exd4 26 .i.xc4 i xc4 27 b3 ..ixb3 28 axb3 
#xb3 29 f4 with simplification and a prob­
able draw.
On the first 23 moves the two players 
had used nearly all their time, and now 
both had about 10 minutes, or perhaps 
even less, left on their clocks. It is this that 
explains the subsequent uneven play and 
White's fatal mistake on the 28th move.
24 S c l # e 6 25 f
 (3) 2S...h4
The plan involving the advance of the h- 
pawn looks tempting (especially in time- 
trouble), but 25..ct'lf5 should perhaps have 
been played, although after 26 .Md1 the 
evaluation of the position would not have 
changed.
267

Garry Kasparov on Garry Kasparov: Part One
26 .l:te1 'iWc6
Here too I recommended 26 ...ti:JfS, al­
though the approximate variation 27 l:td1 
e4 28 i.a 7  e3 29 'ixd s exf2+ 30 i.x f 2 'ifxds
31 l:txds l:txb2 32 i.xc4  l:tb1+ 33 i.f1  i.h 6
34 l:teS leads to a drawn endgame.
27 i.h 6
This does not yet spoil anything, but 27 
f4! was more energetic, driving back the 
knight: 27...ti:JfS (if 27...i.f8 28 fxeS tt:JfS, 
then 29 l:txfs!) 28 fxeS (28 l:td1 e4!?)
28...ti:Jxe3 (28. ..i.xes 29 l:xfs! gxfs 30 i.d4! 
i.xd4+ 31 'iWxd4 'iWb6 32 l:te8+ 'it>h7 33 Sh8+ 
'it;>g6 34 l:!.g8+ with perpetual check) 29 
l:!.xe3 (29 'iWxe3 is somewhat weaker in view 
of 29...i.f8!) 29 . ..i.h6 30 e6! 'iWcS (30...i.xe6?
31 l:!.xe6!; 30. ..fs 31 e7 is equal) 31 exf7+
i.xf7  32 l:!.e8+ .l:.xe8 33 'iWxh6 l:!.e4 34 'iWd2 
with a draw.
The practical advantage of 27 f4 was that 
Black could no longer have 'marked time', 
as in the game: he would have had to make 
a choice and take some decision, and to 
calculate all these variations with just 4 
minutes for 14 moves was not easy. .. True, 
Beliavsky's time-trouble was much more 
serious.
27...1.h8
Of course, the important bishop has to 
be retained.
28 f4??
But now this active move, made at the 
most 
inappropriate moment, leads to 
disaster: Black creates an ultra-powerful 
passed pawn. 28 h3!, defending against the 
threat of ...h4-h3, was essential. I over- 
optimistically thought that ‘even then 
Black's advantage is obvious'. In fact White 
has a fairly solid position and one can still 
talk about a dynamic equilibrium.
28...e4 (the point!) 29 .l:td1 i.e6
Or 29...e3!? 30 'ixe3 tt:Jfs 31 'iWd2 i.d 4  
and wins (Stohl).
30f5
In the event of 30 i.g s  tt:Jfs the black 
pawn would have advanced unhindered to 
e3, making White's resistance hopeless: 31 
'iWas 'it>h7! 32 lid8 l:!.xd8 33 'iWxd8 e3 34 l:!.e2 
'iVe4 35 i.f6  .Jtxf6 36 'ilfxf6 'iWxf4 and wins. 
To somehow coordinate his pieces, Be- 
liavsky sacrifices a pawn, but he is no 
longer able to change the course of events.
30. ..tt:JxfS 31 'iWf4 .l:te8 (3) 32 .l:tfd2?!
Now the stray bishop is lost. However, 32
i.g s e3 (Stohl) or 32...h3 could also not have 
satisfied White.
32...'iWcS+ 33 'it>h1 i.eS 34 'iWgS 'it>h7!
Here White could have resigned, but at 
this point the players had only one minute 
left between them!
268

Adult Games
35 Sd8?! Sxd8 36 Sxd8
36...Wf2! (an unpleasant interposition) 37 
Sd1l2Jxh6
37 
. .... d4 (Stohl) or 37...e3! was much 
stronger, but the capture of the bishop does 
not spoil anything.
38 Wxes e3 (38. ...tg4!? 39 'i'xe4 lt'le3) 39 Wc3
39 
h3 ..ixh3 40 gxh3 'i'f3+ 41 'ig l lt'lf5! 
was also hopeless for White.
39...h3 40 'i'e1 tt'lg4!
The strongest move (although 40...e2!?
41 
'ixf2  exdl'iV would have been more 
spectacular). The time control was reached, 
and White resigned (0-1): ...e3-e2 is threat­
ened, and if 41 S c l, then 41.....id5 42 Wxf2 
exf2 and ...l2Je3, mating. Times: 2.41-2.29.
In the 2nd round with White against 
Gheorghiu I gained a clearly better end­
game. With rooks on the board, the pres­
ence of opposite-colour bishops merely 
aggravated the problems for Black, who 
had positional defects. However, with my 
39th move in time-trouble I lost the greater 
part of my advantage, and immediately 
after the time control I made another 'weak 
move': instead of adjourning the game and 
seeking ways to win, I offered a draw, 
which Gheorghiu joyfully accepted. Later, 
observing how grandmasters seek the
slightest chances in dead-drawn positions, I 
frequently regretted making such a hasty 
peace offer...
In the 3rd round, not without some diffi­
culty I gained a draw with Portisch, and in 
the 4th I defeated Torre with White. By that 
time the leading group had emerged: Kar­
pov - 31/2 out of 4; Kasparov and Smyslov - 3.
In the next three rounds my rivals re­
stricted themselves to draws, and I gained a 
real chance of catching the world cham­
pion, by achieving two draws with Black, 
against Timman and Smyslov (precisely on 
my 18th birthday), and adjourning my 
game against Andersson with excellent 
winning chances, although here too I 
slightly let my opponent off the hook with 
my time-trouble 39th move.
However, the resumption was due to 
take place only after the 8th round, in 
which for the second time in my life I met 
at the board with ex-world champion 
Tigran Petrosian. After our joint trip to 
Banja Luka we were on excellent terms, and 
Nikitin and I had several times visited him 
for creative discussions. But on that April 
day I was thirsting for victory both in the 
game, and in the tournament! Later, after 
being given a masterful lesson in defence 
and counterattack, for a long time I was 
reminded of a light-minded d'Artagnan, 
eagerly galloping to conquer Paris, but on 
the way suddenly encountering the hard­
ened and cunning ‘stranger from Meung'...
Game 52 
G.Kasparov-T.Petrosian
Grandmaster Tournament, 
8th round, Moscow 14.04.1981 
Queen's Indian Defence E12
1 d4 lt'lf6 2 c4 e6 3 tt'lf3 b6 4 a3 (following
269

Garry Kasparov on Garry Kasparov: Part One
the example of Petrosian himself!) 4...^b7 
(4...cs - Game Nos. 32, 68) 5 CDc3 d5 (5 ...CDe4
- Game No.61) 6 cxd5 CZJxd5 7 e3
The alternative is 7 'tc2 (Game Nos. 73, 
75, 98).
7...6e7 8 &b5+ c6 9 &d3 CZJxc3 (4) 10 bxc3
c5 (10...CDd7 - Game No.43) 11 0-0 (9)
11...0-0 (4)
As is well known, 11...CDc6! (Game No.85) 
is more accurate. Now White succeeds in 
weakening the black king's defences.
12 iVc2! (8) 12 ...g6
After 12 ...h6 13 e4 CZJc6 14 M>2 Sc8 15 
'iVe2 CZJas 16 S a d l cxd4 17 cxd4 White also 
has some advantage (Ribli-Hort, Germany 
1991).
13 e4 (9) 13...CZJc6 (11)
13...'ic7?! is weaker: 14 We2 l:.d8 15 h4! 
CZJc6 16 ;. e3 
f6?! 17 eS ..tg7 18 hS with an 
attack (Polugayevsky-Petrosian, lOth round).
14 & h6?!(14 .t e3 is correct) 14. ..Se8 15 
Bfd1 (2)
15...iVc7?! (11)
It definitely made sense for Black to part 
with the exchange: the endgame after
15 ...cxd4! 16 cxd4 CZJxd4 17 CZJxd4 Wxd4 18 
&bs 'ifxe4 19 Wxe4 &xe4 20 &xe8 Sxe8 21 
Bd7 as 22 a4 (22 : e3 bs 23 .l!c1? is parried 
by 23 ...±xa3 24 Zi.cc7 ^b2! 25 Bxf7 b4! 26 
Sxh7 ^es 27 Sce7 .l:b8) 22...±cs would
have promised him every chance of a draw.
16 We2 (6) 16 ....U.ed8 (6) 17 'il'e3! (6)
In connection with e4-e5 and h2-h4-h5, 
White's position begins to look menacing.
17. ..e5! (12)
If 17...Bd7, then 18 ,bS! is unpleasant, 
keeping &f4 in reserve. At the cost of posi­
tional concessions, Petrosian suppresses 
the incipient attack.
18 d5 (58)
On this one obvious move I spent nearly 
a whole hour! I very much wanted to ex­
ploit the opening of the a2-g8 diagonal by 
playing 18 &c4?! exd4 19 cxd4 cxd4 20 
jLxf7+?! 'it>xf7 21 ^ 3 + , but after 21...4e8
22 Wg8+ (22 es ^f8!; 22 B a cl Wd6!)
22. ..'it>d7 23 'iYxh7 'it>c8 24 iVxg6 Wd6 noth­
ing worthwhile would have come of it. Too 
much time was wasted in vain, and I soon 
had cause to regret this.
18...CZJa5 19 c4!? (3)
This weakening of the d4-point gives 
Black counter-chances, but after 19 CZJgs c4
20 &e2 it is also not easy for White to gain 
any real advantage: 20. .. i.c8 21 ®g3 f6 22 
CDf3 CDb3! (22...±f8?! is inferior: 23 i.xf8 
M.xf8 24 CDd2! and h2-h4-h5) 23 Ba2 CZJcs 24 
CDd2 bS with a complicated struggle - 25 a4 
CZJxa4 26 CZJxc4 a6 27 h4 &f8.
19...CZJb3 (2)
270

Adult Games
Yusupov and Dvoretsky suggested 19 .. .f6
20 h4 ..ia6 21 ct:Jd2 ..if8 and a possible 
... ctJb7-d6, but the move in the game looks 
more logical.
20 Sa2 (3) 20...f6 (6) 21 h4 ..ic8?!
To 
all 
appearances, the 
immediate
21.. .i.f8!? 
(Yusupov, 
Dvoretsky) 
was 
sounder. Now White succeeds in keeping 
his initiative alive.
22 H bl! ctJd4 23 ct:Jxd4 cxd4 24 'i¥g3 (the 
thematic f2-f4 is now on the agenda) 
24. ....if8 (4) 25 ..id2! (4) ..id6 (8) 26 I f l  (26 
h5!?) 2 6 ...% 7  (8)
27 a4?! (5)
Opening a second front! But in Petro­
sian's opinion this was an inaccuracy: 
'White should not have made such a seri­
ous weakening of his queenside'. However, 
after 27 f4 Black had the reply 27... ; d7 28 
fxe5 (28 ^ 2  .l:!.f8 29 ..ltb4 We7!) 28. ....ixe5
29 ; f4 Sf8 30 Saf2 .l:.ae8 with a solid 
defence. The correct solution was the 
paradoxical 27 ; b4! (Yusupov, Dvoretsky). 
By preventing .....ltd7, White carries out f2- 
f4 in a more comfortable situation: 27...flie7
28 f4! or 27.....ta6 28 ..ixd6 Hxd6 29 f4 etc.
27...as!
Fixing the weakness at a4. Now White's 
task is far more difficult, but I realised this 
only later, whereas during the game I was
merely staggered by the boldness of my 
opponent, since I was sure that Black would 
be unable to hold out against the combined 
pressure on the b-file and on the kingside. 
At that time I used to think in concrete, 
tactical terms, whereas for Petrosian it was 
long-term, strategic terms.
28 Hb2! jLcS (28. ..Sb8? 29 2fb1 ..ltc5 30 
..txa5 and wins) 29 f4 (4) 29. ..-ltd7 (8)
The prophylactic 29. ..h6 is interesting, for 
example: 30 h5 g5 31 fxg5 fxg5 32 <it>h1 Sf8 
(Petrosian) 33 .l:!.xf8+ 'it>xf8 34 jLe2 jLd7 with 
equality, or 30 flie1!? l:.a7! (not 30...jLd7? 31 
fxe5 fxe5 32 f/ic1 ! 'lt>h7 33 ..ltxh6! or 32. ....ia3
33 ..ixh6! jLxb2 34 'i¥g5 ^ 7  35 Sf6 and 
wins) 31 ^ 1  Sb7 32 fxe5 (32 ..ic1!?)
32...fxe5 33 Sb5 \t>h7! (Yusupov, Dvoretsky).
30 hs! (4)
30.....ixa4? (8)
The more dangerous pawn should have 
been taken - 30 ... gxh5 31 'i¥h4 ..ltg4 32 fxe5 
fxe5 33 ..ig5 .l:.f8! (33..J:e 8 34 i.f6!) 34 ..if6 
(if 34 Sbf2 fixf2 3 5 Sxf2 Black has a good 
choice between 35 ....l:e8 36 ..ltf6 'i¥g6!, 
recommended by Yusupov and Dvoretsky, 
and 35 ...Sf8 36 ..if6 Sxf6! 37 flixf6 flixf6 38 
.l:.xf6 i.d 7  with equality) 34. ..^ 6  35 Sbf2 
Hae8 with approximate equality. Since 36 
d6? is unfavourable: 36.....ixd6 37 c5 ..ltxc5
38 ..ic4+ ..ie6 39 ..ltxe6+ (39 .l:.f5? jLxc4 40
2 71

Garry Kasparov on Garry Kasparov: Part One
l:tgS+ Wg6 41 Wxhs 'it>f7! and wins)
39...l:txe6 40 l:!.f3 d3+ 41 'ith2 d2 42 Sg3+ 
'i!Yg6, White must play 36 Wg3 We3 37 = xes 
l:txes! 38 Wxes J. b4! 39 cs .=- e1 40 WgS+! 
Wxgs 41 l:txf8+ 'itg7, when he has only 
perpetual check (Yusupov, Dvoretsky).
Apart from 31...^g4, an idea of Bologan's 
also comes into consideration: 31...l:tf8!? 32 
'ilfxhs ± xa4 33 fxes fxes 34 l:txf8+ Bxf8! 3S 
^h6 Wg6 36 Wxg6+ hxg6 37 .&xf8 'itxf8 38 
'itf1 i.d 7  39 'ite2 a4 with sufficient com­
pensation for the exchange.
31 h6 (4) 31. ..Wc7
Petrosian was relying on the solidity of 
his position and was hoping subsequently 
to exploit his passed a-pawn, but White's 
threats are too strong.
32 fs?!
A tempting move, and yet 32 fxeS! fxes
33 ^gS l:!.f8 34 ^.f6 was correct - as shown 
by later analyses, including by me (both old 
and new), Timman, and Yusupov with 
Dvoretsky, White's attack is irresistible:
a) 34. ...l:.xf6 3S .l:.xf6 l:!.f8 36 Sbxb6! ±xb6
37 d6! Wd8 38 l:txg6+! Wf7 39 Wxes hxg6 40 
Wds+ 'itf6 41 g4!;
b) 34. .. d6 3S l'1bf2 l'1f7 36 cs!? bxcs 
(36. ..Wxcs 37 ^xes fixf2 38 l:txf2 ±xes 39 
Wxes Wc1+ 40 &f1 Wxh6 41 d6! or
37....■ xes 38 Wxes l'1e8 39 WgS and l:tf6!) 37
±C4 Baf8 38 : xeS!! .&xeS 39 J:i.xf7 l:txf7 40 
d6! (cf. New in Chess 1986 No.4) or the crude
36 :  d8! Bxd8 37 l:txf7 Wxf7 38 l:txf7 'it>xf7
39 Wf3+ 'ite7 (otherwise Wf6) 40 Wg4 Bd7
41 We6+ 'itd8 42 cS!;
c) 
34. . .l:!.ae8 3S fibf2 i.d 7 (3S...i.d6 36 
.l:.fs! ^d7 37 Bgs) 36 &g7! (this is simpler 
than my suggestion 36 'it>h2 - cf. New in 
Chess 1987 No.s) 36 . ...l:.xf2 (36 ...Bf4 37 
^xes! or 37 Bxf4 exf4 38 J:i.xf4 ^d6 39 es!)
37 Wxf2 va4(c8) 38 d6! &xd6 39 cS and in 
all variations White wins.
It was impossible to calculate all these 
variations at the board, especially in time- 
trouble, and I chose what seemed to me to 
be a more forcing continuation.
32 ...gs (8) 33 ^xgS! (there is nothing else)
33...fxg5?
In the event of the cool-headed 33 ...'itf7! 
(I 
underestimated this defence) White 
would have had to be satisfied with a solid 
positional advantage after 34 i.c1! (34 ^d2 
l:!.g8 3S Wh4 'ite7 36 g4 ^e8! 37 gS fxgs 38 
&xgS+ 'itd7 39 'ith1 &f7 is unclear - Yusu­
pov, Dvoretsky) 34. ..l:tg8 3S W i3! '>t>e7 36 g4 
(threatening 37 gS fxgs 38 f6+) 36. ..l:!.af8 37 
l:tg2 with the unavoidable g4-gS break­
through (Bologan).
34 Wxg5+ 'itf8
Not 34 ...'ith8? 3S Wf6+ 'itg8 36 fif3.
272

Adult Games
35 'i'f6+? (3)
White's entire preceding play demanded 
the breakthrough 35 f6! Wf7 (otherwise f6- 
f7) 36 'iVxe5, for example:
a) 36 ...i'g6 37 Sxb6! '@'xh6 38 'i'e7+!! 
..txe7 39 fxe7++ <tlxe7 40 Sxh6;
b) 36. ..ii.d7 37 Hxb6! i.xb6 38 'iVd6+ 'Et>g8 
39 Wxb6 or 37. ...l':e8 38 Se6! i.xe6 39 dxe6 
.l:tac8 40 e7+ Wg8 41 'iVg5+ Wh8 42 e5 ; xe7
43 'iYg7+! iYxg7 44 hxg7+ 'Et>g8 45 c5! h5 46 
kc4+ 'Et>h7 47 ..tf7! d3 48 Sf5;
c) 36...i.d 6 37 ifg5 Wg8 38 #'g7+! 'i'xg7
39 fxg7+ 'it>g8 40 c5! bxc5 41 e5! i.xe5 42 
.l:tb7 ii.d7 43 d6! ii.xg7 44 ..tc4+ 'it>h8 45 
hxg7+ 'it>xg7 46 .l:!.xf7+ and Sxd7;
d) 36. ..M.e8! 37 '@'g5 'i'g6 38 Sf5!, and the 
pawn avalanche sweeps away everything in 
its path: 38.....td7 (not 38...l:!.a7 39 '@'f4 fif7
40 M.f2 and .4g5 or 38. ..'@'xg5 39 .l:!.xg5 'Et>f7
40 :!.g7+!) 39 'ixg6 hxg6 40 Ig 5  f
 
(40...a4? 41 Sxg6) 41 e5.
Analysis diagram
41.....tf5!? 
(an 
idea of grandmaster 
Vadim Zviagintsev; if 41...1:ixe5 42 M.xe5 
'Et>xf6 there is the decisive 43 Sbe2 a4 44 g4!
ii.xg4 45 l1e8 Sa7 46 Sg2! i.f5  47 ;;I.e6+!) 42 
kxf5 d3+!? (42 ... Sxe5 43 ; xg6+ Wxf6 44 
fixe5 'it>xe5 45 Se2+! Wf4 46 Se8! or 
45 ...'it>f6 46 Se6+ 'it>g5 47 ■: d3 and wins) 43
Wh2! (Dvoretsky; 43 
Sxe5 44 i.xg6+ 
'it>xf6 45 .!:!xe5 'ixe5 46 ; xd3 'id 4  47 'it>e2 
Be8+! 48 Wd2 Sg8! 49 h7 1:ixg2+ 50 '\t>d1 
Bgl+ and ...fihl is not so clear) 43 ....l:!.xe5 44
ii.xg6+ 'it>xf6 45 .l:!.xe5 Wxe5 46 ^ xd3 a4 
(46...'it>d4 47 JLbl Wxc4 48 g4!) 47 h7 a3 48 
!1d2 'it>d4 49 ..tbl+ Wc3 (49 ...Wxc4 50 d6!) 
50 Hc2+ 'it>b3 51 g4 and wins.
3S. ..'it>e8! (5) 36 Sa1
The point of White's plan. Now, in the 
event of the bishop retreating, the queen 
check will be fully justified, but - the bishop 
is not obliged to retreat!
36...We7!!
This brilliant defensive move was made 
by Petrosian almost without thinking. 
White's attack peters out, since his rooks 
are stuck on the queenside.
37 Vi'e6?
On seeing that the endgame after 37 
'i'xe7+ 'it>xe7 38 Sxa4 .i:!d6 39 g3 was too 
depressing (although by no means lost:
39... 
Sg8 40 Wg2 Sxh6 41 i.e2 etc.), I tried to 
confuse matters.
37...1.6?! (4)
‘Petrosian is again equal to the occasion: 
after 37. ..'§'xe6 38 fxe6 kd 7 39 exd7+ Sxd7
40 fif2 White would have managed to save 
the game', I wrote in The Test of Time. But 
now I am not so sure: 40 ...Sf7! 41 Sf5 k!.xf5
273

Garry Kasparov on Garry Kasparov: Part One
42 exf5 'if7  followed by ...a5-a4-a3, ...^ 6 
and so on.
Besides, 
Black 
is 
also 
better 
after
38 .....ic6!? 39 Sf2 (39 dxc6? l:!.d6 40 c7 lc6!)
39..'ie7! 40 Sf7+ '>t>d6 41 e7 Se8 42 Sf6+ 
'>t>d7! 43 :!:!xc6 a4.
38 Wg8+ (ignoring 38 'ixe7+ all the more)
38...'if8 39 'iWg3?!
‘After 39 'ixf8+ '>t>xf8 40 I:txa4 l:lxh6 41 
g3 'it>g7 42 .l:i.h2 (42 <&g2!? and .i,e2 - G.K.)
42 ...Sxh2 43 'it>xh2 '>t>f6 White's defence is 
difficult' (Petrosian). And yet objectively 
this would have given real drawing chances 
and was the lesser evil!
39...'ixh6?!
In time-trouble Black avoids the alarm- 
ing-looking 39 ... ^ d7! 40 "it'xe5+ 'it>d8! (but 
not 40...'it>f7? 41 'ig3! #xh6 42 e5), which 
would have given him a chance of convert­
ing his extra piece (41 "it'g7?! l:lxh6 42 
#xf8+ .i.xf8 43 eS .i.c5! etc.). Now, on the 
other hand, not a trace remains of White's 
attack.
40 fixa4??
At completely the wrong time! 40 1:e2? 
'>t>f7! was also hopeless, as was 40 l:lf2? ;  d7
41 'ifxe5+ ^ 7  with the decisive inclusion of 
the rook on a8. But 40 'i¥g8+! 'if8  (40...'it>d7
41 #xa8 'i+Ye3+ 42 .l:if2 with equality) 41 
'i\Yxf8+ '>t>xf8 42 .l:i.xa4 would have taken play
into a somewhat inferior endgame of the 
type that I could have entered on the 37th 
or 39th move.
40...#c1+ (I simply overlooked this ‘long' 
move) 41 '>t>f2 (41 'Oth2 Sh6+) 41...'ixb2+ 42 
'>t>f3 cj;f7
The time scramble ended with a cold 
shower for me! White resigned (0-1). Times: 
2.29-2.28.
This was undoubtedly the turning point 
of the tournament, since that evening 
Karpov crushed Timman and surged ahead 
with 6 out of 8. And the following day I 
conclusively ‘fell out of step' - I failed to 
win my adjourned game with Andersson. 
Apparently, after the dramatic loss to 
Petrosian I did not have sufficient nervous 
energy.
In the 9th round all the games were 
drawn, but in the lOth I gained an unex­
pectedly quick win with Black: Geller, who 
had lost his previous form, blundered in an 
equal position. But Karpov won against 
Smyslov, maintaining his lead of one and a 
half points. I no longer had the strength to 
give chase, the result of which was short 
draws with Balashov and Polugayevsky.
By the will of the pairings I played Karpov 
in the last, 13th round. Many fans had been 
hoping that by that stage I would be only a 
point behind and that the game would 
have great competitive significance. Alas, in 
reality the tournament intrigue was ex­
hausted: Karpov was still one and a half 
points ahead of his closest pursuers and 
had already secured overall victory. Never­
theless I had the desire to fight, but... 'The 
grand struggle, to which Botvinnik and I 
tried to tune up the young grandmaster, did 
not occur', remembers Nikitin. 'Thefact that 
it was impossible to catch his opponent had 
a dampening effect on Garry, and his very
274

Adult Games
first intensive think ended in - an offer of a 
draw' (Game No.4 in Kasparov vs. Karpov 
1975-1985). Before our marathon match, 
which began three and a half years later, 
Karpov and I did not meet at the board 
again ...
At the end of the tournament I was sur­
prised to hear it being said that my result (a 
share of 2nd-4th places) was partly ex­
plained by good luck. Taking account of the 
opportunities that were unconverted in the 
games with Gheorghiu, Andersson and 
Petrosian, one could rather talk about bad 
luck. Or more correctly - about a lack of 
experience 
of participating 
in 
super­
tournaments. An interesting point of view 
was expressed in the 64 magazine by Lev 
Polugayevsky:
'The proximity of Garry Kasparov and Va­
sily Smyslov in the results table shows that in 
Soviet chess a happy period is now ap­
proaching, when young talents are natu­
rally developing and at the same time 
veterans are still active. Such a competitive 
interaction is beneficial to both sides. (Who 
could have thought that three years later 
Smyslov and I would be fighting it out in 
the final Candidates match! - G.K.).
‘During the last two or three years, in our 
country a large group of able young players 
has emerged, among whom Yusupov, Dol­
matov, Psakhis and Kasparov stand out. 
These lads are all very different; each has his 
own character and style, and each has his 
own 
approach. 
Nevertheless, 
Kasparov's 
results are especially impressive.
‘Observing his play, you realise that he is 
not simply strong and, as they say, that he 
has spent hours memorising opening theory. 
No, Kasparov has made a profound study of 
chess history and has scrupulously studied 
the games of the past masters. And this has 
impregnated his style, his chess culture, and,
of course, has brought him great benefit. 
From Kasparov's games, from  the versatile 
manner of his play, you sense what an 
enormous amount of work the young Baku 
player has carried out. Garry's natural 
element is calculation and combination. But 
also he does not avoid a painstaking posi­
tional struggle.
‘Kasparov has 
undoubtedly achieved 
great, very significant successes, and has 
demonstrated original and interesting play. 
However, I think it is premature to assert, as 
some careless voices do, that Kasparov is 
now almost ready to fig h t fo r the world 
championship. I think it is wrong to do this. 
In my view, in the play of the young grand­
master there are still numerous gaps, which 
he needs to work hard to eliminate. Also 
important, in particular, is how the young 
player will pass the test o f fame. This 
important factor has to be remembered 
both by Kasparov himself, and by those who 
are able to influence him. How he manages 
to define his position, whether he will be 
self-critical and objective in his searches - it 
is on this that his further successes largely 
depend.'
Vitaly Melik-Karamov: ‘In the world there 
are now 166 international grandmasters, 
and the youngest among the elite players is 
the 18-year-old Baku student Garry Kas­
parov. He has grown up considerably over 
the past year and has become a sturdy 
young man. Not much has been written 
about him yet, but people talk and argue 
about him constantly. He looks like a quite 
normal youth - you will notfind any signs 
of genius in him. He has a slight stoop, he 
walks quickly, and he likes a joke - in gen­
eral, nothing special. Just like many others. 
Only, he has a fantastic gift fo r chess. "He is 
the Mozart of chess", a journalist acquaint­
ance said to me.'
275

Garry Kasparov on Garry Kasparov: Part One
Audacious Challenge
USSR Team Championship, Second Division 
(Moscow, 16-30 May 1981): 1. Russian 
Federation-2 - 49 out of 72; 2. Moscow-2 - 
471/ 2; 3. Ukraine-2 - 42 (all hors concours); 
4. Lithuania - 401/2; 5. Armenia - 39; 6. 
Kazakhstan - 381/2; 7. Azerbaijan - 34; 8. 
Kirgizia - 25; 9. Tadzhikistan - 231/2; 10. 
Turkmenistan - 21. Tournament of top 
boards: 1. Kasparov - 61/2 out of 9.
The Second Division of the 1981 USSR 
Team Championship, in which the Azerbai­
jan team participated, took place in the 
new central trades union chess club, situ­
ated in the Krylatskoe Sports Complex. I 
remember the light, spacious rooms, excel­
lent playing conditions - and the complete 
absence of spectators. Only six grandmas­
ters were playing, and so even on the top 
board I mainly played against masters, and 
they, for quite understandable reasons, 
normally aimed only for simplification and 
a draw.
However, there were some rare excep­
tions. In the 5th round I was paired against 
the 32-year-old Novosibirsk master Anatoly 
Vaisser, a player with an interesting fate. 
Although he had a degree in mathematics 
and physics, he nevertheless decided to 
devote himself to chess, and after working 
as Psakhis's second at his ‘gold' USSR 
Championships (1980/81 and 1981), within 
a few years he himself became a grandmas­
ter. In the early 1990s he moved to France 
where he successfully continued his chess 
career, and in 2010 he won the world senior 
championship!
For both of us this was a crucial encoun­
ter. Three years earlier, on the last day of 
the all-union qualifying tournament in 
Daugavpils (1978), when I had made a 
quick draw and was awaiting the conclu­
sion of the game of my rival - Igor Ivanov, 
Vaisser and I played a blitz match. I won by 
a small margin, but the King's Indian 
games, against which my opponent em­
ployed only the Four Pawns Attack, almost 
invariably ended in failure for me. Now, of 
course, I was fully prepared to meet the 
onslaught. But an unpleasant surprise 
awaited me...
Vaisser: ‘A game with such a brilliant 
player as Kasparov was a notable event in a 
master's life, and so I prepared especially 
thoroughly fo r it. To score a win against the 
holder of one of the highest ratings in the 
world was very tempting, but above all I 
wanted to play an entertaining, fighting 
game.' He must have succeeded, since the 
magazine Shakhmaty v SSSR published it - a 
rare occurrence! - with comments by both 
players.
Game 53 
A.Vaisser-G.Kasparov
USSR Team Championship, 
5th round, Moscow 1981 
King’s Indian Defence E77
1 d4ctJf6 2 C4g6 3 ctJc3
In three other games from this tourna­
ment I had to fight against 3 g3 &g7 4 &g2 
0-0 5 ctJf3 d6 6 0-0, when neither 6 ...®bd7 7 
Vi'c2 cs (against Slutsky, 3rd round), nor 
6 ...cs 7 dxcs dxcs 8 'ixd 8 Sxd8 9 ctJe5 ltJe8! 
(against Vaganian, 7th round) or 7 ctJc3 ctJc6 
8 dxcs dxcs 9 &e3 &e6!? (the usual reply is
9..iVa5) 10 1Va4 ctJd4 11 S a d l 
d7 12 'iWa3 
tt:lc2 13 'tVxcs b6 14 'iVgs h6 15 Wf4 g5 16 
1Ves Ac8 (against K.Grigorian, 8th round) 
gave more than a draw.
8 
d5 (instead of 8 dxcs) leads to more 
complicated play: 8...tt:las 9 ctJd2 a6 10 I'Wc2 
l:!.b8 11 b3 b5 12 ..tb2 bxc4 13 bxc4 ..1h6 14
276

Adult Games
'2Jc b 1 e5!? 15 ..ic3 X d7 16 '2Ja3 .l:i.b4! 
(16 ... g7?! 17 flab1!, Zaid-Kasparov, Lenin­
grad 1977) 17 .ltxb4 cxb4 18 t2Jab1 Wc7! 
with quite good play for the exchange 
(Timman-Kasparov, Tilburg 1981).
3 ....ig7 4 e4 d6 5 f4 0-0 6 t2Jf3 cs 7 dS
‘This sharp and little-studied variation 
had already served me faithfully for 14 
years. Here I was rather expecting 7...b5, 
which Kasparov had already played once.' 
(Vaisser).
7...e6 (5) 8 .ie 2  (8 dxe6 - Game No.74)
8 ...exds 9 es?! (2)
But here is a surprise! In the aforemen­
tioned blitz match Vaisser invariably fol­
lowed the main line - 9 cxd5, and I replied
9....1:i.e8 or 9...b5. But now I had prepared
9....1g4, for example: 10 0-0 t2Jbd7 11 h3 
..ixf3 12 ^ ■
 xf3 .l:i.e8 13 .l:i.e1 .l:!.c8 14 ..ie3 b5!
15 t2Jxb5 t2Jxe4 16 ..ixe4 fixe4 17 t2Jxd6 
.l:i.xe3 18 Bxe3 1. d4 with equality (Noguei- 
ras-Kasparov, Barcelona 1989).
In the objective evaluation of 9 e5 - '?!' - 
the exclamation mark relates to the field of 
psychology: Vaisser correctly reckoned that 
this exotic continuation would be a sur­
prise for me and that it would be unpleas­
ant for me to have to change tune (as my 
opponent put it, ‘this slight change of 
“register” neutralises Black's home prepa­
ration'). And the question mark, as we will 
now see, reflects the purely chess strength 
of the move.
9. ..CzJg4?l (20)
‘Black swims into the net, although if he 
desired he could have practically forced a 
draw: 9...dxe5 10 fxe5 t2Jg4 11 ..ig5 f6 12 
exf6 ..txf6 13 Wxd5+ "ifxd5 14 tt:Jxd5 ..ixg5
15 t2Jxg5 t2Jc6! 16 t2Jc7 .l:i.b8 17 t2Jge6 .ixe6
18 t2Jxe6 .l:i.fe8 19 ..ixg4 t2Jd4 20 0-0-0 t2Jxe6 
(Vaisser-Petrushin, Dnepropetrovsk 1968). 
However, in a game with Kasparov you 
don't have to fear that in the opening the 
opponent will go into a drawn endgame. 
But if not 9...dxe5, then it is better to play
9 ...'2Jfd7 10 cxd5 dxe5 11 0-0 exf4 12 ..ixf4 
t2Jf6 
with 
complicated 
play 
(Nei- 
Polugayevsky, 34th USSR Championship, 
Tbilisi 1966).' (Vaisser)
However, the most forceful is 9 ...tt:e4! 10 
cxd5 Cz'Jxc3 11 bxc3 t2Jd7 with advantage to 
Black (Nun-Smejkal, Sternberk 1962), but 
this old game went unnoticed, and the 
variation became widely known only after 
Black's win 
in 
the 
game 
Li 
Zunian- 
Gheorghiu (Olympiad, Dubai 1986), which 
found its way into lnformator Volume 42. 
As it transpired, 10 t2Jxd5 t2Jc6 (10...dxe5!?)
11 ..id3 f5 is not much better for White (San 
Segundo-J.Howell, Gausdal 1986).
277

Garry Kasparov on Garry Kasparov: Part One
Theory was truly 'short-sighted' in re­
garding 9 ...lt:lg4 as the best response to 
White's audacious 9th move. One of the 
justifications was the variation 10 h 3? d4
11 CDe4 lt:Jxes! 12 fxes dxes, when Black's 
pawn mass in the centre gives him the 
advantage 
(Beyen-Barczay, 
Olympiad, 
Havana 1966). However, White has a far 
more promising continuation.
10 cxds dxes 11 h3 e 4 12 hxg4 (2)
This capture was not even considered by 
the Encyclopaedia o f Chess Openings, which 
gave only 12 lt:Jxe4 lt:Jf6 with equality. 
‘Apart from the simple 
12...lt:Jf6, also
12. ...l:.e8!? is possible' (Vaisser).
12...exf3 13 gxf3!
An interesting attempted improvement. 
The game Vaisser-A.Shashin (Odessa 1977) 
went 13 &xf3 lt:Jd7 (13...lt:Ja6!?) 14 4f2, and 
here instead of 14...lt:Jf6?! (which could have 
given White the advantage: 15 g5! lt:Je8 16 
&e3), 
Black could have 
equalised by
14 ...l:te8!. ‘Although I won that game, I was 
dissatisfied with the outcome of the open­
ing - more resolute measures are de­
manded of White: he must be prepared to 
sacrifice to try and get at the black king' 
(Vaisser).
Here I thought for a long time. At first it 
seemed to me that White's threats down
the h-file could easily be parried, and that 
the insecure position of the white king 
would give Black good counter-chances. But 
on closer examination it all turned out to 
be not so simple: the difficulties began to 
pile up one on top of another, creating a 
veritable mountain of problems which was 
extremely difficult to scale during the 
allotted time limit. I was quite unable to 
find good squares for the development of 
my queenside pieces, and Black's position 
ceased to appeal to me...
13...Se8 (51)
I shouldn't have thought for so long over 
this natural move! 13...f5?! (preventing f4- 
f5) would have led to a weakening of the 
a2-g8 diagonal, which could have told after
14 &e3 fie8 15 Wd2, threatening d5-d6 and 
0-0-0.
14 fs! (3)
Now the queen's bishop will be devel­
oped at h6, harassing Black's only active 
piece and, more important, the only de­
fender of his king - the bishop on g7.
14...1'b6?! (26)
In order to somehow deflect the mount­
ing attacking wave, Black puts the b2-pawn 
under fire. In The Test o f Time I attached a 
question mark to the queen move, but it is 
not altogether bad.
2 78

Adult Games
‘The trappy 14. ..&d7 with the idea of 15 
i.h 6? &xc3+! 16 bxc3 &bs 17 .Mh2 l xe2 18 
lixe 2 Wh4+ 19 &f1 .l:.xe2 and ...Wxh6, 
winning, would have been easily parried by
15 'iNc2, but with the same aim 14. ..b6!? 
made sense' (Vaisser). And indeed, 15 &h6? 
runs into 15. ..&xc3+ 16 bxc3 &a6, but 
White can look for an advantage after 15 
tt:e4!? gxfs 16 gxfs &xfs 17 &gs Wd7 (or
17 . ..'iVI/c7 18 d6 'iHc6 19 &e7) 18 .Mg1 or 18 
Wd2 (18 tt:f6+?! &xf6 19 .i xf6 Wd6 favours 
Black, despite the loss of his King's Indian 
bishop), as well as with 15 fxg6!? fxg6 16 
&a6 17 tt:e4 (Fries Nielsen-Mortensen, 
Esbjerg 1985).
I was also not attracted by 14. ..ctJd7 15 
-= h6 i.d4(?!) 16 Wd2(c2) and 0-0-0, al­
though in this variation things are by no 
means so clear after 15. ..&xh6!? 16 .Mxh6 
tt:es 17 'it>f2 (17 fxg6 fxg6!) 17 ...gxfs 18 Wc2 
Wgs.
Analysis diagram
19 lih5!? (19 .Mah1 Wf4! with equality, 
Ravisekhar-Thipsay, Indian Championship 
1983) 19. ..Wf4 20 .l:.g1! (recommended by 
Ravisekhar), and now not 20. ..c4 21 gxf5+ 
'it>h8 22 tt:d1! (Stohl) 22...±d7 23 f6 h6 24 
.Mgh1! tt:g4+ 25 <;t>e1! tt:xf6 26 fixh6+ <;t>g7 
27 'iHc3 with the initiative for White, but
the cool-headed 20 ...<;t>h8!?.
Finally, even the unaesthetic 14. ..gxfs 
was possible, for example:
a) 15 &f4 tt:a6 16 Wd2 tt:b4 17 o-o-o fxg4
18 a3 &xc3!? (forcing an amusing draw) 19 
bxc3 'iHas! 20 <;t>b2 tt:xds! 21 ; c4! tt:b6 22 
±xf7+ 4xf7 23 lixh7+ <;t>g8 24 Mh8+! 'if7 !
25 .Mh7+ with perpetual check;
b) 15 &h6, and here 15...&xh6 16 .Mxh6 
Wgs 17 Wd2! Wxd2 18 <;t>xd2 followed by 
.Mah1 justifiably seemed dangerous to me, 
but the unexpected 15 ...&xc3+!? 16 bxc3 
fxg4 is stronger, with an unclear game 
(Packroff-Grigorescu, European Correspon­
dence Championship 1985).
15 Jih6?! (18)
White pays no attention to the oppo­
nent's ‘pin-pricks' and continues carrying 
out his long-range plan. Even so, he should 
have preserved his b2-pawn. ‘15 Wc2 was 
quieter, not burning his boats, for example:
15 ...c4 (otherwise &h6) 16 &gs tt:a6 17 
o-o-o tt:b4 18 Wd2 - although Black has 
counterplay, White's threats are the more 
dangerous' (Vaisser). 15 fxg6!? hxg6 16 
<;t>f1(f2) also came into consideration.
1S. ..Wxb2? (16)
I was aware of the danger threatening 
Black, but I decided to be consistent and I 
took the pawn, thinking: perhaps I'll be able 
to defend myself... ‘15 ...&xh6 16 .Mxh6 
Wxb2 was not so risky' (Vaisser), for exam­
ple: 17 tt:e4 (Stohl) 17. ..ctJd7 or 17 .Mc1 gxfs
18 Sc2 'iHb4 with double-edged play.
16 
xg7'it>xg7
‘The culmination of the battle' (Vaisser). 
The abundance of attacking possibilities 
available to White is immediately apparent, 
but I consoled myself with the thought that 
by no means any move would win, and to 
sense the critical moment and find that, 
perhaps only winning move, the opponent 
would need not to lose his head.
279

Garry Kasparov on Garry Kasparov: Part One
17 f6+?(24)
And here he is in too much of a hurry... 
White cannot resist the temptation to 
advance a further assault column up to the 
walls of the black king's fortress. 17 'Lle4(?) 
would have been refuted by 17...gxf5 18 
gxf5 &xf5. when the bishop joins the 
defence of the denuded king.
In such a position one does not want to 
consider the modest 17 Sc1!, but this move 
would apparently have given White an 
irresistible attack (the threat is Sc2 and 
'id2, or in some cases iVcl or 'jfal). ‘To me 
it seemed insufficiently forcing, but a 
thorough analysis established that Black 
has very difficult problems' (Vaisser). Here 
are some sample variations:
a) 17...'it>g8 18 Sc2 ^ 6  19 "id2 tLld7 
(19 ...'iVf6 20 'Lle4 'ie5 21 "iVh6 'jfg7 22 
'flfxh7+!) 20 iVh6 'Llf8 21 'Lle4 f6 22 fxg6 
hxg6 23 g5! and wins (Vaisser) or 18...1Vb4
19 Wc1 #d4 20 'Llb5 'i'e5 21 "ih6 l2Ja6 22 
#xh7+ f
 23 ^ 8 +  'i'xh8 24 Sxh8+ ctJe7
25 f6+ ctJd8 26 Sxe8 'it>xe8 27 l2Jd6+ 'it>f8 
(27...ctJd7 28 'Llxf7 - Vaisser) 28 &xa6 bxa6
29 Bh2 'litg8 30 Se2 i.d 7 31 I:e7 and wins;
b) 17...CLld7 18 Sc2 ^ 6  (18. ..^ 4  19 
'ir'c1 !) 19 1i'd2 gxf5 (19. ..Sh8 20 ^ 6 +  'it>g8
21 l2Je4! and wins) 20 d6! l:te6 21 gxf5 l:!.xd6
22 'i'g5+ 'ih 8  (Vaisser gives 22...'if8 23
.i:!.xh7, when mate is not far off) 23 tLld5! 
l:txd5 24 Sg1 and wins;
c) 
17. ..gxf5 18 Sc2 'tib6 (given by Vaisser; 
White's threats are very strong after 18...1Yb4
19 #c1l f4 20 'itf1) 19 d6!, cutting off the 
black queen from the broken kingside:
c1) 19...Se6 20 'i'a1! (20 tLld5 Vxd6 21 
gxf5 Se5! 22 f6+ 'it>h8 23 'Lle7! iVxd1+ 24 
'it>xd1 lLld7, given by Vaisser, is not so clear)
20. ..#xd6 21 gxf5 lte8 22 l2Je4+ or 20...'it>g8
21 gxf5 .i:!.xd6 22 Sg1+ 'it>f8 23 'Llb5! l:tf6 24 
'Llc7! Wb4+ (24.....ixf5 25 'Lld5!) 25 'it>f1 'id 4
26 'ixd 4  cxd4 27 l2Jxa8 and wins;
c2) 19...'id8 20 #d2 lte6 21 gxf5 Sxd6 22 
#f4!, and the attack is bound to produce a 
win (Vaisser), or 20...'i'f6 21 'Lld5! #xd6 22 
#g5+ 'ig 6 23 Sxh7+! 'it>xh7 24 'Llf6+ 'it>h8 
(24. ..'it>g7 25 'Llxe8+ 'it>h7 26 1i'xg6+ and 
'Llc7) 25 'ih4+! 'it>g7 26 l2Jxe8+ with crush­
ing threats;
c3) 19...fxg4 20 'iVd2 Se6 21 'i'g5+ 'it>h8
22 ^ 5  h6 23 #xf7 (threatening #f8+)
23 ... Vd8 (23...^xd6 24 Sd2) 24 l2Je4 'ig 8 25 
'if4 !o r  20. . . f
 21 ^ 6 +  'it>g8 22 'Lld5! 
"iVa5+ 23 'it>f1.
Analysis diagram
Black loses ignominiously after both
23 ....i:!.e6 24 'Lle7+!Sxe7 25 ltc4!!, and
23 ...'Lld7 24 ltc4! 'Llf8 25 Sxg4+ &g6 26
280

Adult Games
'Llf6+ 'it>h8 27 #xf8+ 1xf8 28 Sxg6 'with a 
pretty mate, but, alas, I was tempted by 
another possibility' (Vaisser).
17...'it>g8! (2)
'I thought that Black was obliged to cap­
ture the pawn - 17 ...'it>xf6, when White 
gains the advantage by 18 'Lle4+ 'it>g7 
(18..Jxe4 19 fxe4 is also not fully satisfac­
tory) 19 .l:1b1 'i'e5 20 'id2, and 20...'it>g8? 21 
^ 6  'i&'g7 22 'iVxh7+! 'i'xh7 23 'Llf6+ 'it>f8 24 
Sxh7 or 20. ..h5? 21 gxh5 Sh8 22 h6+ is bad 
for Black' (Vaisser). The only move is
20....l:h8, although here too after 21 'Llxc5 
'Lld7 22 f4 1fc7 23 'Lle4 Se8 24 'ifd4+ 'it>g8
25 0-0 White has unpleasant pressure.
Leaving the pawn on f6 was rather terri­
fying, but I thought that it could not be 
taken because of the given variations. In 
fact 19...'iVd4!? (instead of 19...'ife5) is more 
ot less adequate: 20 'ifc1 (VaisseT) 20. ..:th8
21 ^ 6 +  'it>g8 22 2d1 'iVe5 23 d6 tLld7, or 20 
'iVxd4+ cxd4 21 Sxh7+ 'it>xh7 22 'Llf6+ 'it>h6
23 tt:Jxe8 'Lld7 with a somewhat inferior but 
defensible position.
After 17...'it>g8 the white army only needs 
to make a last, decisive thrust, but at this 
point intuition suggested to me that the 
worst was behind, and I began to set my 
sights on the white king caught in the 
centre.
18 'iVc1! (11)
'The retreat of the king looked bad be­
cause of this reply, seemingly forcing the 
transition into an ending favourable for 
White' (Vaisser). It was not possible to 
decide the game by a frontal attack - 18 
l2Je4, for example:
a) 18...kxg4!? 19 2b1 'i'xa2 (in The Test 
of Time I considered only 19...'i'e5? 20 'i'd2 
'Lld7 21 'iVh6 tt:Jxf6 22 tt:Jxf6+ 'i'xf6 23 
#xh7+ 'it>f8 24 'iVh8+ winning a piece) 20 
l:txb7 'Lld7 21 fxg4 Sxe4 22 Sxd7 'ifa3! with 
perpetual check after 23 0-0 'i'g3+ 24 'it>h1 
^ 3 +  (Stohl);
b) 18. ..l2Jd7! 19 Sb1 'ir'e5 (after Stohl's 
move 19...Wxa2!? the momentum is main­
tained by 20 Sh4!) 20 'ir'd2 tt:Jxf6 21 'iVh6 b6 
(or 21...t2Jxd5!? 22 'ir'xh7+ 'it>f8 - Stohl) 22 g5 
(22 'Llxf6+?! is weaker in view of 22...#xf6
23 #xh7+ 'it>f8 24 #h8+ 'it>e7!) 22...t2Jxe4 23 
'i'xh7+ 'it>f8, and White's offensive peteTs 
out.
Instead of this Vaisser offers to go into 
an endgame, where the opponent's re­
tarded development and the strong pawn 
on f6 will be factors ‘voting' in favour of 
White. But now it is his tum to be sur­
prised!
18...'iVb4! (11)
18...'i'xc1+ 
would have been 
faint-
281

Garry Kasparov on Garry Kasparov: Part One
hearted, as would the exchange sacrifice
18 ... Sxe2+?! 19 li:Jxe2 i¥xf6 - after 20 'ic3!
£)d7 21 'ixf6  ^xf6 22 
White's chances
are better.
‘I did not even consider the retreat of the 
queen. The pawn at f6, the half-open h-file, 
the queen ready to leap in at h6, the oppo­
nent's pieces undeveloped, White to move
- and to think that with all this there 
shouldn't be a mate?!' (Vaisser). It has to be 
agreed that 18...'i'b4 seems suicidal, but 19 
ffl16?, creating two deadly threats, can be 
parried by Black: 19...'Y/Uxc3+ 20 ..t>f2 'id4+
21 'it>g3 'iVe5+ 22 f4 'ix f6  23 'iWxh7+ 'lt>f8 24 
il.f3 ^d7!.
Here I also made a psychologically win­
ning ‘move': I stood up from the board and 
began strolling about as though nothing 
had happened, although for the 22 moves 
to the time control I had only 11 minutes 
left! And my opponent became agitated...
19 'M1? (9)
In continuing his quest for the holy grail, 
White imperceptibly oversteps the fatal 
mark. He should have readjusted and, 
rejecting any ambitious plans, reconciled 
himself to equality. The commentators 
considered two continuations:
a) 
19 'iVd2 £id7 (after Vaisser's sugges­
tion 19 ...'iWd4 there is the good reply 20 flc1 
and £ie4) 20 l:tb1 Wd4, and now one oftwo 
options:
a1) 21 'iVxd4 cxd4 22 tt:le4 Se5 !? (22 . ..li:Jb6 
is no better: 23 Sh4! li:Jxd5 24 <;t>d2 and 
l:bh1 with counterplay, or my earlier varia­
tion 22...d3 23 &xd3 ^xf6 24 ..t>f2 ‘with a 
probable draw', which I should like to 
improve: if 24. ..^xd5 the correct reply is 25
il.c4! fixe4 26 fxe4 tt:lc3 27 .l:rb4! li:Jxe4 28 
'it>e3 etc.) 23 'lt>f2 li:Jb6 (23...!txd5 24 i c4!)
24 .l:!.h4! li:Jxd5 25 Sbh1 h5 26 gxh5 Sxh5 27 
lxh 5  gxh5 28 Sxh5 -=■ e6 29 I:!g5+ ..th7 30 
Hg7+ 'it>h6 31 li:Jg5 li:Jxf6 32 li:Jxe6 fxe6 33
l:xb7 li:Jd5 34 .l:d7 with a draw;
a2) 21 ^e4! Sxe4 (21...'ixd2+ 22 'itxd2 
li:Jb6 23 Bh4! with the threat of Sbh1) 22 
fxe4 'iVxe4 23 0-0 li:Jxf6 (5tohl) 24 Sbe1! 
'ie5  (not 24..gxg4? 25 & dl! or 24..'ixd5
25 'iVf4!) 25 ^c4 'Y/Ug3+ 26 'iWg2 with an 
initiative, compensating for the material 
deficit;
b) 
19 .l:!.b1 'ifd4 20 ctJe4 ctJd7 21 ^ 6  (21 
'if4  b6) 21...li:Jxf6 22 ctJxf6+! (Vaisser's move
22 rl.d1(?) is incorrect because of 22...Wb4+!
23 'it>fl l:!,xe4! 24 fxe4 'iWxe4 25 Sh4 &xg4
26 gxg4 ctJxg4 27 'i'xh7+ 'lt>f8) 22...'iWxf6 23 
'i/Vxh7+ 'it>f8 24 d6! 'ixd 6 25 'i'h6+ 'lt>e7 26 
#g5+ f
 27 iYxc5+ 1Vd6 28 'ig5+ with 
perpetual check.
‘After moving my king, I was full of joyful 
hope, especially as Kasparov had very little 
time left on his clock. If only I could have 
foreseen my opponent's brilliant rejoinder 
on the 20th move!' (Vaisser)
19 ... li:Jd7 (2) 20 &b5 (2)
This looks convincing - it appears that 
nothing can prevent the white queen from 
occupying the cherished square, but... 'In the 
light of Black's reply, which dispels the 
illusion, 20 g5 was essential, with chances of 
resisting', Vaisser concludes his commen­
tary. However, after 20. ..li:Jb6 21 'Y/Ue1 kf5 22 
Bh4 c4 there were few such chances.
282

Adult Games
20..:i?Vd4! (1)
In fact Black has no intention of defend­
ing his king, and he launches a counterat­
tack, creating the threat of ...l:!.e3.
21&g2 (18)
The direct 21 "ih6? would have run into
21...tt:Jxf6 22 kxe8 "ixc3 23 'it>g2 kxg4! 
(23..."ib2+ 24 'it>g3 "ie5+ is also not bad - 
Stohl) 24 kxf7+ Wxf7 25 fxg4 l:!.e8, and 
White has no defence. And if 21 l:!.h3 (Stohl) 
the simplest is 21..."ixf6.
21. ...l:!.e3!
This is far stronger than 21..."ixf6?, 
which after 22 Bb1! would have given 
White serious counterplay, despite the two- 
pawn deficit: 22 ...Sb8 23 W i6 "ig7 24 W 14! 
etc.
22 tt:Je2 (there is nothing else: 22 tt:Jd1? 
Bxf3! or 22 Be1 Bxe1 23 "ixe1 tt:Jxf6 and 
wins - Stohl) 22..."ieS 23 'it>f2 Bxe2+ 24 
kxe2 tt:Jxf6
We can assess the results of White's 
‘blitzkrieg'. His attack has come to a halt, 
and the winning of the exchange offers 
little consolation. Black already has two 
pawns for it, and in addition the exposed 
position of the white king creates the 
conditions for various tactical operations.
25 "ixc S (23)
There is nothing else. Thus, if 25 .l:i.b1 the
bishop sacrifice would have given Black an 
irresistible attack: 25. . ...txg4! 26 fxg4 tLle4+
27 'it>f1 tLlg3+ 28 'it>g2 (if 28 'it>f2, then
28...Be8! 29 ..tf3 tLle2!! - very pretty!)
28. ..4:Jxe2 29 'ie 1  (29 ^ 6  t2Jf4+, mating or 
winning the queen) 29...l:!.e8 or 27 'it>e1 
'ig3+ 28 'it>d1 4:Jc3+! 29 'it>c2(d2) tt:Jxe2 with 
crushing threats.
25.....txg4! (here I now had just 6 minutes 
left) 26 "ie3 (6)
If 26 l:!.ae1 there could have followed
26...1:!.c8!, for example: 27 "i\Vxa7?! l:!.c3! 28 
k d 1 " if 4! 29 Sh4 (29 .l:i.e3 kxf3!) 29...l:!.xf3+ 
or 27 "ie3 "ixe3+ 28 'it>xe3 tt:Jxd5+ 29 'it>f2 
ke6 with a won ending. To avoid the worst, 
White immediately goes into the endgame, 
at least with an extra tempo.
26..."i\Vxe3+ 27 'ixe 3  tt:JxdS+ 28 'it>f2 ke 6  
Three pawns for the exchange is a sig­
nificant advantage, but White still retains 
chances of saving the game.
29 Sab1 (5)
29 
Bh4!? came into consideration, with 
the idea of 29 ...flc8 30 Bc4 or 29 ... 4:Jc3 30 
kc4, as well as 29 kc4!? l:!.c8 30 kb3 (aim­
ing for the exchange of bishops; 30 Bac1? 
tt:Jb4!) - in this case I would have had to 
choose between 30...l:!.c5 31 Ba(h)c1 Ba5 
and 30...'it>g7 31 l:!.ac1 (31 l:!.hd1 l:!.c5!)
31...1:!.xc1 32 l:!.xcl 'it>f6, centralising the king
283

Garry Kasparov on Garry Kasparov: Part One
with good winning prospects.
29. ..b6 30 S b cl lt:lf4
By now Vaisser was also running into 
time-trouble: he had roughly 10 minutes 
left.
31 a3? (2)
The final mistake: White allows the ex­
change of his bishop for the knight. 31 .Uc7 
lt:lxe2 32 'ixe2 bs! would have been no 
better, but 31 ..ic4 was more resilient, with 
the idea of 31 ... .li!.c8(?!) 32 ..ia6! (but not 32 
..ixe6? li:ld3+ 33 'it'e3 Sxc1 34 .l:Ixc1 lt:lxc1 35 
.i.ds lt:lxa2 and wins) 32...Sxc1(?!) 33 Bxc1 
..ixa2 34 Sc7 (Stohl) or 31 ... .Md8! 32 'it'e3, 
and nevertheless things are not completely 
clear.
31...lt:lxe2 32 &xe2 bs!
Now Black has a technically won posi­
tion, and his victory is merely a question of 
time.
33 Sc7 as 34 S b l ..tc4+ 35 ^ 2  a4!
Such an 'anti-positional' arrangement of 
the pawns is justified, since 'a supported 
bishop is not inferior in strength to a rook' 
(one of Botvinnik's memorable rules).
36 Se1 !td8 37 Se3 Sd2+ 38 'itg3 'itg7 39 f4 
Sb2 40 Scs hs
Or 40. ...l:'l.b3 41 SceS hs.
Here the game was adjourned and White 
sealed 41 'it>h4.
Black has two clear ways to his goal, and 
the choice between them is a matter of 
taste. The first is 41.....ie6 42 'it>g3 b4 43 
axb4 .Mxb4 44 SaS h4+ 45 'it>xh4 Etxf4+ 46 
'it>g3 Sb4(d4), and the three passed pawns 
decide the outcome. The second involves 
exploiting the weakness of the white 
pawns: 41..l:.b3 42 Sg3 l:b1! 43 Se3 Sg1!?
44 Ig 3  2f1 45 fS l:h 1 +! 46 'itgS f6+ or 44 
.MgS flf1 45 'it>g3 f5!, cutting off the rook 
from the queenside.
On encountering Vaisser the next day, I 
informed him of these plans, and he de­
cided not to suffer in vain. White resigned 
without resuming (0-1). Times: 2.21-2.29.
A very interesting and dynamic game. 28 
years later Anatoly Vaisser had this to say in 
an interview on his 60th birthday:
'One of my most memorable games was 
played in the 1981 USSR Team Championship 
in the Russia-2 v. Azerbaijan match against 
Kasparov. There is an amusing story associ­
ated with it. As it later transpired, in the event 
of a draw I would have shared 1st place with 
Kasparov on our board. I was asked before the 
game whether I would play for a draw with 
White. I replied: "No! What for? I will simply 
play! I want to gain pleasure from playing 
against a great player!" That was how I set
284

Adult Games
my objective - not to play fo r a win, but to 
play chess. And it turned out excellently: at 
the board I found a novelty, and by the 17th 
move I was winning; moreover, I was playing 
easily, whereas he, by contrast, was under 
some incredible strain...
‘It all became clear after the game. Garik 
told me that a pretty girl playing fo r one of 
the teams, who half the players, including 
himself, had been courting, decided to play a 
joke on him. She heard me speaking about 
my intention to play, “exaggerated" what I 
had said, and before the round informed him 
that I had allegedly announced publicly that I 
would beat him. One can understand Kas­
parov's feelings: he was already one of the 
strongest players in the world, and here some 
little-known master had made such an 
audacious declaration!
'And then in that favourable situation, 
when I had an hour and a half left on my 
clock, whereas he had only about 10 minutes,
I committed an unpardonable mistake: I 
decided that matters were settled. It ap­
peared that the game would win itself Black 
no longer had his dark-square bishop, a white 
pawn would go to f6 and then the queen to 
h6... But on no account should the greats be 
underestimated! Kasparov found a brilliant 
defence, after two inaccuracies by me there 
was no longer a mate, and on the board was 
a better endgame fo r Black. Despite my 
defeat, this game is precious to me. It is also a 
memorable one fo r Kasparov. As he put it, in 
thoseyears it was usually sufficientfor him to 
use 70% of his capabilities at the board, but 
here he had to apply all 100%.'
Confirmation of Class
3rd World Under-26 Team Championship 
(Graz, 17-29 August 1981): 1. USSR - 32/2 out 
of 44; 2. England - 301/2; 3. Hungary - 281/2; 4. 
USA - 26/2 5-6 France and Israel - 241/2; etc.
(altogether 34 teams). The winning team 
comprised Kasparov (9/10), Psakhis (61/ 2/9), 
Yusupov (6/9), Dolmatov (4V2/7), reserves 
Kochiev (11/2/3) and Vladimirov (5/6).
Before this Student World Team Cham­
pionship few had doubts about the success 
of the Soviet team, which was made up of 
top-class players and was probably also 
capable of contending for the medals in the 
adult Olympiad. Judging by the average 
ratings, our main rivals looked to be the 
Americans with five international masters, 
and the English led by grandmaster Jona­
than Speelman - the winners of the first 
championship (1978).
Before the start we experienced hardly 
any of the usual anxiety: it appeared that 
everything should go smoothly and that the 
main ‘problem' would be deciding on the 
daily team line-up. But in sport all sorts of 
surprises are possible, especially in a com­
petition run on the Swiss System...
In the 1st round, as is usual in such cases, 
the favourites were paired against middle- 
ranking teams. We were opposed by the 
home team, from Austria. I had White 
against the national master Arne Dur and I 
was the first to finish my game. It turned out 
to be a straightforward one, although it was 
a good illustration of my opening searches 
of those times and my striving to get away 
from classical principles,
Game 54 
G.Kasparov-A.Dur
Student World Team 
Championship, 1st round 
Graz 17.08.1981 
Queen’s Gambit D55
1 d4 tt'lf6 2 c4 e6 3 tt:Jc3 (5) 3...dS 4 tt'lf3 i.e7
285

Garry Kasparov on Garry Kasparov: Part One
5 &g5 (3) 5 ...o-o 6 e3 h6 (6...tt:Jbd7 7 'iVc2 c5
8 o-o-o - Game No.33) 7 &xf6 (2)
After testing 7 &h4 b6 8 'iVc2 &b7 9 &xf6 
i.xf6  10 cxd5 exd5 11 o-o-o (Game No.41), I 
became fascinated by a different variant on 
my favourite plan with the exchange on f6, 
queenside 
castling, 
and a subsequent 
attack on the kingside.
7...^xf6 8 'ifd2
Following my April game with Karpov 
(Moscow 1981). Before it Nikitin and I had 
made a serious study of 8 'Yi'b3 c6 9 h4, but 
we came to the conclusion that for the 
attack on the kingside 8 ifd2 was sounder 
(but later I also tried 8 'Yi'c2 - Game No.92).
8...c6 (3)
A standard, but passive reply. Karpov 
played 8 ...tt'lc6 against me (Game No.4 in 
Kasparov vs. Karpov 1975-1985), but in the 
mid-1980s the best was deemed to be 
Portisch's idea 8 ... dxc4! 9 &xc4 ctJd7 and 
...c7-c5 (Game No.58 in Kasparov vs. Karpov 
1975-1985) - this relieving manoeuvre fully 
neutralised the move 8 'ir'd2.
9 h4! (3)
Exploiting the fact that it is difficult for 
Black to create counterplay in the centre 
and on the queenside, White begins storm­
ing the king's fortress and threatens to 
open lines by g2-g4-g5. Subsequently 8 ... c6
almost went out of use, precisely because 
of 9 h4.
9...ctJd7?! (17)
A routine response, which is not surpris­
ing: in a few rare games from the 1960s, 
after this move only 10 o-o-o had been 
played, allowing Black time for 10...&e7 or
10... 
g6! 11 g4 &g7.
To avoid the immediate opening of the 
kingside, 9...g6! 10 g4 &g7 should have 
been played, when after 11 g5 h5 Black's 
defences 
are 
solid 
enough 
(Spassky- 
Cvetkovic, Lugano 1984), but after 11 tt:Je5 
c5 12 cxd5 exd5 13 -^ e2! tt'lc6 14 f4 or
11...dxc4 12 ..ixc4 c5 13 0-0-0 (or 13 f4) with 
the intention of h4-h5 the initiative is 
nevertheless with White.
10 g4!
A novelty, which stunned my opponent. 
At a training session for the Soviet team 
before the student world championship I 
won a number of blitz games with this 
dashing attack, mainly against Vladimirov 
('regretfully’, 
he 
even 
began 
delaying 
castling - 5 ...h6 6 &xf6 &xf6 7 e3 c6, after 
which I now played 8 'ic2!, not fearing ... c7- 
c5).
10. ..Se8?l (9)
Another routine move. White is better 
after 10...g6 11 g5! hxg5 12 hxg5 ..ig7
286

Adult Games
(12.....txg5? is bad: 13 li:Jxg5 ifxg5 14 o-o-o 
followed by f2-f4, ifh2, ' d3 and Sdg1, 
winning - Psakhis) 13 o-o-o 'ile7 (not
13 . .. b5? 14 cxb5, Psakhis-BOnsch, Lvov 1984)
14 Sh4i (14 e4 b5 is now unclear, Tukma- 
kov-Shmirin, 5imferopol 1983) 14... b6 15 e4 
etc.
But it was still possible to guard against 
the opening of lines, by playing 10.....te7 
with the idea of 11 g5 h5. However, at e7 
the bishop is less well posted than at g7, 
and after 11 o-o-o Black stands passively 
(Polugayevsky-C.Hansen, Plovdiv 1983).
11 0-0-0 (3)
The immediate 11 g5! was more accu­
rate, but I sensed that after 10....I:l.e8 all the 
same the opponent would not play 11... ..te7
- and I was not mistaken!
11.. .bS? (16)
‘Black is rattled and he decides to give up 
a pawn in the hope of counterplay. But he 
is not able to exploit the opening of the b- 
file, and the white bishop at b5 occupies an 
attacking position' (Bykhovsky). Of course,
11.....te7 12 g5 h5 was essential, although 
Black has lost time and his prospects are 
poor.
12 cxbs cxbs (7)
Or 12...c5 13 g5 hxg5 14 hxg5 ..txg5 15 
li:Jxg5 'i'xg5 16 f4 'i!Yf6 17 'i!Vh2 g6 18 f5! and
White wins.
13 ..txbS SbS? (7)
This fails completely. 13...i.e7 14 g5 h5 
was more resilient, although here, apart 
from the quiet 15 "ic2 (and if 15 . .g6, then
16 li:Je5 'it>g7 17 e4), there is the strong 
breakthrough 15 g6!? fxg6 16 Iitdg1 with an 
overwhelming position.
14 g51
White's further play is obvious: he 
checkmates the defenceless black king.
14...hxg5 (5) 15 hxgS .i.xgS 16 li:JxgS (5)
16..."ixgS 17 f4 'ir'f6 (9) 18 'ir'h2 (4) 18...g6
(12)
If 18. ..'it>f8 both 19 f5! 'lile7 20 .Udfl and
19 e4! dxe4 20 d5! would have been deci­
sive.
19 fSl (1)
This concludes matters. 'Into a three-fold 
attack! However, the pawn is invulnerable' 
(Bykhovsky).
19..."ig7 (20)
The alternatives were also hopeless:
19...gxf5 20 .I:!.dg1+ Wf8 21 'i'd6+ l:Ie7 22 
tt:Jxd5 or 19...exf5 20 tt:Jxd5 (the simplest)
20..."ig7 21 i.xd7 .i.xd7 22 ctJe7+ Sxe7 
(22...'it>f8 23 'i'd6) 23 'i/xb8+.
20 fxe6 (20 fxg6!?) 20...fxe6 21 l:Idg1 (21 
..ltd3!? g5 22 l:Idg1) 21. .JH 8 (6) 22 i.d3 l:If6 
(6) 23 e4 (7)
287

Garry Kasparov on Garry Kasparov: Part One
Here my eyes were rather dazzled: cap­
tures on g6 and 23 l:!.g4 were also good.
23...e5 (13) 24 tt:Jxd5 l:!.f7 25 l:!.xg6 1-0
Times: 0.S0-2.21.
Dolmatov also won, but in his oppo­
nent's time-trouble Psakhis unexpectedly 
blundered, and as a result we only defeated 
the Austrians 21/2-11/2. Thus the USSR team 
immediately fell one and a half points 
behind eight teams (including England), 
which had begun the championship with a 
4-0 win. Our pleasant dreams of an ‘easy 
stroll' were dispelled.
In the 2nd round it was only with enor­
mous difficulty that we managed to snatch 
a 21/2-11/2 win over the Yugoslav team (I won 
spectacularly against Klaric, but Dolmatov 
suddenly lost to Dizdar), whereas the Eng­
lish maintained their tempo and defeated 
the strong Brazilian team by a clean score. 
After two rounds we were in the middle of 
the tournament table and the gap was 
already three points.
However, for the moment there was no 
reason to lose heart. In the next two rounds 
the Soviet team crushed both the Canadi­
ans and the French 31/ 2-1/2 (I won against 
Morrison and made a draw with Kouatly), 
but the English also scored big wins - over 
the strong Swedish team (31/ 2-1/2) and the 
USA (3-1), so that the gap was reduced by 
just half a point.
All we could do was pin our hopes on the 
individual meeting. This is what the trainer 
of our team, Anatoly Bykhovsky, had to say: 
‘The 5th round USSR-England match was the 
culmination o f the championship. In the 
event o f a draw, or even a loss by the mini­
mal margin, the English would have had 
very good chances of the gold medals. Asfor 
us, only a convincing victory would do. There 
are matches which one never forgets, and
this was one o f them. All four o f our players 
battled with great fervour, and with an 
enormous will-to-win'.
And we achieved our aim! Despite com­
mitting some inaccuracies, I was able to 
overcome the 
tenacious 
resistance 
of 
Jonathan Speelman.
Game 55 
J.Speelman-G.Kasparov
Student World Team 
Championship, 5th round 
Graz 21.08.1981 
English Opening A30
1 ctJf3 tt:Jf6 2 c4 c5 3 ctJc3 e6 4 g3 b6 5 i.g 2 
&b7 6 0-0 -ie7 7 b3 0-0 8 &b2 d6 9 e3 (16)
9...tt:Jbd7 10 d4 (S) 10. ..a6 (3) 11 l:!.cl 
Smyslov's 11 'ie2 (Game No.49) is far
more natural. Speelman's move allows me 
to carry out an interesting and unexpected 
counterblow.
11... 
b5! (16)
If now White does not undertake any­
thing, after ...b5xc4 and ...c5xd4 the slight 
weakness of the central white pawns will 
give Black good play.
12 d5 (13)
Speelman, who had no objection to a
288

Adult Games
draw, considered the variation 12 dxcS 
;uxcS 13 cxbs axbs 14 tt:lxbs Sxa2 15 ..ixf6 
with the idea of 15 ...gxf6 16 b4, but he 
rejected it because of 15.....ixf6! 16 tt:lxd6 
(16 Wxd6 tt:lxb3) 16 ... ..ia6! 17 Sxc5 i e2! 18 
'l'fM lb 2  (if 18 ...Sa1, then both 19 Wxa1 
and 19 tt:lxf7 will do), when White loses the 
exchange. However, after 19 iVc1! (19 tt:lxf7 
is also acceptable) it is unfavourable for 
Black to play 19...i.xf1?! in view of 20 tt:lxf7! 
it>xf7 21 J. xf1 with excellent compensation, 
and so there only remains 19...Wxd6 20 .l:!.e1 
'*1Vd3 or 20... i xf3 21 
xf3 !txb3 with equal­
ity.
12...exds 13 tt:lxds ltJxds 14 cxds ..if6!
The exchange of bishops favours Black: 
after it the e4-e5 breakthrough is hindered, 
and in addition his counterplay on the 
queenside is facilitated.
15 & xf6 (4) 1s ...t x f 6
The advantages of this capture are obvi­
ous - the knight exerts pressure on the 
centre, but its drawbacks are less so - 
White will prepare e4-e5, and in this case 
the knight is better placed at d7 (from 
where, incidentally, it can also be switched 
to the queenside). Therefore 15...Wxf6!? 
came into consideration - on the long 
diagonal the queen could have supported 
the pawn offensive ...a6-a5, ...b5-b4 and
...a5-a4.
16 ctJh4 (4) 16...as (11) 17 e4 (5) 17....i:.e8 18
fle 1 (3)
18...g6! (16)
It is important to take away the fs- 
square from the white knight. The direct
18...a4?! would have run into 19 es! Sxes
20 Sxes dxes 21 .U.xcs with the initiative:
21...e4 22 it:lfs! or 21...axb3 22 'it'xb3 e4 23 
it:lfs! (when 23 . .. ..ixds? is bad in view of 24 
I;\.xds tt:lxds 25 -;. xe4!).
19 Wd2 b4 (and here 19...a4?! is inaccurate 
because of 20 b4) 20 a3?! (14)
A questionable decision: in his desire to 
suppress Black's activity, Speelman ad­
vances a pawn in a place where the oppo­
nent is stronger. The logical continuation 
was 20 f4 Wb6 (20 ... tt:ld7 21 it:lf3, insisting 
on e4-e5) 21 'ih 1 a4 22 11Yb2 (22 Scd1 axb3
23 axb3 c4!?) 22 .. .#d8 23 Scd1 axb3 24 
axb3 Sa3 with double-edged play.
20. ..bxa3! (9)
Although weak, the a3-pawn remains 
alive in certain variations, and may become 
dangerous.
21 fla 1 (3) 21...i¥e7?! (9)
Black is carried away by the tactical 
complications, but here the queen may 
come under attack by it:lf5. He would have 
gained somewhat the better chances with
289

Garry Kasparov on Garry Kasparov: Part One
both the quiet 21...a4 22 Bxa3 'it'a5 23 
"ixa5 Bxa5 24 Sxa4 Hxa4 25 bxa4 tt:lxd5, 
and the sharp 21...l\Vb6 22 "Yig5 (22 tt:lf5 
±c8!) 22. ..tt:ld7 23 Sxa3 Be5!.
22 h3?! (5)
The hasty 22 e5? would have been par­
ried by 22 ... dxe5 23 d6 "id7, and the pre­
paratory 22 f4? by 22 . ..a4! 23 b4! (23 e5? is 
totally bad because of 23...axb3! 24 exf6 
"ixe1+! 25 fixe1 Sxe1+ 26 "Yixe1 a2)
23...fiac8! 24 ..tf3 (if 24 e5? there is a spec­
tacular win by 24. ..cxb4!! 25 exf6 'Yi'xf6 26 
.l:.eb1 b3 or 26 "ixb4 "ib2) 24..."ic7 25 b5 
(25 Bxa3? "ib6!) 25. ..c4, and Black's trumps 
are higher.
Instead of this 5peelman prepares 23 
Be3 (and .l:.xa3), safeguarding himself 
against ...tt:lg4 and vacating the h2-square 
for his king. But this is too slow! The imme­
diate 22 Hxa3! was far more energetic, not 
fearing 
22 ...,&xd5 
23 
Haa1 
J b7 
or
22 ...tt:lxd5 23 Baa1 tt:lf6. Now after 24 tt:lf5?! 
gxf5! 25 exf5 tt:le4 26 ,&xe4 ^xe4 27 f3 'it'f6
28 fxe4 Bxe4 29 Sxe4 "ixa 1+ 30 Wg2 "if6! 
Black remains a pawn up, but 24 e5! dxe5
25 tt:lf5! gives White counterplay sufficient 
for a draw: 25 ...gxf5 26 &xb7 Hab8 27 
'it'g5+ Wh8 28 ±g2 and .l:.xa5.
22..."Yie5 (6)
Aiming 
for 
a favourable 
endgame.
22...a4!? was perhaps more natural, for 
example: 23 Bxa3 .; (tt:l)xd5 or 23 b4 fiac8
24 .l:txa3 cxb4 25 "ixb4 i.xd5 26 Bxa4 Bc4
27 "ib5 Bxa4 28 Wxa4 ^xe4 with an extra 
pawn (29 ..txe4 d5!).
23 Bxa3 (this is now forced: ...iVb2 was 
threatened) 23 ..."id4! (23...tt:lxd5? 24 tt:lf3)
24 "ixd4 (16) 24... cxd4
Another passed pawn - this time on the 
d-file! True, it too is weak, but it causes a 
certain confusion in the opponent's ranks. 
Also important is the fact that it is difficult 
for White to bring his bishop and knight 
into play - they are tied down by Black's 
central pressure.
25 .l:a4
With a simple reckoning: 25 ...^xd5 26 
Sxd4 Sab8 27 Ba1(e3). 25 Bd 1 tt:lxe4 26 
Bxd4 looked sounder, but after 26...ctJc3(f6) 
White would still have had problems.
25...d3! (2)
26 Bd1? (4)
After 26 Sd4 &xd5 27 Hxd3 (27 Se3? is 
weak: 27.....txb3 28 Bdxd3 a4 29 e5 d5! or
28 Sxd6 tt:ld5! 29 Sxd3 a4) 27. ...l:.ab8! 28 
Sa1 &xb3 29 Hxa5 tt:lxe4 the fact that the 
white rook is at d3, and not at d4 (as in the 
previous note) is important, and the regain­
ing of the pawn by 30 ,&xe4 Sxe4 31 Bxd6 
involves a risk: 31...^e6! 32 g4 Bb3 or 32
290

Adult Games
'.tg2 .l:.b2 - although the pawns are on one 
wing, it is not so easy for White to make a 
draw. It would appear that things are even 
more unpleasant for him after 26...i.a6!?
27 tt:lf3 tt:ld7 28 b4 axb4 29 Sxb4 Hab8 30 
2xb8 Sxb8, when the d3-pawn is like a 
fishbone in his throat.
However, the lesser evil was 26 tt:lf3 
tt:lxd5 27 exd5 Sxel+ 28 tt:lxel d2 29 l:ta1! 
Ic8  30 l:tdl dxel'i+  31 S x e l lic5 32 1ld1 
with a somewhat inferior but tenable 
endgame.
26...tt:ld7l
Now Black's advantage sharply increases.
27 b4 (3)
The d-pawn proves to be very hardy: 27 
l:!xd3? tt:lc5!.
27 ...axb4 (3) 28 Sxb4 tt:Jc5 (5) 29 tt:lf3 (4)
A belated return of the 'prodigal' knight. 
If 29 f3 there is the very strong reply 29... f5! 
with the idea of 30 exf5(?) g5, when things 
are bad for White: 31 Sg4 <J;f7 32 .l:txg5 
l:ta1!! 33 S x a l d2 and wins.
29...l:a2 (2)
Winning chances were also promised by
29. ..Hxe4 30 Sxe4 tt:Jxe4 31 tt:le1! l:ta4! 
(31 ... tt:lc3 32 Sxd3 Sa1 33 Sxc3 Sxel+  34 
'it>h2 l:!.d1 and ...i.xd5 is weaker - as Tar- 
rasch taught, 'all rook endings are drawn')
32 tt:lxd3 tt:lc3 33 Se1 -^ xd5 with an extra,
passed pawn.
30 e5 (5)
In Informator and The Test o f Time I at­
tached an exclamation mark to this move, 
although the break in the centre rather 
resembles a desperate chance. In the event 
of 30 tt:ld2 i.c8! White would have faced an 
excessively difficult defence:
a) 31 f3 ..id7! 32 tt:lc4 i.a 4  33 ltd2 Sc2!
34 ..if1 l:ta8!, and if 35 Sxd3 tt:lxd3 36 ..ixd3, 
then 36. ...l:tc3!, winning;
b) 31 e5 ..id7 32 exd6 ..ia4 33 Sc1 (33 d7 
tt:lxd7 34 tt:lb3 tt:Jc5) 33- ..Sxd2 34 Sxc5 Sel+
35 &h2 ..id7 36 Sf4 g5 37 Se4 See2! 38 1lc1 
fixf2 or 35 ..ifl ..id7! 36 Sd4 Sb2 37 Sxd3 
(things are no better after 37 4g2 d2 38 
Sc7 dl"iV 39 S xd l S xd l 40 Sxd7 Sxd5)
37. ....ixh3 38 4h2 iL x fl 39 Sf3 ..ie2 40 d7
i.xf3 41 d8'i+ 4g7 42 g4 Sxf2+ 43 &g3 
fiefl! with a pretty win.
30...dxe5 (4) 31 S c l
31. ...l:c2? (29)
Returning the favour; with both sides 
now short of time, Black restricts himself to 
transposing into an ending with four 
pawns against three on the same wing. 
After 31. ..d2?! 32 tt:lxd2! tt:ld3 33 Sxb7 tt:lxcl
34 tt:le4 it is now the white passed d-pawn 
that would become dangerous. Also noth­
ing was achieved by 31 ... e4?! 32 Sxc5 I:la1+
291

Garry Kasparov on Garry Kasparov: Part One
33 'it>h2 exf3 34 i xf3 .l:te2! 35 'it>g2!.
But the cool-headed 31....l:ta5! would 
have placed White on the verge of disaster:
32 Mxc5?! .l:txc5 33 .l:txb7 e4 34 tt:Jd2 f5 or 32 
l2Jd2..ta6 etc.
32 Sxc2 dxc2 33 .l:tc4 tt:Jb3 (4)
Little better was 33 ...e4 34 l2Jd4(e1) GtJd3
35 tt:Jxc2 kxd5 36 Mc7 or 33 ...GtJd3 34 flxc2 
e4 (34... ..txd5 35 .l:td2) 35 fle2 f5 36 tt:Jd4 
..txd5 37 f3! fle5(e7) 38 fxe4 fxe4 39 tt:Jb5 
and GtJc3(d6), attacking the e4-pawn with 
all the forces.
34 .l:txc2 kxdS 35 .l:tc7
With his flag hanging, White begins to 
lose control over the situation. 35 tt:Jd2! was 
simpler, with a probable draw.
35. . .e4 (2) 36 tt:Je1 tt:Jd4 37 .l:td7
The line given by me in Informator was 
also acceptable: 3 7 tt:Jc2 tt:Je6 (after the 
exchange of this knight there is no hope of 
success) 38 Mc3.
37....l:teS
38 GtJd3?
Clever, but insufficient: Speelman over­
looks a tactical nuance. I thought that ‘here 
it was not to late to return- 38 .l:tc7', but 
then 38. . .i.b3! is unpleasant, when Black 
dominates. Only after 38 'it>h2! with the 
idea of 38 ...'1t>g7?! 39 ..txe4! or 38...tt:Je6(b3)
39 f4! would White have gained a draw
without any particular problems.
38. ..exd3 (3) 39 ..txdS
Thus Black again has a passed pawn - 
already his third! The question is what to do 
with it.
39. ..'it>f8!
In terrible time-trouble I managed to 
spot this pretty winning move. The oppo­
nent was obviously hoping for 39...d2?! 40 
xf7+ 'it>f8 41 flxd4 Ae1+ 42 'it>g2 d1"i 43 
Bxd1 J:ixd1 44 i.c 4  with a draw.
40 ). C4 (40 i.xf7  l:ie4!, and the d-pawn can 
be stopped only at the cost of a piece)
40...d2 41 .l:txd4
Here the game was adjourned, and two 
hours later it was resumed.
41...fie1+ (the sealed move) 42 'it>g2 d1"i 43 
.l:txd1.l:txdl(5)
The conversion of the exchange advan­
tage does not present any serious prob­
lems.
44 h4 (2)
One of our team - I think it was Vladimi­
rov - suggested to me a precise winning 
plan for Black: he must penetrate with his 
king into the opponent's position, force f2- 
f4, advance ...h7-h6, ...f7-f6 and ...g6-g5, 
then drive back the white king and create a 
passed pawn.
44...Mc1 45 ..tdS (3)
292

Adult Games
Strangely enough, two years later in my 
game with Nikolic (Niksic 1983) after 
White's 40th move exactly the same ending 
was reached, except that the rook was on 
c2 and the black h-pawn already on h6. Two 
moves before this the white h-pawn had 
still been at h3, and I could have played 
...g7-g5 (which would have won easily), but 
I deliberately allowed h3-h4 in order to win 
in the same way as against Speelman.
4S. ..l:!.c5 46 .ib3 (6) 46. ..We7 47 -ia 2 (3)
47...h6 48 ..ib3 'C.c7 49 &a2 (6) 49...'&d6 50 
'it>h3 'it>e5 51 ^g4 (6) 51.J:t.a7 (2) 52 &b3 
l:!.b7 53 &d1
Or 53 -&a2 'it>e4!
53...1:!.b2 54 'it>f3 ^d4 55 Ae2 Sb3+ 56 'it>g2 
'it>c3 57 J. f3 'C-b5 58 &c6 Sc5 59 &e8 IJ.c7 60 
'it>f1 &d2 61 &a4 .Uc1+ 62 'it>g2 'it>e1 63 &b3 
l:!.c7 64 f4 'it>e2
With Nikolic a similar position arose 
three moves earlier. True, my rook was on 
a7, and the white bishop already on d5, 
which induced my opponent to play 62 h5, 
but here too after 62...gxh5 63 &f3+ 'it>e3 64 
^xh5 .l:ta2+ 65 'it>h3 f6 66 .l1Le8 f
 67 'it>h4 
l:a8  68 &c6 'C.g8 69 g4 &e3 70 *g 3 f5 71 
&f3 h5 White resigned.
65 ^d5 'it>e3 66 ^aS f6l
Here it is all very simple, but with his 
pawn on h5 Black would have had to play
66...f5 and after ....l:c2+ break through with 
...g6-g5. This ending is also won, but it is far 
more complicated and demands deep 
analysis.
67 'it>g1 l:!.g7! 68 'it>g2 gS 69 hxg5 hxg5 70 
fxg5 l:!.xg5 0-1
In view of 71 &b7(c6) f5 72 'lt>h3 Wf2 or 
72 f
 f4. Times: 3 35-2.55.
Back in ‘normal time', Psakhis gained a 
crushing win in excellent style over Mestel 
(who before that had won all his games, 
and in the end finished with the best score 
on board two - 8 out of 10), Yusupov dis­
played fine endgame technique, outplaying 
Plaskett in a ‘dead-drawn' ending, and only 
Hodgson managed to hold out against 
Dolmatov. And so, we won this key match 
31/ 2-1/2 - and burst half a point ahead!
In the next round, the 6th, the Soviet 
team had to endure another serious test: 
the match with the USA team did not go 
well for us and ended in a draw (I beat 
Fedorowicz, but Yusupov unexpectedly lost 
by blundering against Benjamin). However, 
that day the shocked English went down to 
the Hungarian team - 11/2-21/2. The lead 
over our pursuers grew to a whole point.
None of the Soviet players lost any more 
games, and we finished very confidently. A 
considerable role in this was played by the 
friendly atmosphere which prevailed in our 
team. The constant feeling of unity and 
friendly support enabled us to overcome all 
difficulties.
In the 7th round we defeated the Hun­
garians 21/2-11/2 (I drew with Groszpeter), in 
the 8th and 9th rounds we crushed the 
Swedes and the Dutch 31/ 2-1/2 (I won in quite 
good style against Schussler and van der 
Wiel), and in the penultimate, 10th round, 
we beat the Brazilians. There was a memo­
rable finish to my game with the future
293

Garry Kasparov on Garry Kasparov: Part One
grandmaster Jaime Sunye Neto, a partici­
pant in two Interzonal Tournaments (in Rio 
de Janeiro 1979 he shared 5th-6th places).
Game 56 
J.Sunye Neto-G.Kasparov
Student World Team 
Championship, 10th round 
Graz 27.08.1981
35 'it>hi
The most accurate way of parrying the 
attack was 35 f3! ctJg3 36 l1ee1! (36 ..ixg6 
tLlxe2+ 37 tLlxe2 tLlxg6 is equal), forcing 
Black to concern himself more with how to 
equalise: 36. ..tLlgf5 37 .l:i.c1 l1a8 or 37 'iVbs 
tLlxd4 38 exd4 'iVxb5 39 axbs .', b4 40 gxg6 
..ixe1 41 ..ixf7+ 'it>xf7 42 Bxe1 l1a8! etc. 
However, I would have preferred the less 
specific 36. ...l:.d6. But 5unye Neto avoids the 
slightest weakening of his position.
3S...tLlfs! (3) 36 &xe4? (2)
In time-trouble White commits a serious 
positional mistake, based on overlooking a 
tactical blow by the opponent. Under­
standably, it was not easy to decide on the 
audacious thrust 36 g4!?. But 36 ..ib5 Vc8
37 tLlf3 'iVe6 would have led to a roughly 
equal game, while the simplest way of 
eliminating the black cavalry was by 36 
tLlxfs # xfs 37 ..ixe4 'i!Vxe4 38 f3 with equal­
ity.
36 ...dxe4 37 .l:i.ed2 ctJh4!
In this position, which is slightly better 
for White, my opponent offered a draw. 
However, I was able to find a tempting way 
of attacking on the kingside. And, also 
taking account of the fact that my oppo­
nent was somewhat short of time, I decided 
to play on.
32...tLle7!?
Intending to play this knight via f5(g6) to 
h4, and the rook to g6, with pressure on the 
enemy king. ‘Kasparov's patent manoeu­
vre', wrote Bykhovsky, having in mind my 
game with Tempone (Game No.44). 'The d4- 
square only seems to be weakened. The 
white knight on this square will be prettily 
placed, but that is all.'
33 ctJd4 (33 ctJd2!?) 33...Sg6 34 &d3 #d7 (5)
5o, 
the first threat has appeared - 
...'iVxh3.
Only here did my opponent discover to 
his amazement that after the 38 ctJf3(?) an 
unpleasant surprise awaited him: 38. ..exf3 
39 l1xd7 fxg2+ 40 'it>g1 tLlf3 mate! Another 
knight discovery - 38 tt:fs(?) leads to the 
win of the exchange, but after 38 ...'i!Vxfs 39 
l1xd8+ 'it>h7 the white king is defenceless.
294

Adult Games
What then can be done?
38 lt:Je6?
This also leads to a swift catastrophe! 
The only saving move was 38 f4! - after
38...'.UVc8(e8) or 38...£l.d6 (but not 38...exf3?
39 lt:Jxf3 and wins) White's position would 
merely have been somewhat inferior.
38...1Vxd2 39 .Uxd2 £Ixd2 40 lt:Jf4 SgS (2) 41 
it>g1 (7)
Here the game was adjourned and I had 
to seal my move. The surprise nature of it 
served as an overture to one of the most 
beautiful combinations in my career. The 
resumption took place that same evening.
41 ...ctJf3+! (23)
Highly spectacular, although Black could 
also have won by 41.....txe3! (or even
41.. 
...id6) 
42 
fxe3 
ct:Jxg2 
(apart 
from
42 ...lLlf3+) 43 'it>fl Sg3 44 'irb5! lt:Jxf4 45 
"ie8+ 'it>h7 46 'ifxe4+ £Ig6! 47 Wxf4 .i:!.xb2.
In the adjournment analysis I demon­
strated various mating constructions to my 
colleagues, and our whole team refined the 
possible variations.
42 'it>fl
In the event of 42 'it>h1 another combina­
tion had been prepared: 42...kxe3!! 43 fxe3 
l:.dxg2!! 44 lt:Jxg2 £ig3!. A fantastic position! 
Despite his enormous material advantage, 
White cannot defend against the mate (45
lt:Jf4 B g l mate). I have yet to come across 
anything similar in a practical game. White 
would also not have been helped by 43 gxf3 
i xf4 or by declining the sacrifices - 43 
tt:Je6, after which I was planning 43. ..flxf2
44 gxf3 (44 'iVc4 fxe6 45 'iVxe6+ 'ih 7 46 
'i+Vxe4+ J:ig6! is also hopeless for White)
44...5f1+ 45 'it>h2 exf3! 46 't!Vxe3 kig2 mate 
or 46 lt:Jxg5 ..if4 mate! - again an amazing 
mating finish!
Thanks to these concluding events, per­
formed with of a kind of special, distinctive 
elegance, this game appealed to me more 
than any of the others that I played in Graz.
42.....1xe3!! 43 fxe3 (7)
The acceptance of the sacrifice is forced - 
after 43 lt:Je2 White would have lost his 
queen orbeen mated: 43..ctJh2+ 4 4 ..tel (44 
'it>g1 .l:txe2 etc.) 44...E!.xg2 45 1!Vxe3 lt:Jf3+ 46 
'it>fl Sg1+!! 47 etJxg1 Sdl+.
43...1:[dxg2! 44 "ic3 (2)
The only defence: if 44 'iYb6, then
44...1:ih2 
45 lt:Je2 Sgg2 is immediately 
decisive. But now in this case White has 
perpetual check on c8 and f5.
44...1:.h2 45 lLle2 (4) 45...Wh7!
Renewing the threat of .J;:tgg2. Sunye 
Neto prevents it in the most primitive way 
and overlooks one of the original mating 
constructions.
295

Garry Kasparov on Garry Kasparov: Part One
46 'it'c8 (9)
46 'irb4. retaining control of the d2- 
square, looks somewhat more resilient. But 
in this case too Black has a clear way to win 
-46...f5!.
Analysis diagram
For example: 47 'Wiff8 (47 'it'd6 .l:tgg2)
47. .J:th1+ 48 'i!tf2 tt:lh4 49 tt:lf4 S h 2+ SO 'it>fl 
Sxb2, or 47 ^ 5  fihl+ (this is even better 
than 47 ...f4 48 'ifb4 cud2+! and ...f4-f3) 48 
^ 2  tt:ld2 (threatening ...lifl mate) 49 tUg3 
.l:th2+ SO Wel f4 with crushing threats.
46...Hh1+ (3) 47 'it>f2 cud2!
With the threat of ...lith mate. In view of
48 CUg3 l:h2+ 49 'it>el tt:lf3+ and ...Sxb2, 
White resigned (0-1). Times: 307-2.30.
The 3-1 score in the match with the Bra­
zilians put us practically out of reach: the 
English were 21/2 points behind us. In the 
final, 11th round for the first time I allowed 
myself to relax, and victory over the West 
Germans (21/2-11/2) consolidated the success 
of the USSR team.
The English, by beating the Yugoslavs (3­
1), finished second - and left a strong 
impression. They made the best scores on 
three boards (Mestel, Plaskett and Davies), 
whereas the Soviet team did this only on
two (Kasparov and Vladimirov; incidentally, 
we shared a room, and this was the start of 
our close chess collaboration). At one time 
the American team was in contention (the 
16-year-old Joel Benjamin played well, 
achieving the best result on the first reserve 
board), but because of a poor finish they 
even finished without the bronze medals, 
which went to the Hungarian masters.
I 
was happy with my play in Graz: I cre­
ated a number of interesting games, and I 
achieved the absolute best result among all 
the participants. The role of leader is un­
doubtedly an honourable one, but at criti­
cal moments a double responsibility lies on 
his shoulders. For this reason I had to play 
for ten successive rounds without being 
substituted.
Bykhovsky: ‘In Graz the young grandmas­
ter achieved a great creative success. Kas­
parov likes complicated play. He sees a lot, 
he calculates accurately and deeply, he is 
extremely inventive, and he has an excellent 
feeling fo r the dynamics of a position. But 
the strongest aspect of his play, in my view, 
is his ability to obtain complicated positions, 
and his ability to impose his play on the 
opponent.'
At that time the American master Eric 
Schiller gave a curious pen-portrait: 'Kas­
parov's preparation just before the onset of 
the game is intense. Arriving early at the 
board, he plunges into deep concentration, 
and starts to get his juices flowing. The face 
which was calm and peaceful only moments 
before becomes creased with tension... Away 
from the board it is quite another matter. He 
enjoys blitz, although quickly bored when 
faced by weak opposition. The consensus 
among some ofAmerica'sfinest blitz players 
was that he is simply astounding. Garry told 
me that there is really only one interesting 
blitz opponentfor him - Karpov.'
296

Adult Games
Tilburg Lessons
International Tournament in Tilburg (1-16 October 1981)
l
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
0
l
2
1
Beliavsky
*
y,
0
1
y,
y,
y,
y,
1
1
1
1
7Vi
2 Petrosian
y,
*
y,
y,
y,
y,
y,
1
1
y,
y,
1
7
3 Portisch
1
y,
*
y,
1
0
y,
y,
0
1
1
y,
6Vi
4 Timman
0
y,
y,
*
y,
y,
1
1
0
1
y,
1
6Vi
5 Ljubojevic
y,
y,
0
y,
*
y,
y,
y,
y,
1
1
y,
6
6 Andersson
y,
y,
1
y,
y,
*
y,
0
y,
0
y,
1
5Vi
7 Spassky
y,
y,
y,
0
y,
y,
*
1
y,
y,
y,
y,
5Vi
8 Kasparov
y,
0
y,
0
y,
1
0
*
1
y,
1
y,
5Vi
9 Sosonko
0
0
1
1
y,
y,
y,
0
*
0
y,
y,
41/*
10
Larsen
0
y,
0
0
0
1
y,
y,
1
*
0
1
4Vi
11
HUbner
0
y,
0
y,
0
y,
y,
0
y,
1
*
y,
4
12
Miles
0
0
y,
0
y,
0
y,
y,
y,
0
y,
*
3
The super-tournaments in the small 
Dutch town of Tilburg, which were held 
from 1977 to 1998, were among the most 
prestigious in the world. There were ideal 
playing conditions and quite high prizes. 
Therefore, even for an elite Soviet grand­
master, participation in such a tourna­
ment was an exceptional event. And for 
me Tilburg 1981 was also an important 
stage in my chess development. It gath­
ered all the strongest grandmasters, apart 
from Karpov and Korchnoi, who were in 
Merano playing a match for the crown, 
and Tal and Polugayevsky (they were 
helping Karpov).
At the start I was paired against the 38- 
year-old Genna Sosonko, a highly colourful 
character on the tournament scene - 
previously a Leningrad master, a second of 
Tal and Korchnoi, who after leaving the 
USSR became one of the best grandmasters 
in Holland, twice champion of the country 
and winner of the tournaments in Wijk aan 
Zee (1977 and 1981), and also an excellent 
chess journalist and writer.
Game 57 
G.Kasparov-G.Sosonko
Tilburg, 1st round, 2.10.1981 
Queen's Gambit D38
1 d4 ctJf6 2 c4 e6 3 ctJf3 d5 4 ctJc3 &b4 
At that time Sosonko was one of the few 
supporters of the Ragozin Variation - 
nowadays the leading players employ it 
much more often.
5 cxd5 (S) 5...exd5 6 &g5 (the natural reply)
6...h6 7 
h4
Leading to an open battle - none of your 
‘amorphous' captures on f6 (7 : xf6 'ixf6  8 
^ 3  'i:Vd6 9 a3 ^a5 10 "i!Va4+ ttJc6 11 b4 
&b6 12 e3 0-0 with equality, Kasparov- 
Kupreichik, Minsk 1978).
7...c5 8 e3 g5 9 &g3 ctJe4
Immediately trying to exploit the pin on 
the knight at c3. Now these sharp positions 
are already a matter of course - Black plays 
both this, and even 9 ...c4.
10 
,&b5+ (S)
A tempo-gaining developing move. It is
297

Garry Kasparov on Garry Kasparov: Part One
unfavourable to play 10 dxc5?! tt:Jxc3 (and if
11 'iWd4, then 11. ..tt:Jxa2+ and ...0-0) or 10 
tt:Jd2 tt:Jxg3 11 hxg3 cxd4 12 exd4 tt:Jc6 with 
equality (Rashkovsky-Taimanov, 41st USSR 
Championship, Moscow 1973).
10...'it>f8!?
This prepared novelty surprised me. And
I stopped to think, since I had only been 
expecting 10.....id7 11 ..ixd7+, assuming 
that the weakness of the f5-square would 
promise White some advantage.
II dxcs?! (15)
An unexpected exchange sacrifice! I 
thought that in return White would gain a 
fearfully strong attack, but I underesti­
mated Black's defensive resources.
11 
0-0! ..ixc3 12 bxc3 c4! was more logi­
cal. In the game I.Sokolov-Sosonko (Rotter­
dam 1998) there followed 13 tLle5!? tt:Jxc3
14 Wh5 'iWf6(?!) 15 f4! g4 16 f5 tt:Je2+ 
(16 ...tt:Jxb5 ?! is weaker in view of 17 ..ih4 
iYg7 18 tt:Jg6+! 'it>e8 19 tt:Je7 etc.) 17 'it>h1 
tt:Jxg3+ 18 hxg3 .Mg8 19 tt:Jg6+! 'it>g7 20 tLle7 
l:td8, and here 21 e4! (Sokolov) would have 
given a powerful attack: 21 . ..dxe4 (after 
Ribli's move 21 ... a6?! there is 22 tt:Jxd5 
l:txd5?! 23 ..ixc4!) 22 .Jtxc4 tt:Jc6 23 tt:Jxc6 
bxc6 24 .Mf4! 'it>f8 2 5 l:xe4 or 24. ..'it>h8 25 
l:txe4 etc. However, after 14... ) e6! 15 f4 
l:.h7! no way for White to win is apparent.
A double-edged struggle also results 
from 13 'iWc2 f
 (Ribli's move 13 ...'iWa5? is 
bad because of 14 ..ixc4!) 14 'iWb2 'it>g7. So it 
is not altogether clear why 10...'it>f8 went 
out of use.
11...tt:Jxc3 (11) 12 bxc3 &xc3+ (30) 13 'it>e2 
(2) 13... . xa1 (8)
Sosonko was rather shocked, but he nev­
ertheless took the exchange, which, in my 
view, is more critical than 13 ...'iWa5 14 a4 a6
15 ..id3 tt:Jc6, although here too there is 
nothing terrible for Black.
14 'iWxa1 f6 15 h4 (3)
This looked to be the most vigorous con­
tinuation. Nothing particular was promised 
by 15 ..id6+ 'it>g 7 16 tt:Jd4 i.g4+ 17 f3 .Jtd7
18 ..id3 tt:Jc6 19 tt:Jxc6 ..ixc6 20 h4 'iWd7 21 
'it>f2 
b5 22 ..ic2 b6 with equality.
15...g4?! (6)
The first step towards the precipice. Of 
course, 
Black 
should 
have 
preferred 
15. ..'1t>g7! 16 hxg5 hxg5 17 Sxh8 'iWxh8! (the 
threat of tt:Jxg5 is illusory) 18 tt:Jxg5 t2Jc6, 
when he is alright: White has compensa­
tion for the exchange, but not more (Genna 
informed me of this possibility the follow­
ing day).
16 tZ:ld4 (5) 16...\t>f7 (9) 17 &d3 (10)
With the intention of tLlb5-d6 (17 ..id6!?
3..d7 
and ...tt:Jc6 is unclear). The situation
298

Adult Games
has rapidly changed to White's advantage. 
This was one of my main latent superior­
ities: I had a very good feeling for the dy­
namics of such positions with unbalanced 
material, whereas my opponents often 
hesitated for too long.
17...tLld7 (20)
White also has an easy game after
17...tLlc6 18 tt:Jb5 with the threat of an 
invasion on d6 (18 ...tLlb4 19 'ic3, as in the 
game). It is not easy for Black to defend: his 
king is exposed, and the knight on d6 
paralyses his entire defence.
18 'iVc3 (7) l 8...tt:JeS (25) 19 tt:JbS (2)
19...'iVe7 (9)
It is hard to offer any better advice: if, for 
example, 19 ...tLlxd3 20 'ifxd3 iYa5?!, then 21 
.l:!.b1! (but not 21 'ixd5+? 'it>g7 22 tt:Jc7 b6! 
with equality), and Black is lost (21...'ixa2+
22 'it>e1! b6 23 tt:ld6+ 4g7 24 h 5!).
20 tt:ld6+ (2) 2 0 ...^ 8  (14)
Of course, not 20...it>g7? 21 .&f5! ; d7 22 
ix e 5  fxe5 23 &xd7 'ixd7 24 'iVxe5+ etc. 
21.l:!.dl (6) 21...b6? (5)
Not yet sensing the impending danger, 
Sosonko 
continues 
making 
positional 
moves. 21...tt:lxd3 22 'i¥xd3 &e6 was more 
resilient, although after 23 h5 or 23 Eb1 all 
the same things are not easy for Black.
22 ^c2! (9)
Now all White's pieces join the attack 
and, to the unconcealed surprise of my 
opponent, the game quickly concludes.
22...^a6+ (4)
22...bxc5 23 Sxd5 tLlf7 24 ..tg6! or
23...^e6 24 Sxe5! fxe5 25 'ir'xe5 was also 
hopeless.
23 'it>el &c4 24 tt:lxc4 (4) 24. ..dxc4
25 .l:!.d6! (the concluding stroke) 25...Se8 (5)
26 &xes (2) 26...fxes (2)
26. ..'iVxeS was slightly more tenacious, 
but after 27 Sxf6+ &g7 28 Sg6+ 'itf8 29 
'Y!Yxc4 bxc5 30 'ir'xg4 Black also cannot hold 
out.
27 'iVxc4 'ilf7 (if 27...bxc5 the most forceful 
is 28 ±b3!) 28 We4! (3) 28...g3 (4) 29 fxg3 
1-0
Times: 1.31-2.18.
In the 2nd round I had Black against Por- 
tisch, and again, as six months earlier in 
Moscow, I chose the Modern Benoni De­
fence. And again I sacrificed a pawn! On 
this occasion I was able to seize the initia­
tive and even land the spectacular blow 
24. ..tLlf3+!!, but Portisch found a way to 
save himself and after an interesting strug­
gle things ended in a draw. The result was 
the same in a very complicated 3rd round 
game with Beliavsky.
299

Garry Kasparov on Garry Kasparov: Part One
In the 4th round against Timman I 
played a well-known variation of the King's 
Indian Defence with an exchange sacrifice 
and, after employing a strong novelty, I 
gained sufficient counterplay (cf. Game 
No.53, note to White's 3rd move). But I 
spoiled everything with the mediocre move
21...CLJb7? - after it Black no longer had 
compensation for the exchange. Timman 
accurately converted his material advan­
tage and, with 3 points out of 4, took the 
lead together with Andersson. This loss was 
the beginning of my 'Tilburg sufferings'.
My first meeting at the board with Boris 
Spassky ended tragically for me. I have to 
admit that I did not feel inhibited by the ex­
world champion. I had 2 points out of 4 and 
was in a fighting mood: I believed (and not 
without justification) that I would score 
many more points. And before the game I 
cheerfully informed my opponent how it 
would end: I prepared him for the worst, 
and in my usual, natural manner - with a 
laugh and even using not altogether liter­
ary language. To which Spassky, also in his 
usual - ‘Tolush-like' - manner, grandly 
replied: ‘I implore you to carry it out!'
Game 58 
G.Kasparov-B.Spassky
Tilburg, 5th round, 7.10.1981 
King's Indian Defence E74
1 d4 t2Jf6 2 c4 cs 3 ds g6 4 lilc3 (5) 4...d6 S 
e4 i.g7
Spassky always made subtle choices in 
his openings. I was somewhat startled that 
he should take the risk of playing a King's 
Indian set-up that was very familiar to me. 
After some thought I decided to choose the 
Averbakh Variation - perhaps not the most 
dangerous for Black, but one that demands
very energetic play and a detailed knowl­
edge of opening subtleties (which the 
opponent probably did not have!).
6 i.e2 (9) 6...0-0 7 i.gS
7...bS?! (14)
After some hesitation Spassky decided to 
sacrifice a pawn in the spirit of the Benko 
Gambit, hoping to seize the initiative and 
force White to defend accurately, i.e. to give 
the play a character that was unpleasant 
for me. Fischer employed 7 ...e6 (Game 
No.30 in Volume IV of My Great Predeces­
sors), and I myself - the preparatory 7...h6 
(Game No.28).
8 cxbs (7) 8...a6 9 a4!
9..:iVaS?! (11)
The first subtlety: 9 . h6! 10 i.d2! e6 is
300

Adult Games
better, as I played two months later against 
Tukmakov (Game No.67).
10 ..id2! tt:lbd7? (21)
Here play on general grounds is too pas­
sive: Black simply ends up in an inferior 
version of the Benko Gambit, as is also the 
case after 10...axb5?! 11 ..ixb5. The only 
chance of confusing matters is 10... ft4 !? .
11 Ha 3! (15)
Now Black's activity peters out.
11 ... ..ib7 (7) 12 tt:lf3 axbs (5) 13 ..ixbs (18)
13...ih'c7 (11) 14 0-0 (2)
White's position is already technically 
won: he is a sound pawn to the good, 
without any counterplay for the opponent. 
Thus Spassky's venture had failed. However, 
he carried on playing as though nothing 
had happened, with a completely unper­
turbed appearance (which, I remember, 
made me laugh somewhat).
14...tt:lg4 (13)
14. . e6? 15 dxe6 fxe6 16 4lg5 l:.ae8 17 
f
 e5 18 ..ic4+ 'it>h8 19 tt:lb5 ">i'b8 20 tt:lxd6 
was completely bad for Black.
15 ..igS (14)
It is hard not to make this move, al­
though the computer suggests 15 a5.
15...tt:lgf6 (2)
A pragmatic decision by an experienced 
campaigner! Black must hold his ground,
be patient, and wait - the opponent may 
over-press, or make a second-rate move ... 
The variation 15... tt:ld(g)e5 16 lZJxe5 tt:lxe5 
17 f4 tt:ld7 18 ..ixe7 Sfe8 19 i.g  5 h6 20 i.h 4  
..ixc3 21 bxc3 l:l.xe4 22 c4 would have led to 
a decisive advantage for White.
16 tt:ld2 (5) 16...e6 (4)
17 tt:lc4l (4)
Things would have been far from clear 
after 17 dxe6 fxe6 18 lZJc4 (18 a5!?) 18...d5 
19 exd5 exd5 (19..tt:Jxd5 20 a5) 20 i.xd7 
'*!Vxd7 (20...dxc4?! 21 i.e6+) 21 lbb6 #c6! 22 
..lixf6 i.xf6  23 'i¥xd5+ (23 lZJcxd5 l!ad8!) 
23. ..'i!Vxd5 24 lbbxd5 ..lixd5 25 tt:lxd5 ..lixb2
26 l:l.a2 : d4 with drawing chances.
17...exds 18 exds SadS (13)
18...tt:lb6 did not work because of 19 
tt:lxb6 'i!Vxb6 20 "iVf3! lL:lh5 21 g4 and wins.
19 as (3)
An obvious plan for converting the ad­
vantage. To this day I don't understand how 
I contrived to lose from such a position!
19... 
h6 (3) 20 i h4 (3)
20 
i.f4 ! was better, and if 20...lbe5 - 21 
lbxe5 dxe5 22 d6! 'i¥xd6 23 'i¥xd6 l!xd6 24
ii.xe5 .l:te6 (24. ..1ld2 25 a6) 25 ..ixf6 Sxf6 26 
a6 or simply 21 ..ixe5! dxe5 22 d6 'iYb8 23 
a6 ; a8 24 'iYa4, with a winning position in 
both cases. For the moment the move in the 
game also does not spoil anything, al­
301

Garry Kasparov on Garry Kasparov: Part One
though Black acquires a hint of counter­
play.
20...tt:Je5 (3) 21 a6 AaS (3) 22 !i.el (4) 22...g5
(2) 23 &g3 tt:lfd7l (opening the way for the 
f-pawn) 24 a7! (11) 24. ..f5 (4) 25 ^xe5 
tt:lxe5 26 tt:lxe5 dxe5!? (6)
A desperate chance: after 26 ...,&xe5 27 
'i!Vh5 'it>g7 28 .l:i.a6! with the threat of .l:txe5 
or the immediate 27 Sa6!? and &c6 White 
would have won without any trouble. Now 
too the a7-pawn should decide the out­
come, but at least it is blockaded and Black 
still has hopes of exploiting the power of 
his dark-square bishop.
27 l:!.a6 e4 (3) 28 &c4 (6)
The computer recommends the 'crude'
28 d6! 'i¥f7 29 #e2(a4) or 29 d7.
28...'i'f7 (28...'iVf4?! 29 g3!) 29 tt:lb5 (3)
29...'ih7 (5)
29...^xd5? 30 a8# Sxa8 31 &xd5 etc. is 
bad for Black.
30 Se6
The situation has clarified, and I began 
playing more enterprisingly: the knight has 
defended the a7-pawn and the rook has 
invaded at e6. The finishing-off stage has 
been reached and Spassky was already in 
severe time-trouble (perhaps this was my 
undoing?).
30...1.'b7! (5)
Black is not tempted by 30...'ixe6? 31 
dxe6 S x d l 32 S xd l &e5 33 e7 Se8 34 .l:1.d8.
31 iVh5?! (7)
The first move that deserves more seri­
ous criticism. I should have simply attacked 
the e4-pawn - 31 f3!, and the game would 
have 
concluded 
quickly, for 
example:
31. ..Ixd5?i 32 &xd5 i'xd5 33 i¥Vxd5 &xd5
34 .:d6 &a8 35 fxe4 fxe4 36 S fl! or
35...&xe4 36 .:tb6! and Sb8. I am amazed 
that I did not play this. Commentary is 
superfluous...
31. ..l:!.f6 (2) 32 l:.xf6 (5) 32...&xf6 33 g4?
Whereas the queen sortie was not so 
bad, here (in the opponent's time-trouble!) I 
simply 'twitched'. 33 h4, 33 d6 e3 34 f3, and
33 f3 (with the threat of fxe4) 33 ... exf3 34 
l:!.e6!, etc., would all have given an elemen­
tary win.
33. ..f4!
An instant reply! For the first time Black 
has acquired real counter-chances.
34 h4l? (2)
With the opponent in time-trouble, this 
'side' move is not a bad chance in the 
unexpectedly sharpened situation. 34 b3 
would also have done, or else 34 Sxe4 .i:.xd5
35 f3!, but the over-hasty 35 .ixd5? would 
have led only to a draw: 35 ...#xd5 36 f3 
'ilfdl+ 37 'it>f2 &xe4 38 'iVf7+ &g7 39 fxe4
302

Adult Games
'il'd2+ with perpetual check. Could White 
really have reconciled himself to such an 
outcome?!
34...'ig7?l
An instinctive move with the flag about 
to fall! 34. ..e3 would have led to a position 
which seemed completely unclear to me. 
But today I see that here there was a win by 
either 35 fxe3 Sxd5 36 e4! (but not 36 
i.xd5? "ixd5 37 e4 Wd3 with a draw), or 35 
hxg5 i.xg5 36 fxe3! Sxd5 37 e4! fld8 
(37 . ...l:Id2 38 le 8 !) 38 'iff7+. as well as by 
the merciless 35 i.d3+! Wg8 36 b3!, when 
the d5-pawn is taboo because of 
c4.
35 t'Llc3? (7)
A nightmarish reply: White misses an 
immediate and straightforward win, which 
would have been achieved by 35 d6! e3 36 
f3! (this is only apparently risky) 36...Sf8 37 
t'Llc7! '1ifxf3 38 t'Lle6+, mating, or 36. ...l:c8 37 
tbc7 Sxc7 38 dxc7 'i'xc7 39 'it'e8 'i&'d8 40 
"if7+ etc.
35 ...e3l
This leads to an abrupt sharpening of the 
play. For some reason I had reckoned only 
on 35 .. ."ixa7? 36 t'Llxe4 "ie7 37 f
 i.xd5 
(37. ..gxh4 38 t'Llg3!) 38 
xd5 Sxd5 39 t'Llxf6 
"ixf6 40 "ie8, winning.
36 ; d3 (2) 36...exf2+ 37 'ixf2  "ixb2+ 38 
.Ue2?
A blunder - now in a mutual time 
scramble. Indeed, White gives up a knight 
for just a couple of checks! After the only 
correct move 38 t'Lle2, strangely enough, 
White would still have retained an enor­
mous advantage:
a) 38...i.xd5?! (38...Sxd5? is worse in
view of 39 't!Vg6+ Wf8 40 S b l! etc.) 39 'i&'g6+ 
f
 40 "ixh6+ We7 41 ' i f l !  Wd7 42 'iVh7+! 
(but not 42 hxg5? Sh8! 43 \'!Vxf6 Sh1+ with 
perpetual 
check) 
42 ...'it>d6 
43 
S b l!
(Akopian) or 42... ) g7 43 i.e4!, and Black 
has problems;
b) 38. ..ife5 39 Wfl! gxh4 40 'iVg6+ f
 41 
'i:Vxh6+ i.g 7 42 'il'xh4 Sd7 43 B b l! ltxa7 44 
"i'd8+ 'if7  45 g5! with an irresistible attack;
c) 38 ...i.d4+ 39 W fl f3 40 'iVg6+ 'it>f8 41 
'tWf5+ Wg7 42 "ixf3 .Uf8 (42 ...i.xd5? 43 
"ixd5! and a8'iV) 43 i.f5 . and Black has an 
obviously bad position (true, nevertheless it 
is still playable).
3 8 . . M x c 3  39 'ifg6+ ^ 8  40 #xh6+ i.g 7 41
'i:VxgS
4 1 . . . f  (25)
The sealed move. At first sight, 41. . .'Wd4+ 
(driving the king back from f2) 42 W fl 'Wf6 
was more accurate, with a win for Black 
after the 'cooperative' 43 Wxf6+ i.xf6  44 g5
i.d 4  45 i..c4? (after 45 .Ue4! a draw is highly 
probable) 45 . ..f3! 46 fla2?! (46 Se4 Sd7! 47
303

Garry Kasparov on Garry Kasparov: Part One
l:!.f4+ 'itg7 4B Sxf3 Sxa7 49 h5 is more 
resilient) 46...Be8! 47 Ba3 f2 4B 4g2 S e l.
But in this case White would have ac­
quired the excellent resource 43 ^ 5 l, for 
example: 43 ...f3 44 B e l f2 45 :.b l! 4e7 46 
Sb8 # al+  47 &xf2 &xd5 48 'ir'g5+ f
 49 
#e3+ '>t>f7 50 'i"i'f4 with a draw, or 43 ...'ir'a1+
44 l:!.e1 'ir'xa7 45 d6! 'ir'f7 46 "ixf7+ 'it>xf7 47
ii.c4+! 'it>g6 48 Se6+ Wh7 49 i.d3+! Wg8 5O 
.tc4!, prettily maintaining the balance.
In the adjourned position the restricted 
material also leaves White with hopes of a 
draw. The game was resumed that same 
day, two hours later. The sharp change of 
scene (instead of a win, I urgently had to 
find a way to draw!) had a dispiriting effect 
on me, and I squandered all my chances.
42 'ixf6+ (5) 42...i.xf6 43 .tc4?!
I thought that I needed to retain the d5- 
pawn. Both in my brief analysis, and at the 
board, I did not see the most accurate 
continuation 43 g5! .&d4+ 44 4 f3  ^xd5+ 45 
.te4! .txe4+ 46 'it>xe4 Sa8 47 .:I.a2 1. e3 48 
fla4 c4 49 B x c 4  Sxa7 50 f
 (50 h5!?)
50.. lt>g7 51 Sc6 (5passky). In the end this 
would have led to the endgame with rook 
and bishop against rook, which, despite my 
depressed state, I would most probably 
have held.
43....txh4+ 44 f
 Sd7
45 .l:a2? (5)
Another mistake, now reparable only by 
a miracle. 45 Bh2! &f6 46 g5! was essential, 
creating the greatest difficulties for Black, 
for example: 46. ..&g7 (46...&e5 47 :.e2) 47 
Sa 2 &e5 48 'it>e4 t c7 49 Bb2 Bd8 50 'itf3, 
and there is no win (White simply plays 
'itg4 or Sb3 etc.).
45...ii.g5 (now White is unable to play g4- 
g5 and his position is lost) 46 We4 Sf7l 47 
.l:a5
47. ..'itg7l (6)
An important moment: 47..f3? was in­
correct because of 48 Sxc5 Sf4+ 49 4e5 
J:.xc4 50 l:!.xc4 f2 51 Sc8+ 'it>g7 52 Bxa8 f 1'iV
53 Sg8+ 'itxg8 54 a8"i+ with a draw.
48 Sxc5 (11) 48 ...4f6? (5)
48. 
. Jx a 7  49 Wf5 ^e7! 50 Bc8 f3 or 49 
.i:!.c8 .i.b7 50 l:i.b8 .ta6 51 .txa6 Bxa6 52 Bc8 
(52 'itf5 .i.e7!) 52....th6 etc. would also have 
been decisive. Apparently 5passky thought 
that in this way too he would convert his 
extra piece, but problems could have 
arisen.
49 l:c8! (9)
The variation 49 Ba5 Be7+ 50 4d4 was 
worse because of 50...<it'g7! (50 ... &h4 51 d6! 
is unclear) with the ideas of .. &f6+ and ...f4- 
f3.
49....l:!.xa7?! (2)
304

Adult Games
Another error: only 49.Se7+! 50 'id 4 
.l:.xa7 
would 
have 
retained 
winning 
chances, although after 51 <;t>c5! i.b 7  52 
Sf8+ 'it'g7 53 Sf5 'ih 6  54 <;t>b6 :la 4  55 'it>xb7 
Bb4+ 56 'it'c6 l:.xc4+ 57 <;t>d7 it is possible 
that White's activity is sufficient for a draw.
50 IfB +  'it>g7 (50. ..'ie7 51 Sf5 with a draw)
51 Sc8?
It 
was 
essential 
to 
play 
51 
Be8! 
(threatening 'if5 ) 51. .'if7  52 Sb8! with a 
positional draw. But by now I was in a 
complete stupor...
51. ..'it>f6? (a comedy of errors: in his second 
time-trouble Black misses 51...i.b7!) 52 
IfB+  'it'g7 53 .UcB? (53 Se8!) 53....ib7!
Now White is finally lost.
54 Sc7+ (54 Sb8 ..ia6!) 54...'it>f6 55 'it>d4 
i.h 4! 56 d6 (6) 56.....if2+ (3)
Or 56. ..f3!?. Time-trouble was over and 
the third time control began.
57 'it'c3 i.e4! (29)
Of course, not 57- .. 'ie5? 58 d7 ..ie1+ 59 
'i!tb3 i.h 4  60 g5! Ix g 5  61 lic5+ ®d6 62 
Bxg5 'ixd7 63 1ig7+ with a draw.
58 ::e7 (18)
58 i.b5 Bb7! or 58 g5+ 'ixg5 59 d7 Sa8 
60 Bc8 ..ib6 was also bad for White.
SS. .Jb e 7  59 gS+ 'ig6 60 dxe7 .ic6  61 'it>b4 
; b6 (21) 62 .ib3 (62 £.b5 ? xb5 63 'it>xb5 
'it'f7! and wins) 62 ....id7 (6)
The final trap: 62 ...f3? 63 i.d 5 with a 
draw.
63 .id s (3) 63....ie8 64 .ic4  f3 65 .id3+ 
'it>xgS 66 .ib s f2 0-1
Times: 345-405.
The calm and enterprising way in which 
5passky fought on in a hopeless position 
made a great impression on me. Despite 
some time-trouble errors, he splendidly 
exploited the tactical chances that arose 
and subtly sensed the psychological nu­
ances of the struggle. He outplayed me, in 
particular, psychologically. In such an ugly 
position another player would simply have 
lost heart, but 5passky fought on to the 
bitter end under the motto: 'He is young 
and hot-tempered - this may tell at some 
point.' And that is what happened.
Two successive defeats were a heavy 
blow: such a thing had not happened to me 
for a long time! The next day I had Black 
against Robert Hubner, a finalist in the 
previous Candidates cycle. And, pulling 
myself together, I made every effort to 
retain my composure and not lose my 
optimism.
Game 59 
R.Hi.ibner-G.Kasparov
Tilburg, 6th round, 8.10.1981 
English Opening A30
1 C4 (Hubner's usual move) 1...lt:Jf6 2 l"Llc3 c5 
3 l"Llf3 (if 3 g3 e6 4 ..ig2, then 4...d5 is good) 
3 ...e6 4 g3 b6 5 .ig2 .ib7 6 0-0 .ie 7  7 d4
7 
l:.e1 is more cunning, whereas 7 b3 is 
guileless (Game Nos. 49, 55).
7 ...cxd4 8 Wxd4 d6!
This was one of my first experiences of 
employing the 'hedgehog' set-up at world 
level. I liked the flexibility of Black's posi­
305

Garry Kasparov on Garry Kasparov: Part One
tion; he can manoeuvre for a long time, 
awaiting the moment for ...b6-b5 or ...d6- 
d5. At that time there were not yet any 
clear prescriptions, and Hubner decided to 
play the opening in the waiting manner of 
Uhlmann - the main expert on this set-up 
for White.
9 b3
The immediate 9 e4 is also played: 9...0-0 
(or 9...a6) 10 'iVe3 tt:lbd7 11 tt:ld4 Se 8i? 12 b3 
d5! (an idea of Gelfand). An alternative is 9 
Bd1 a6! 10 b3 tt:lbd7 11 ..tb2 (11 e4i? "ib 8 - 
Game No.7 in Revolution in the 70s) 11 ...0-0
12 h3 W/c7 13 e4 .l:!.ad8 14 .l:!.ac1 B fe 8 (Ren- 
man-Kasparov, 5kara 1980) or 9 ..tg5 a6 10 
..txf6 ..txf6 11 'i:Vf4 0-0 (Karpov-Kasparov, 
Moscow 1981; Game No.3 in Kasparov vs. 
Karpov 1975-1985), in both cases with 
roughly equal chances.
9...0-0 10 e4 (4)
The direct 10 ..ta3 does not achieve its 
aim in view of 10...tt:la6! (Game No.5 in 
Revolution in the 70s).
10...tt:lbd7 (2) 11 "ie3 a6 (2) 12 tt:ld4 (2)
A more accurate interpretation of Uhl- 
mann's plan than 12 ..tb2 'iVc7 13 .l:!.fd1 
.l:!.ac8 14 .l:!.ac1 'iWb8 15 tt:ld4 .l:!.fe8 16 h3 ..tf8 
17 f4? e5! 18 tt:lf5 d5! 19 fxe5 ..tc5 20 tt:ld4 
(Cserna-Portisch, Budapest 1975) 20...#xe5! 
etc.
12. ..Wc7 13 ..tb2
After 13 ..ta3 l:tfe8! 14 h3 ..tf8 15 l:.fe1 
Sad8 16 Sad1 tt:lc5 17 f3 (17 f4 e5!) 17...g6!
18 g4 ..tg7 19 ..tb2 ..ta 8 20l:.e2 h6 21 Sde1 
^ 8  22 # d 2?! e5! 23 tt:Jc2 b5! 24 cxb5?! (24 
tt:le3 is better) 24...d5! the 'hedgehog' bris­
tles with all is spines (Uhlmann-Bonsch, 
Halle 1976).
13....1:!.fe8! 14 h3 (3)
Useful prophylaxis, although the imme­
diate 14 .l:!.fe1 is also possible, with the 
same idea of l:.e2 and #d2-e1. Another of 
Uhlmann's ideas - 14 'it>h1 ..tf8 15 f4 leads 
after 15 ...g6! 16 l:tae1 ..tg7 to double-edged 
play.
14.....tf8! (2)
With the intention of ...g7-g6 and .....tg7. 
This is more harmonious than 14....l:!.ad8 15 
Bfe1 #b8 16 Be2 h6 17 l:tae1 tt:lh7 
(Uhlmann-Kuligowski, 
East 
Germany v. 
Poland 1981).
15 l:.fe1 (2)
15 
f4?! again runs into 15...e5! 16 tt:lf5 
d5!. ‘However, here it is not all so simple: 17 
fxe5 ..tc5 18 tt:ld4 W/xe5 19 tt:lxd5 ..txd5 20 
cxd5 tt:lxd5 21 W/f2 tt:l5f6 22 Sad1, main­
taining the balance.' (5hipov)
Black also has a good game after 15 Bae1 
tt:lc5 16 'it>h2 l:.ad8! 17 l:.e2 g6 18 tt:lc2 ..tg7
19 ..ta1 d5! 20 e5 tt:lfd7 21 cxd5 (21 f4 dxc4)
306

Adult Games
21...tLlxe5 22 f4 exd5! 23 fxe5 d4! 24 tLlxd4 
Sxe5 2 5 '*'f2 tLld3 (Uhlmann-Gheorghiu, 
Manila Interzonal 1976).
15...5ad8 (8)
Clearly hinting at the ...d6-d5 break­
through. 15 ...Sac8 16 Se 2 ^ 8  is also 
acceptable, for example: 
17 'id 2  tLlc5 
(17.i/Ua8! with the idea of ...d6-d5 is more 
accurate) 18 d.d1 '*'a8 19 ife1! (Uhlmann- 
Vaisser, Berlin 1982), or 17 Sd1 #a8! 18 
#d2 'i'b8?! (18. ..d5! would have equalised)
19 &a1 i.a 8  20 'ife1! (Uhlmann-Ermenkov, 
Berlin 1982), in both cases with some 
advantage to White.
16 l e 2 (5)
After 16 Sad1 g6 White has the good re­
grouping 17 'i'c1 'tlfb8 18 #a1! ; g7 19 
tLlc2! &a8 20 Se2 and lLle3 (Uhlmann- 
Vilela, Halle 1981), but 16...'tlfb8! is more 
subtle: 17 #c1 (17 Se2!?) 17...4:Jc5 and 
...#a8, pressing on the e4-pawn (Uhlmann- 
Akesson, Polanica Zdroj 1981).
16...g6 
(10)
Later 
Dizdarevic 
and 
BOnsch 
tried
16...#b8!? and ... iL.a8 against Uhlmann.
17 Hae1 (5)
It was still possible to play 17 Hd1 
(Uhlmann-Petran, Budapest 1982) or 17 
#d2, in order to hide the queen at e1.
17. ..'i'b8 (4) 18 'i'd2 (16) 18. ..&g7 (10)
18. 
...tLlc5 19 'id 1 #a8 is also quite good, 
for example: 20 tLlc2 &g7 21 &a1 h5!? 22 
b4 tLlcd7 23 #xd6 h4! with lively counter­
play (Uhlmann-Adorjan, Budapest 1982). At 
any event, the outcome of the opening is 
very favourable for Black.
19 'id 1 (10) 19...tLlcS (9)
'Everything is ready for the break­
through. But without the help of the oppo­
nent it is not easy to carry it out. Any at­
tempt by White to play for a win will pro­
vide this help!' (Shipov)
20 i.c1?! (3)
With the dubious idea of provoking the 
weakening ...h7-h6. 20 ^ 1  or 20 l:f.d2 was 
sounder. If White 'stands still', it will be 
hard for Black to break through. But who 
has the courage to 'stand still' for the entire 
game?! It seems to me that Hubner was 
playing in a rather carefree manner, as­
suming that he could do anything he 
wanted within his own territory. He was 
probably counting on my depressed state 
and waiting for me to 'twitch' somewhere.
20...Sc8! (8)
Exploiting the fact that the knight at c3 
is undefended, Black intensifies the threat 
of ... b6-b5 or ...d6-d5.
21 ,&g5 (2) 21. ..h6 (6) 22 i.c1l:ted8!
Again eying the white queen from afar
307

Garry Kasparov on Garry Kasparov: Part One
and, in anticipation of ...d6-d5, moving 
away from the X-ray of the white rooks on 
the e-file.
23 ..ib2
An inglorious return home: as a result of 
this loss of time the black rooks have taken 
up their optimal positions at c8 and d8, 
whereas White's are firing into thin air. In 
the event of 23 Sd2 'ia 8  Black would have 
advantageously maintained the tension 
and the threat of ...d6-d5.
23. ..bsl? (15)
I think that this spectacular move and 
the next one came as an unpleasant sur­
prise to Hubner.
The immediate blow in the centre sug­
gested itself - 23 ...d5!, when 24 e5?! dxc4
25 .i. xb7 iVxb7 26 bxc4 (26 exf6? ..ixf6 27 
lLle4 t2lxe4 28 l:i.xe4 c3! and wins) 26. ..ttJfd7
27 f4 lLlb8! and ...lLlc6 is to Black's advan­
tage. But I was afraid (wrongly, apparently) 
of the drawing tendencies in the variation
24 exd5 exd5 25 cxd5 t2lxd5 26 t2lxd5 ..txd5, 
for example:
a) 27 ..ixd5 l:i.xd5 28 b4 "id6! (28...lLle6 29 
.l:!.xe6! fxe6 30 Sxe6 is equal) 29 bxc5 bxc5 
30 # c 1 ..ixd4 31 ..txd4 Sxd4 32 #xh6 l:tdl 
and ...c5-c4 with some advantage;
b) 27 J:d2 kxg2 28 Wxg2 'iVh7+ 29 'iff3 
(29 'lt>h2 l:.d6!) 29...'iVxf3+ 30 Wxf3 Sd6!
(30. ..f5!? and ...lLle4) 31 J:ed1 Scd8, and in 
view of the pin on the d-file White would 
still have had to fight for a draw.
However, I decided to strike a different, 
rather daring blow, but one which sharply 
changed the character of the play. My 
opponent became unsettled and within a 
few moves he began to 'flounder'!
24 cxbs (2)
24. ..ds! (only now!) 25 exds (17)
The complications begin. It is unfavour­
able for White to play 25 bxa6? ..txa6 26 
l:td2 dxe4 or 25 e5?! l2Jfe4, when he loses his 
e5-pawn.
2S ...l2JxdS 26 l2JxdS jL,xdS
Black's counterplay is based on the oppo­
sition of rook and queen on the d-file: ... e6- 
e5 is a constant threat.
27 b4l (2)
For the moment Hubner is equal to the 
occasion. True, 27 ..ixd5 Sxd5 28 b4l2Jd7 29 
ila1! was also suitable, eliminating the pin 
on the knight: 29. ..l2Je5! (29 ...axb5? 30 
l2Jxe6! and wins) 30 l2Jc6! l2Jf3+ 31 W fl 
i.xb2 32 'ik'xb2 'iVd6 33 "if6 2xc6! 34 bxc6 
l2Jxe1 35 .l:!.xe6! fxe6 36 #xg6+ Wf8 37 #f6+ 
'lt>e8 38 c7! with an elegant draw.
27... kxg2 (3) 28 Wxg2 es!
But not 28. ..'ia8+ 29 'ih 2  e5 in view of 
30 l:txe5! kxe5 31 l:i.xe5 l2Je6 32 Sxe6! fxe6
308

Adult Games
33 1\Vg4 'ith7 34 tt:xe6 with full compensa­
tion for the two exchanges.
29 bxcs (5) 29...exd4
And in this double-edged position Hub­
ner stopped to think...
30 l:!.d2?! (21)
An important moment: White goes on to 
the defensive! In Informator I suggested 30 
1\Vd3 (30 bxa6?! d3!) 30. ..axb5 31 S c 2 with 
an 'equality' evaluation, but after 31..'ifa7! 
(this is stronger than 31. . .# a 8+ and ...# xa2)
32 c6 (32 'iVxb5? d3!) 32...#xa2 Black never­
theless has the better chances.
The correct decision was the active 30 
.l:i.e7 !, since the reply which I recommended 
a quarter of a century ago - 30. . .1:!.xc5 31 
1\Vb3 l:!.f8?! (I should add 31...#a8+ 32 l:!.1e4! 
S f8 33 bxa6) 32 bxa6 S b 5 does not work on 
account of 33 'i'f3! Sxb 2 34 a7 'id 8 35 
fle8!, and the a-pawn queens (to see this at 
the board was not easy!). And if 30 ...axb5 or
30 ...1\Vxb5 there is the good reply 31 ^ f3. 
Therefore Black should include 30...#a8+!, 
although after 31 '>t>gl! (31 S le 4? ..if6; 31 
11Vf3 1\Vxf3+ 32 'it>xf3 axb5 or 31 c6 axb5 32 
l:!.b7 l:!.xc6 33 2ee7 # x a 2 34 Sxf7 #d5+ 35 
<;t>g1 'ixf7  36 l:!.xf7 'it'xf7 is also dangerous 
for White) 31...Sxc5 32 ^ 3  S f8 33 bxa6 
1\Vxa6 34 l1b7 or 31...axb5 32 'i+ib3 S f 8 33 
..ia3 (33 S 1e6 is parried by 33. ..Bce8 or
33 ...fixc5 34 fixg6 'ir'd5) White does not 
have even a hint of any problems.
30..l:i.xcs (10) 31 bxa6 (not 31 ..txd4? 'ir'a8+ 
and ....l':f.cd5) 31...^a8+ 32 'i¥f3 (10)
32 
<;t>h2 ?! 1\Yxa6 33 ; xd4? is not possible 
on account of 33 . ..Scd5 34 ..ie3 .Uxd2 35 
..ixd2 # d 3(d6) with a fatal pin on the d-file.
32. ..1\Vxa6
Now it is not easy for White to combat 
the passed d4-pawn - under its cover Black 
can attack the queen, aiming to seize 
control of the a8-h1 diagonal. But for the 
moment his threats do not look so terrible.
33 l:!.edl (6)
Shipov recommended 33 Se4, 'in order if 
possible to eliminate the powerful pawn at 
the cost of the exchange: 33. ..'iVa8 34 
i.xd4!? Scd5 35 ..txg7 14.xd2 36 i.x h 6 with 
an almost drawn position.'
33...l:!.f5 (8) 34 'i'e4 'i'a4! 35 a3 (35 ..ixd4? 
l:!.fd5! and wins) 3S ...14.e8?1 (14)
A time-trouble error. 35 ...h5 or 35 ...Sc5 
was stronger.
3611Vb7 k!d8! (14)
Reverting to the correct plan. If 36.J:e2?! 
there was the reply 37 l:x e 2 'ir'xd1 38 'ir'c8+ 
'it>h7 39 'ili'c2! with equality.
37l:i.d3?! (2)
Not the best move. 37 'Yi'e4 or 37 <;t>g1 
was more solid.
309

Garry Kasparov on Garry Kasparov: Part One
37...hs! (an unpleasant rejoinder: it is hard 
to find the correct defence straight away)
38 .l:hd2?! (again it was better to play 38 
'it>g1 #e8! etc.) 38...We8! (2)
With the threat of ...Hb8. Somehow im­
perceptibly White has ended up in a diffi­
cult position.
39 'it>f1? (12)
Not wishing to conduct a cheerless de­
fence the exchange down after 39 ..txd4 
.l:fd5, Hubner commits a fatal error. 39 'ih2 
was more resilient (but not 39 'fic7? .Uc8!), 
after which I was planning 39... h4!.
39....1.!.b8 (3) 40 W/c7
If 40 #g2 Black would have won by
40.. 
,#c8! with the threat of ...Sxb2.
40....1:!.xb2! (2)
A decisive combinative stroke on the last 
move before the time control (I still had 
about eight minutes left).
41 fixb2 WUe4 42 "ic4 (here the game was 
adjourned and then resumed that same 
evening, a couple of hours later) 42. .JlVh1+ 
(8) The sealed move.
43 c;t.e2 "ig1 (43 ...lae5+! 44 'id2 fie6(e1) 
was simpler, but the move in the game is 
also good) 44 JabS+ Wh7 45 f4h4! 46 .l:!.bs 
Or 46 fibb3 Hf6!, and soon the curtain 
comes down.
46....1:!.xbs (3) 47 'itxb5 hxg3 48 'ig s i¥f2+
49 
Wd1 "if1+ 0-1
In view of 50 Wc2 #e2+ 51 fid2 d3+ or 50 
c;t.d2 g2 51 .l:.!.g3 ..th6!. Times: 2.32-2.42.
After this good win I gained heart. I was 
on 3 out of 6 - just one point less than the 
leading quintet!
Against one of these, ex-world champion 
Tigran Petrosian, I had White in the next 
round - and, naturally, I wanted to gain 
revenge for the vexing loss in Moscow in 
April. But again I ran into an amazing 
defence by ‘Iron Tigran'.
Game 60 
G.Kasparov-T.Petrosian
Tilburg, 7th round, 10 .10 .1981 
Queen's Gambit Accepted 022
1 d4 ds 2 c4 dxc4 3 '2lf3 lt:lf6 4 e3 iL.g4 (2) 5 
±xc4 e6 6 h3 (4) 6 .....th5 7 ctJc3 (2)
If 7 ' i 3 ,  then 7... 'sxf3 8 gxf3 lt:lbd7 
(Szabo-Larsen, Portoroz Interzonal 1958), 
obtaining reasonable compensation for the 
pawn after 9 'Yi'xb7 c5 (the same is played 
after 6 'ib3). Black's successes in this direc­
tion raised the stock of the moves 3 e4 and
3 e3 (insteadof 3 ctJf3).
7...a6 (3) 8 g4 (5) 8.....tg6 9 '2les
310

Adult Games
The comparatively rare variation chosen 
by my opponent came as something of a 
surprise to me - however, a pleasant one: I 
though that White's advantage in space 
would give me chances of an attack.
9 ...CtJbd7 (4) 10 4Jxg6 hxg6 11 .if1 ! (9)
11 
g5 is harmless: 11. ..4Jd5 12 tt:Jxd5 
exd5 13 ..ixd5 c6 14 &b3 (14 &c4 is more 
accurate) 14. ..'i'xg5 15 'ilff3 4Jf6 (Petrosian- 
Ivkov, Hamburg 1965) or 15....ib4+ and 
.. .'if5 (Petrosian-Djindjihashvili, Olympiad, 
Buenos Aires 1978). When I made the 
'reverse' move with my bishop and stood 
up from the board, Spassky approvingly 
slapped me on the shoulder: a good ma­
noeuvre!
11...c6 (5) 12 .Jig2 'ic7  13 0-0 iie7 (4) 14 f4 
(4) 14...4Jb6 (3) 15 g5 (9)
15 a4 also came into consideration.
15...etJfd7 (15...li:Jfd5?! 16 e4 li:Jxc3 17 bxc3 is 
inferior) 16 'ilfg4 (10) 16...0-0-0 (3)
In search of counterplay Black must cas­
tle queenside: if 16. ..0-0?, then 17 h4! and 
h4-h5.
17 ! b !  (12) 17...'1t>bS (20) 18 b4 (5) 1S...lt:Jd5
19 lt:Ja4!? (instead of the quiet 19 lt:Jxd5)
19 
...f5! (7)
Again a surprise: when I sacrificed the 
pawn I was hoping for 19..lt:Jxb4? 20 .Jid2 
li:Jd5 21 e4, when White's attack develops
without any particular interference - even 
after the best 21 ...f5 (Petrosian) 22 gxf6 
lt:J5xf6 23 #xe6 lt:Jc5 24 lbxc5 &xc5 25 dxc5 
Itxd2 26 e5 lLld5 27 'i!Nxg6.
20 % 3 !?  (8)
Insisting on the pawn sacrifice, although 
now it is far more risky! The double-edged
20 gxf6 gxf6 21 iixe6 2de8! was also 
unclear (Petrosian). I had to accept the 
appearance of an 'eternal' knight on d5.
20...lt:Jxb4 (10) 21 i.d2 lbd5 22 l:;tfc1 (2)
The pressure on the open b- and c-files 
allows White to look to the future with 
optimism, and for the moment, on a board 
full of pieces, Black's extra pawn is hardly 
felt.
22 ... 4>a7 (5) 23 We1 (4) 23 ... &a3!? (14) 24 
.l:c2 (12) 24...'id6 25 l:Ib3 (2) 25...'ie7 (4) 26
'ie 2 (9)
Serious consideration should have been 
given to the immediate 26 li:Jb2!? i.xb2 27 
.l:tcxb2 .l:b8 28 e4 fxe4 29 'iVxe4, maintain­
ing the dynamic balance.
26....l:b8 (5)
In Petrosian's opinion, 26. ..Ba8!? was 
more accurate, with the same idea of 
...:!.hc8 and ...b7-b5.
27 'id3 ii.d6 (2)
If 27..lt:Jb4 28 .Jixb4 .Jixb4 there is an un­
pleasant piece sacrifice - 29 &xc6! bxc6 30
311

Garry Kasparov on Garry Kasparov: Part One
flxc6l:!.b5 31 a3! lt:Jb8 32 S c 2! ) d6 33 l:txb5 
axb5 34lt:Jc3 with a powerful attack.
28 lt:Jb2! (2) 28. ..Hhc8 29 l2lc4 i.c7?! (5)
It would appear that my highly experi­
enced opponent overestimated the sound­
ness of his position. After 29...lt:J7b6! (im­
mediately clarifying the intentions of the 
knight on c4) nothing definitely advanta­
geous for White is apparent.
30 a4!
Here I was already anticipating placing 
my pawn on a5, then playing Scb2 and 
'i¥bl - and gaining a convincing victory! For 
example: 30...Sh8?! 31 a5! 4a8 32 Scb2! 
'if8  33 'iVbl! 'ic8  34 &b4! lt:Jxb4 35 l:Ixb4 
4a7 36 lt:Jb6 .i.xb6 37 axb6+ 4a8 38 Sa4 
and wins. And indeed, it is not clear what 
Black can do.
30...b5?!
This move staggered me. It looks like a 
gesture of despair - after the natural
30 ...lt:J7b6 31 lZ:la5 the first impression is 
that White's threats snowball: 31....i.d8 
(31. ...i.d6? 32 Scb2) 32 i.f l!  'jVd7 (32 ...fia8?
33 l2lxb7! 4xb7 34 a5 is bad for Black, while 
after 32. ..c5 33 dxc5 ltxc5 both 34 Scb2 and
34 l2lc6+!? Bxc6 35 Sxc6 4a8 36 Sc2 lt:Jxa4
37 l:tb1 are tempting) 33 Scb2 c5 34 dxc5 
flxc5 35 lt:Jxb7!? (35 #d4!?) 35 ..Jxb 7  36 a5 
with an attack, although after 36. ..flb5 37
l:txb5 (37 'id 4  Sxb3 
38 Sxb3 'ifc6!)
37. . .axb5 38 #d4 b4 39 axb6+ .i.xb6 40 
l:ta2+ 'lt>b8 41 'ie5+ Sc7! 42 i.g2 j_c5 43 
fia6 'it>c8! (with the idea of 44 Sxe6?! lt:Je7!) 
or 38 axb6+ .ixb6 39 'i'a3+ 4b 8 40 j_xb5 
#e7(c7) Black retains drawing chances.
31 axb5 (3) 31...cxb5 (3) 32 S a 2! (3)
A strong rejoinder: first and foremost 33 
l:tba3 is threatened, but that is not all. It 
appears that the collapse of Black's de­
fences is now imminent. I remember that I 
was very proud of my position and I 
thought that the game was already over.
32...'1t>b7?l (10)
But this move staggered me even more: 
can such play really go unpunished?! It 
appeared that the opponent was obliged to 
go in for the variation 32...i.d6 (32...bxc4? 
33 l:txa6+!; 32. ..j_xf4? 33 l2la3!) 33 Sxb5 
Sxb5 34 lt:Jxd6 #xd6 35 'ixb5 Sc2! 36 ^ 3  
l:txa2 37 'ixa2  lt:J7b6 38 j_ fl l:ilc7 with 
chances of a defence, although the long- 
range bishops would have left White with 
an enduring advantage. Sensing that the 
win was somewhere near at hand, I began 
to grow nervous.
33 .i.b4? (6)
Strangely enough, this natural move, 
building up the pressure, is a serious mis­
take. I underestimated the opponent's
312

Adult Games
defensive potential! White should not be 
circumventing, but attacking Black's fortifi­
cations - at a6, b5 and d5.
Firstly, this aim would have been served 
by the knight manoeuvre c4-a3-c2-b4. I 
discovered the grandiose move 33 Cba3! 
immediately after the 
game. 
Thus 
if
33...'i!Ve8 there is the very strong 34 Cbxb5! 
axb5 35 'il!Vxb5+ ..ib6 36 1!a6! 'i;c7 37 ..ia5! 
'id8 38 ..ixd5 exd5 39 #xd5 etc.
In my book The Test of Time (1986) I gave
33. ...ib6 34 Cbc2! Sa8 35 t'Llb4 'Wd6 36 e4(?) 
fxe4 37 'iYxe4 as the main variation, over­
looking the spectacular refutation, later 
pointed out by Timman: 36 ...t'Llc5!! 37 dxc5 
'i!Vxc5+ 38 'ih 2  'i'g1+ 39 'i;g3 #f2+ (39 . ..Sh8
40 ii.e3!) 40 'ih2 'i¥g1+ with perpetual 
check.
Even so, with the computer's help I was 
able to find the accurate 36 l:tbl! lLlb8 
(36. ..Sc4? 37 'i'a3!) 37 'ifh3 Sc4 (or 37 ...Sd8 
38 l:f.cl) 38 S c l! S xc l 39 ..ix cl t'Llc6 40 t'Llxd5 
exd5 41 ..ixd5 and wins.
The same computer 'friend' brought 
some 'joy' in another direction. In that book 
I stated that after 33 t'Lla3! the reply
33 ...t'Llb6 would lose to 34 t'Llxb5 axb5 35 
'i!Vxb5 l'1d8 (35. ..!Ia8?? 36 'i'xd5+, and mate)
36 .:..b4! 'ie 8  (36...'i'f7 37 ..ic5) 37 'ir'a6+ 
'ic6 38 ..ic5 'it>d7 (38...!Ia8 39 flxb6+) 39 
..ifl!. However, it transpired that 35. ...l:h8! 
is more resilient - here White still has to 
display exceptional ingenuity in attack: 36 
..ib4! 'i'e8 37 ^a6+ 'i;c6 38 ..ifl! t'Llxb4 39 
Sxb4 'i'd8 (39. ..\to>d6 40 Wia3! or 39..'ife7 40 
..ib5+ 'id5 41 "i¥a3! is also bad for Black) 40 
ft5 +  'id 6  41 'i'e5+ 'it>e7 42 'Wxg7+ 'it>d6 43 
'iVe5+ 'ie7 44 Sa7 and wins.
Secondly, after the publication of Vol­
ume Ill of My Great Predecessors (2004), 
where this game was published with the 
majority of the variations given above, I 
saw that the 'interesting' move 33 ^ l ! ,
which supposedly 'would not have solved 
the problems facing White', would in fact 
also have given an irresistible attack: after
33 ...Se8 or 33 ...Sh8 (33. ...ld8?! 34 Sxb5+!) 
the patient move 34 l:tc2! is very strong, 
with the threats of t'Lla5+, ..ib4 and Sxb5+ 
(and if 34...'>t>a7, then first 35 'i'al!).
Thus, to find clear ways leading to a win 
for White, many years and many megahertz 
of computer power were required. But at 
the board, not suspecting any dangers, I 
continued simply building up the pressure. 
Such a general approach does not always 
prove correct, as I came to realise within 
literally a couple of moves.
33. 
.. 'i!Ve8l (3)
From here the queen indirectly defends 
the b5-pawn. 33...'Wd8? was much weaker 
in view of 34 e4! fxe4 (34 .t'Llxb4 35 Bxb4 
and wins) 35 'i'xe4, when Black is lost:
35 . ..'iYe8 36 't\Vxd5+! exd5 37 ..ixd5+ ctJa7 38 
fixa6+! 'it>xa6 39 Sa3+ ..ia5 40 Sxa5 mate, 
or 35...bxc4 36 #xe6 t'Ll7b6 37 !l.ba3! also 
with a mating attack.
34 ..td6?! (3)
34 
..ia5 'i'e7! was also no use, and nei­
ther was Petrosian's recommendation 34 
t'Lld6+ ..ixd6 35 ..ixd6 Sa8 36 e4, in view of
36 ...fxe4 37 ..ixe4 i:c6 with double-edged 
play. But the cool-headed 34 ..ia3! Sa8 35
313

Garry Kasparov on Garry Kasparov: Part One
l:.b1 with the idea of 'iVb3 would have left 
White with much the better chances.
34...fia8l (5) 35 "ib1?! (9)
White again plays on general grounds, 
hoping that an opportunity for him to land 
some combinative blow will present itself. 
After the 'concrete' 35 e4 fxe4 36 'i!Vxe4 Wf7 
Black, with his powerful knight on d5, could 
have felt quite calm. He would also have 
had a comfortable game after 35 S b l ..tb6!
36 CZJe5 CZJxe5 37 ..txe5 'iVd7. But with the 
retreat 34 ..ta3! White would still have 
retained reasonable compensation for the 
pawn.
3s. ..'it>c6!!
A fantastic defence! This move, which 
Petrosian made instantly, threw me into 
complete confusion: how is it possible to 
move the king forward with a board full of 
pieces?! Who, after Steinitz, had done such 
a thing?! The psychological effect of the
30...b5?! thrust and the king march ...ctJa7- 
b7-c6 was so strong, that I was unable to 
gather my thoughts, failed to find a draw­
ing combination, and lost quickly...
36 Sba3? (7)
It was essential to play 36 L xo ! bxc4 
(36 . ..'it>xO 37 ctJb2 'it>d8 38 ctJd3 with com­
pensation for the pawn) 37 Sb7! (the over- 
optimistic 37 il.a5?! cxb3 38 'iVxb3 Sab8 39
flc2+ is refuted by 39. . .CZJc5! 40 l!xc5+ 'it>d7)
37 ...Sxc7 38 l!xa6+ l!xa6 39 'iVb5+ 'id 6 40 
..Wxa6+ 'it'e7! 41 ..txd5 Sxb7 42 i.xb7 (not
42 Wxe6+? \t>d8) 42...iih8! with a draw.
36...bxc4 37 Sxa6+ Sxa6 38 Sxa6+ ii.b6 39
..tcs (39 ^ 4  \t>b7 40 Sa2 c3!) 39...®d8! 40 
'.Wal (4)
If 40 l'iVb4, then 40...\t>b7! - this move 
both suggests itself, and is the only one to 
win (40...Sa8?? 41 ii.e7!! and White wins).
40...CZJxcs 41 dxcs 'ix c s 42 Sa4
And White resigned (0-1). In analysis af­
ter the game it was noticeable how much 
more deeply my opponent had evaluated 
the positions that arose. Times: 2.29-2.29.
Following the one in Moscow (Game 
No.52), this was another unforgettable 
lesson! The games with Petrosian broad­
ened my understanding of chess. Had it not 
been for these defeats. I would possibly not 
have reached the top in chess. I saw how 
many latent defensive possibilities are 
often concealed in cramped positions!
After this dramatic duel I again sank to 
'minus one' and lost my last chances of 
success in the tournament. The race was 
led by Petrosian, Timman and Beliavsky on
5 out of 7, followed by Andersson (4/ 2) and 
Portisch (4).
314

Adult Games
Now I had to try and extricate myself 
from a minus score, since my store of 
energy and my eagerness for a fight had 
not yet disappeared. And my next oppo­
nent, the outstanding master of defence Ulf 
Andersson, was very unlucky: that day I 
managed in one game to concentrate my 
entire offensive power.
Game 61 
G.Kasparov-U.Andersson
Tilburg, 8th round, 11 .10 .19 81 
Queen's Indian Defence E12
1 d4 
2 c4 e6 3 tZ:lf3 b6 4 a3 i.b7 (4...c5 -
Game Nos. 32, 68) 5 4Jc3 tt:Je4 (6)
At that time this was the Swedish 
grandmaster's favourite reply to the 4 a3 
variation. In my opinion, the usual 5 ... d5 is 
more promising (Game Nos. 43, 52, 73, 75, 
85, 98).
6 tt:Jxe4 i.xe 4  7 tZ:ld2!?
An ambitious continuation. I had also 
analysed 7 e3 with the idea of 7 ...c5 8 ^d3 
i.xd3 9 'i'xd3 cxd4 10 exd4 d5 11 i.g5 ^e7
12 i.xe7 'ilxe7 13 0-0, when White has the 
better prospects. But Ulf used to defend 
with 7...i.e7 8 ^d3 ^xd3 9 i¥xd3 d5, and I 
wanted something more.
7 ... .-s g6?! ( 17)
A new move, but hardly a good one. If
7 . .. .&b7 Black was probably afraid of the 
advance 8 e4, but after 8 ...'t'-H6 9 d5 (only 
not 9 e5?! 'ig6 10 4Jf3 f6) 9 ... ..Qd6 10 .id3 
tt:Ja6 11 0-0 lt:lc5 12 i.c 2 0-0 13 Sb1 a5 14 
lZ:lf3 White's advantage is comparatively 
slight.
8 g3! (10)
An immediate change of plan: if the 
black bishop has moved off the long diago­
nal, why not occupy it with the white 
bishop?
8... 4Jc6 (5)
'The same fanciful course', I wrote in The 
Test of Time, where I recommended the 
'normal' 8...c6 9 jl_g2 d5 (strangely enough, 
in the game Black only plays ...d7-d5 just 
before he resigns), which is the event of 10 
0-0 ^e7 11 e4 ‘would merely have given 
White slightly the better chances'. But 10 
e4! ^e7 11 h4! is more vigorous, with an 
unpleasant initiative (for example, 11 ...h6
12 h5 ^ h 7 13 exd5 exd5 14 cxd5 cxd5 15 
#b3, etc.).
In fact, Ulf adopted a practical approach: 
he thought that Black had time for a series 
of unhurried positional moves, creating 
long-term preconditions for counterplay. 
From this point of view, 8...lt:lc6 suggests 
itself.
9 e3 a6?! (5)
Black concedes space after 9 ...e5 10 d5 
(Psakhis-Gurgenidze, 52nd USSR Champi­
onship, Riga 1985) or 9.a5 10 b3 e5 11 d5 
(Rustemov-Chernyshov, Elista 2001). Per­
haps he should have remembered about 
the development of his kingside - 9 . i.e7
10 ^g2 0-0, although after 11 b4 or 11 0-0 
a5 12 lZ:le4 and lZ:lc3 Black's position is 
unpromising. It was for this reason that 
Andersson began preparing an advance on 
the queenside.
315

Garry Kasparov on Garry Kasparov: Part One
10 b4! (6)
10 b3 was also not bad, but I decided to 
provoke my opponent into playing actively.
10...b5 (13)
Logical! 10. ....1id6 11 &g2 0-0 12 0-0 
would clearly have played into White's 
hands. But now it appears that Black has 
achieved some potential positional gains, 
which he may subsequently be able to 
exploit.
11 cxb5 (3)
After 11 &b2!? bxc4 12 ..lixc4 Black 
would also have faced an unpleasant 
defence.
U...axb5 12 ^b2
Consistent development with an attack- 
now &xb5 is threatened (12 &xb5? lt:Jxb4).
12...ctJa7?! (6)
12. 
.J:tb8 was better, although here too 
after 13 Sc1 White has an appreciable 
advantage. At this moment Ulf assessed his 
position optimistically: after the planned 
...d7-d5 Black will have nothing to fear. But
- to the end of the game he is not allowed 
any respite!
13 h4! (3)
The start of a ferocious assault. A weak­
ening of Black’s kingside must be provoked.
13...h6? (5)
An imperceptible but possibly already
decisive mistake: Black allows h4-h5, which 
later allows White to exploit the weakness 
of the g6-square.
Better defensive chances were offered by 
the seemingly risky 13...h5 - after 14 d5! 
(the same obstructive sacrifice as in the 
game) 14... exd5 15 ..lig2 c6 16 0-0 f6 17 Se1 
&e7 18 e4 dxe4 19 lt:Jxe4 0-0 20 g4!? 
(Crouch; after Stohl's move 20 lt:Jc5 there is 
the acceptable reply 20...^xc5 21 bxc5 ctJc8) 
or 19 &xe4!? White also has a dangerous 
attack, but Black can still resist.
14 d5! (6) 14...exd5 (11) 15 .Si.g2 c6 (14) 16 
0-0
This is the position for which White was 
aiming. The development of the black 
pieces has been retarded, and the threat of 
opening up the game by e3-e4 is essentially 
unavoidable: although 16...f5 parries this 
threat, after 17 lt:Jf3! the weaknesses in 
Black's position are irreparable.
16...f6 (6)
Andersson tries to castle artificially, but 
in so doing he catastrophically weakens the 
light squares.
17 Se1 (13)
The immediate 17 e4!? was more force­
ful, with the idea of 17. ..dxe4 18 #g4! 'it>f7 
(if 18 ...^f7(h7), then 19 lt:Jxe4! is strong) 19 
h5 i.h 7  20 .txe4 &xe4 21 lt:Jxe4 ..lie7 22
316

Adult Games
.i:!.fel! (Crouch), reaching a position from 
the game.
1 7 ..J e7?! (4)
This already loses by force. 17 ...'1t>f7?! was 
also insufficient in view of 18 e4 dxe4 19 
hS! (19 l2lxe4!?) 19... ..if5 20 ..ixe4 or 18 
^ 3 !?  ..te7 (18 ...f5 19 liJf3 - Crouch) 19 e4 
.i:!.e8 20 exd5 'it>f8 21 Sad1 (21 fie3i?) etc. 
After 17. ..fi.f7 18 e4 ..ie7 19 exd5 0-0 White 
would also have retained strong pressure 
(20 l2lb3 or 20 #g4), but now he breaks 
through on the decisive part of the battle­
field.
18 "ig4 'it>f7 19 h5 ..ih7 20 e4! dxe4 (2) 21
fi.xe4 (2) 21.....ixe4 (21...d5? 22 ..txh7 .l:!.xh7
23 liJf3 !) 22 l2lxe4
It only remains to play laad1, and White 
will fully mobilise his forces, whereas the 
black pieces continue to huddle together on 
the back two ranks. The outcome is decided.
22...tt:c8 (27)
The black king is not destined to find a 
secure shelter. If 22 ...Sf8 there is the imme­
diately decisive 23 :.ad1 d5 24 l2lxf6i, while 
if 22...Se8 - 23 "ig6+ 'it>f8 24 g4, and there 
is no defence against tt:g3-f5. Also bad is
22 ...d5 23 liJc5! (Stohl; 23 Sad1l? - Crouch)
23 ....txc5 24 'i'e(g)6+ 'it>f8 25 bxc5 with a 
mating attack.
23 J:i.ad1 .Ua7 (7)
23. 
. .^b6 would have created an opening 
for the murderous 24 liJd6+! or 24 Sd6!. 
Black has somehow defended his weak­
nesses, but with a simple combination 
White destroys the defensive fortifications.
24l2lxf6!! (6) 24. ..gxf6 (4)
24...i.xf6 would have lost immediately to
2 5 "ig6+ 'it>f8 26 fi.xf6 gxf6 27 Jae6i.
25 "ig6+ 'it>f8 26 ..tcl!?
Playing for mate, since 26 Sxe7 VJkxe7 27 
..txf6 'Wh7 28 i.xh 8  l\Yxg6 (28. ..iVxh8 29 
J:!.e1! l2le7 30 "id6 and wins) 29 hxg6 tt:e7
30 
i.d 4  and ..tc5 (Stohl) would have 
‘merely' led to a won endgame.
26. ..ds (7)
Alas, with a great delay. However, there 
is no choice: 26..."ie8 27 ..txh6+ Jaxh6 28 
'ixh6+ 'it>g8 29 lae4 f5 30 Jadd4! (a pretty 
rook sacrifice!) 30.. .fxe4 31 Sxe4, mating 
the bare king, or 28. ..'1t>f7 29 ifl7 +  'it>8 30 
h6 'i'f7 31 VJkf5! liJd6 32 'Wi'f4 (and if
32. ..liJe8, then 33 VJke3!, as specified by 
Stohl, while Crouch adds 33 ...lab7 34 'ixe7+ 
'it'xe7 35 l:Ixe7 'it>xe7 36 h7).
27 J:i.d4! (3)
The clearest way to win, along with 27 
Se4!. Black would still have had some 
chances after 27 ..txh6+ Sxh6 28 VJkxh6+ 
\t>g8! - 29 Sd4?! ..tf8! 30 Sg4+ Sg7, but 
here too he would not have held out after
317

Garry Kasparov on Garry Kasparov: Part One
29 i¥g6+! 4h8 (29. ..'.t>f8? 30 h6) 30 l:tc1! Sc7 
31.l:e6.
27...lt:Jd6 (27...f5 28 £xh6+) 28 .l:!.g4 (28 
^xh6+!) 
28...lt:Jf7 29 i.xh6+! 4e 8  (or
29.tt:Jxh6 30 'ifg7+ 4e8 31 'ilt'xh8+ 4d7 32 
'i\Vxh6) 30 i.g7
And with his flag about to fall, Black re­
signed (1-0): 30...Sg8 31 h6!. Times: 1.05­
2.28.
This game, which was judged to be the 
best in lnformator Volume 32, is dear to me 
for 
its 
harmony. 
Although 
outwardly 
strange, in essence it is absolutely harmo­
nious. White made seemingly ugly, chaotic 
moves - in particular with his pawns, but 
when, finally, his plan also became clear to 
the opponent, it transpired that all the 
white pieces joined in the play as if by 
schedule. The game breathes dynamism 
and is typical of my style at that time - 
unrestrained pressure on a solid positional 
basis; I played very quickly and made, as it 
later transpires, almost the ideal moves. For 
Andersson this crushing defeat remained a 
terrible reminder, and later he was no 
longer able to play normally against me.
In connection with this game, Petrosian 
commented: ‘Kasparov’s emergence on the 
international scene has made much the 
same impact as Karpov's emergence once 
did. Play based on general considerations 
does not usually work successfully against 
either of them... The ability to mobilise his 
reserve forces patiently before advancing 
them is one of the secrets of Kasparov's 
success... One can only admire the way that 
all his pieces, apart from  his king, take part 
in the attack, and at the same time the 
opponent has absolutely no opportunity to 
exchange even one of them.'
In the 9th round after a complicated bat­
tle I drew with Black against Ljubojevic. And
in the 10th round I faced at the board for 
the first time the legendary Bent Larsen. I 
had only 41/2 points out of 9, and I was 
burning with a desire to distinguish myself 
at least in some way, to move on to a plus 
score, and so I continued acting with de­
termination.
Game 62 
G. Kaspa rov- B.Larsen
Tilburg, 10th round, 13.10.1981 
Old Indian Defence A54
1 d4 ti:Jf6 2 c4 d6 3 lt:Jc3 eS 4 ti:Jf3 (8)
4...ti:bd7 5 £g5 (2)
In Bugojno 1982 against Larsen I chose 
the main plan with 5 e4 and ^e2. But here, 
on encountering this rare set-up for only 
the second time in my life, I played as I had 
against Morovic (Cagnes-sur-Mer 1977). 
5-..^e7 6 e3 0-0 7 'Yi'c2 (7 ^e2 c6 8 0-0 ti:Je8! 
with equality) 7...c6 8 : d3 h6 (4) 9 h4!? (5)
Against Morovic I played more simply - 9 
' h4, after which, incidentally, 9 ..ti:Jh5! 10 
j)_xe7 'fixe7 11 0-0 ti:Jhf6 is good, when 
White has merely an insignificant advan­
tage. But in this game my fingers were so 
itchy, that I was ready to sacrifice anything. 
And Larsen accepted the challenge!
318

Adult Games
9...bs?! (7)
This showy, reckless move, immediately 
creating 
strong 
tension, 
was 
deemed 
dubious and did not occur again in any 
serious games. 9 ...Se8 is more solid, after 
which White has tried 10 ..ixf6 ..ixf6 11
0-0-0 (Alburt-Morovic, Santiago 1981), as 
well as 10 dxe5, and even the risky 10 0-0-0 
(regardless of 10...e4!? 11 Ci:Jxe4 Ci:Jxe4 12 
..ixe4 hxg5).
Black can also consider 9...exd4 10 exd4 
d5 (Cebalo-Fries Nielsen, Plovdiv 1983), or
10...1.te8 11 0-0-0 Ci:Jf8 - in my youth I 
thought that White was better here, but 
now I am not so sure: the black bishop 
comes out to the weakened g4-square, etc.
10 dxes (19)
Of course, no one has refuted the crude
10 cxb5!? cxb5 11 ..ixb5, when after the 
possible 11....1fi.b7 12 Sd1 it is doubtful 
whether Black has full compensation for 
the pawn. But in those times it was consid­
ered bad form to capture such pawns. We 
were both struggling desperately for the 
initiative, and in such a struggle pawns did 
not count.
10...Ci:JxeS (3) 11 Ci:JxeS dxes 12 o-o-o (5)
12... 
Was
13 '>t>b1 (3)
Useful prophylaxis. In analysis after the
game, here Spassky demanded a move 'in 
the style of Kazimirych' (i.e. Tolush) - 13 
g4!?. However, in the event of 13...b4 14 
..ixf6 ..ixf6 15 g5 ..ie7! 16 lba4 (16 lbe4!?, 
but not 16 gxh6? bxc3 17 2dg1 g6! 18 ..ixg6 
Wh8 and wins) 16...h5! 17 ..ih7+ 'it>h8 18 
..ie4 'fic7 White's slight initiative evapo­
rates.
Besides, 
Black 
can 
boldly 
reply
13 .....ixg4!? 14 Bdg1 h5. This conclusion 
was reached in the joint analysis with 
Larsen and Spassky, but later I thought that 
after 15 Ci:Je4 White had an obvious advan­
tage. Now I see that this is an exaggeration, 
for example: 15...'t>h8 16 ..ixf6 gxf6 17 'it>b1 
Bad8 with an unclear game. The develop­
ment of White's initiative is hindered by 
the nail that has been driven into his posi­
tion - the bishop on g4.
13....ie6 (7)
The most natural reply, and the one that 
I was counting on, although 13...fib8!? was 
also possible.
14 i.xf6 ! (2) 14....ixf6 15 ctJe4 .ie 7
15....l:!.fd8!? (not allowing the following
tactical stroke) 16 Ci:Jxf6+ gxf6 was more 
steady, with counterplay to neutralise the 
spoiling of the kingside pawns.
16 tZ:lgSl (a surprise!) 16...bxc4l (6)
Of course, not 16...hxg5? in view of 17
319

Garry Kasparov on Garry Kasparov: Part One
i.h 7+! &h8 18 hxg5 g6 19 ..txg6+ 4g8 20 
&xf7+! 4xf7 21 iVh7+ &e8 22 iVg6+. Also
16...^xg5?! 17 hxg5 .&xc4? 18 i.xc4  bxc4 19 
gxh6 g6 20 #xc4 is bad for Black.
17 &h7+! (10) 17...^hB 18 .i.f5 (5)
It is on this nuance that White's entire 
idea is based.
1B....i.xf5?l (7)
18...e4 was not so clear: 19 i xe6 fxe6 20 
'Llxe4 l:.ab8 21 #xc4 iVe5 22 iVd4 iVf5 23 
iVd3 &f6 24 b3 a5 with counterplay for the 
pawn. An unexpected piece sacrifice was 
also of interest - 18...^d5!? 19 e4 Sab8! 20 
exd5 cxd5! (20 . ...i.a3? 21 b3 cxb3 22 axb3 
cxd5 23 .i.e6! or 22...g6 23 dxc6 gxf5 24 c7 
and wins), and Black is alright: 21 i.d 7  e4! 
22 .i.c6 .i.f6 23 l:.xd5 iVa6! or 21 jj_e6!? 
i.xg5 22 Sxd5 iVb6 23 hxg5 iVxe6 with 
equality.
19 'ix f5  ^xg5
Concrete play begins. In the variation
19...g6 20 'Llxf7+ &g7 21 iVxe5+ iVxe5 22 
'Llxe5 l:.xf2 23 Sd7 Se8 24 'Llxc4! (24 Sxa7 
c3!) 24 . ..Sxg2 2 5 Sxa7 and a2-a4 White is a 
pawn up in the endgame, but he still has to 
work hard to achieve a win.
20 hxg5 Sa bB 21 S c l! (3)
The only move that retains an advan­
tage. 21 gxh6? was incorrect on account of
21...1:.xb2+! 22 &xb2 Sb8+ 23 &c1 iVc3+! 24
iVc2 'ia3+ 2 5 &d2 Sb2.
21. ..®d2 (11)
If 21...iVb5?! 22 l:.c2 e4, then 23 iVf4! and 
gxh6 is very strong.
22 &C2 (5) 22...iVd3
23 g4! (3)
This was underestimated by Larsen. I 
remember that I was very proud of this 
positional move, whereas the computer 
suggests it in the very first second! After 
giving up a pawn, White continues the 
fierce struggle for the initiative.
23...iVxf5 (8) 24 gxf5 Sb4 25 Sh4 (10)
25 
gxh6!? or 25 f6!? also came into 
consideration.
25. ..Sd8 (5)
In the event of 25- ..4h7 Black also has a
320

Adult Games
rather unpleasant position: 26 f6 Sh8 27 a3 
.l:!.a4 28 !1h5!, provoking 28...e4 29 blh4 etc.
26 a3! l:a4 (2) 27 gxh6 (5) 27...g6?l
27...Sd6! was more resilient. And 27.g5 
would have forced the continuation in the 
game, without allowing White an addi­
tional chance.
28 fxg6 (6)
This capture was criticised, but wrongly 
so, since the 'immediately winning' 28 
.l:!.hxc4!? Bxc4 29 Bxc4 is in fact no better: 
after 29 ...gxf5 30 Bxc6 Bdl+ 31 'it>a2 
.l:!.fl(d2) 32 Sa6 Bxf2 33 a4 f4 34 exf4l:txf4
35 l:xa7 things are indeed difficult for 
Black, but in the event of 29 ...Bd6 30 Bc5 g5
31 Sxe5 !1xh6 32 f6 Sxf6 33 11xg5 Bxf2 34 
l:ta5 .l:!.e2 35 blxa7 'it>g7 the outcome is not 
so obvious.
28...fxg6 29 Shxc4 Sxc4 30 Sxc4 Sd6! 31 
l:cs (7) 31. ..Se6 (3) 32 BaS (3) 32. ..!!e7 33 
l:ta6 Sc7 34'ic2 'ih7
34. 
...l:1.f7!? came into consideration, with 
the idea after 35 \¥/d3 Bxf2 36 b4 'ih7 (if
36 ...Sf7, then 37 \¥/e4 Be7 38 !txc6 \¥/h7 39 
b5 'it>xh6 40 a4 and wins) 37 .l:ixa7+ 'it>xh6 
38 'it>e4(?) g5 of obtaining a position from 
the game, but avoiding the improvement 
for White (cf. the note to White's 36th 
move). Here 38 Ba6! would have remained 
the only chance of success.
35 'it>d3
To me the endgame appeared to be an 
easy win, but here Larsen, as in his former 
years, began performing miracles of re­
sourcefulness.
35...5f7!
A brilliant move! Black exploits his last 
chance - the latent dynamics of the posi­
tion. He would have lost quickly after
35. . .'it>xh6? 36 \¥/e4 Bf7 37 f3!.
36 'it>e4? (7)
This would appear to throw away the 
win. 36 'it>e2 was correct, for example:
36. ..c5 37 Bc6 Bb7 38 Sxc5 Bxb2+ 39 'if3  
e4+ 40 'it>g3 'it>xh6 41 blc7 Ba2 42 £I.xa7 with 
the advance of the a-pawn, or 36 ...Bc7 37 
'it>f3 .l:1.f7+ 38 'ig3 Bc7 39 b4! 'ixh 6 40 l:Ia5 
.l:1.e7 41 e4 'it>g5 42 f3. and Black has a diffi­
cult position: zugzwang, weaknesses and 
the active white rook. It was only after the 
tournament that I found this winning set­
up with my trainers Nikitin and Vladimirov, 
when I annotated the game for Informator.
36....1:1.xf2 37 Sxa7+ \t>xh6 38 b4 gS (2) 39 
.l:1.a6 'it>hs (2) 40 Sxc6 S a 2 41 Sc1! (4)
At the board I thought that all the indica­
tors pointed to a win, but...
41. ..g4!
Creating unexpected counterplay with 
just a single pawn, supported by the king. If
321

Garry Kasparov on Garry Kasparov: Part One
41.. ..l:!.xa3?, then 42 .l:!.b1 fla6 43 b5 flb6 44 
'it>xe5 and wins.
42 'it>xes (8)
If 42 .l:.b1 Black has time to play 42...g3 43 
b5 g2 44 b6 flb2! with a draw.
42....1.!.xa3 43 'it>f4 (12) 43...fib3 (3) 44 Hcs+
(it transpires that White does not have a 
win: 44 .l:!.c4 .Ubl!) 44 ...'it>h4 45 Hc8 (3)
The last chance - a pawn sacrifice.
45...fixb4+ 46 e4 'it>h3! (46...'it>h5? 47 Hg8!, 
and mate - in 30 moves!) 47 fih8+ (3)
47...'it>g2 
48 Hg8 'it>h3! yi-Yi
If 49 .l:!.xg4 .l:!.xe4+!. Times: 2.3 5- 1 .30.
In this complicated game Larsen's inex­
haustible optimism is again clearly seen. I 
was very upset that I was unable to win this 
superior rook endgame. But Spassky said to 
me, then an 18-year-old youth: 'Why are 
you upset? You should be paying Benya fo r 
the lesson!’ (Benya was Spassky's affection­
ate name for his old friend and rival.)
In the 11th and final round I pressed 
with Black on Miles's position, but I was 
unable to win. This round was decisive for 
the allocation of the prize places. The 
leading trio, who were on 'plus three', went 
different ways. Petrosian made a quick 
draw and remained the only contestant not 
to experience the bitterness of defeat. But 
the fate of first place was decided in the
Beliavsky-Timman 
encounter. 
After 
employing an improvement in a very sharp 
variation of the Sicilian Defence, Beliavsky 
won the game and became the tournament 
victor. Thus ended one of the most memo­
rable events of the year.
I may have scored only 5O%, but on the 
other hand I 'played very interesting chess', 
as was said by the players who after Tilburg 
arrived at the match in Merano. Many 
grandmasters were now able to assess both 
my playing style, and my potential. Public 
opinion was gradually beginning to incline 
towards the fact that in 1984 there would 
be a Karpov-Kasparov match.
Meanwhile in Tilburg I established a per­
sonal tournament record in adult chess, 
which, fortunately, I have not in fact 
beaten: I lost three games! The defeats 
against Spassky and Petrosian were espe­
cially painful. I lacked that experience in 
which juniors are usually found wanting 
when playing world-class opponents: a 
completely different, as yet unaccustomed 
level of resistance! In an interview given 
soon afterwards, I expressed dissatisfaction 
with my play and said: 'It was partly fatigue 
that told: after all, I arrived in Tilburg 
having only just returned from the world 
junior team championship in Graz. But the 
main thing the tournament showed is that 
I need to work on my technique. I still lack 
professional forcefulness, the ability to 
'finish off' opponents. It was for this reason 
that I was unable to take better or winning 
positions to their logical end.'
There were also unmentioned reasons 
for my uneven play in the tournament. 
Sosonko and Spassky, with whom I struck 
up good relations, held seditious 'anti­
Soviet' conversations with me, and also for 
a few days Sosonko loaned me a copy of 
Solzhenitsyn's famous Gulag Archipelago
322

Adult Games
(which was strictly banned in the USSR), 
and I read it at night without a break! And 
on free days I travelled to a safari park, 
played football, and raced up and down the 
avenues on a stylish Peugeot bicycle, which 
the organisers later presented to me. I 
remember that the customs officers at 
Sheremetevo looked at me as if I were mad: 
everyone was bringing in electronic gadg­
ets from abroad, and here was some kid 
with a bicycle...
Nikitin, who had followed the tourna­
ment from Moscow, recorded in his note­
book the following lessons from Tilburg:
‘Garry aimedfor a fight in all 11 games. He 
did not fear anyone, and not once was he 
outplayed. Only he did the outplaying - 
either of his opponents, or himself A danger­
ous one-sidedness in his play appeared - only 
against the king, or more accurately - a 
striving fo r greater complexity. In such com­
plexity a player himself can become entan­
gled. Play on positional lines disappeared. He 
lacked strength to recover before games - 
hence poor play in the fifth hour. Extraneous 
interests prevented him fromfocusing on the 
games. He lost after the free days (5th and 
9th October). Conclusion: the tournament 
was lost on the free days! Particular attention 
should be paid to ways of relaxing that do 
not interfere with the play. The contact with 
Spassky and Sosonko and the reading of 
literature gave Garry much information, 
which excited his mind. This seriously di­
verted him from the business of the tourna­
ment and prevented him from  focusing on 
the game in the necessary way. He arrived in 
Tilburg aiming to win, but the lack of focus 
on the play sharply reduced his chances.'
Whereas earlier I was greatly helped by 
the surprise factor - no one could believe 
that the youngster sitting opposite them 
could present a serious danger, and also my
games were still little-known to foreign 
players - now the situation had changed: 
my name went before me, and opponents 
began preparing for their games with me.
Later I realised how useful and, above all, 
how timely this 'failure' was, but at the 
time I experienced something of a shock. 
After all, I was not accustomed to losing! 
Such a result disillusioned me, and I per­
ceived it as the collapse of my hopes. As 
usual, I had been aiming to win at all costs, 
but the devilish ingenuity of the leading 
grandmasters punished me for my exces­
sively risky actions. This was a sobering 
experience, showing that there was still 
much for me to learn and master in chess. I 
realised that I needed greater practical 
experience at the level of foreign grand­
master tournaments. I needed to learn to 
play more forcefully, in order to carry 
through my plans to their conclusion in 
battles with the best tournament players. 
My trainers and I agreed that this was the 
main lesson learned in Tilburg...
This was the last tournament to which 
my grandfather wished me good luck. 
Before leaving I visited him in hospital. He 
had just had a serious operation, but he 
was already feeling better. Our parting, as 
usual, was warm but undemonstrative - 
my grandad didn't like superfluous words. I 
left in the hope of seeing him at home in a 
month's time. .. The crisis developed sud­
denly. When I was playing my first game, he 
was no longer alive. I wasn't told of this: my 
mother said on the telephone that my 
grandad was still in hospital ('some compli­
cations'). Why was I so uneasy? It was more 
than ten years since my father had died, 
and I somehow didn't think that I would 
again have to experience the bitterness and 
pain of losing someone close.
It had become a tradition that after re­
323

Garry Kasparov on Garry Kasparov: Part One
turning from a tournament my mother and 
I would go to the Jewish cemetery where 
my father was buried. On that October day 
in 1981 I was taken to the Armenian ceme­
tery. I was convulsed by sobs, but my 
mother did not try to comfort me: she 
realised that her son was now saying good­
bye both to his grandfather, and to his 
childhood. .. For a long time I was unable to 
get used to the fact that there was only one
man in the house.
I played a further three times in Tilburg: 
in 1989 and 1991 I gained two unforgetta­
ble victories, and in 1997 I shared 1st-3rd 
places. Although the first attempt was a 
failure, I was consoled by the creative 
richness of the games (in this sense Tilburg 
1981 was one of my best tournaments). 
Moreover, I sensed that I was on the 
threshold of another surge.
USSR Champion
49th USSR Championship Premier League (Frunze, 26th November - 22nd December 1981)
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
1 Psakhis
*
1
1
Y,
1
Y,
1
0
Y,
1
Y,
Y,
Y,
1
Y,
1
1
1
121/2
2
Kasparov
0
*
Y,
1
1
Y,
1
1
1
Y,
Y,
1
1
1
Y,
0
1
1
121/2
3 Romanishin
0
y,
•
y,
y,
1
1
y,
0
y,
1
y,
y,
y,
1
0
1
1
10
4 Gavrikov
Y,
0
Y,
*
Y,
Y,
Y,
Y,
1
0
Y,
1
Y,
1
Y,
1
Y,
Y,
91/2
5 Tukmakov
0
0
Y,
Y,
*
0
Y,
1
Y,
1
Y,
Y,
Y,
1
Y,
1
Y,
1
91/2
6
vo
m
azg
<
y,
y,
0
y,
1
•
y,
y,
y,
0
1
y,
1
0
y,
1
1
0
9
7 Beliavsky
0
0
0
y,
y,
y,
*
1
Y,
O
Y,
Y,
1
1
1
1
Y,
Y,
9
8 Yusupov
1
0
y,
y,
0
y,
0
•
y,
1
0
0
1
1
1
y,
0
1
8 /
9 Dorfman
y,
0
1
0
y,
y,
y,
y,
•
0
1
y,
y,
y,
y,
y,
1
y,
8 /
10
ikhi
icei
rpuK
O Y,
Y,
1
0
1
1
0
1
*
O Y,
O O Y,
1
Y,
Y,
8
11
Sveshnikov
y,
y,
0
y,
y,
0
y,
1
0
1
•
y,
0
1
y,
y,
y,
y,
8
12
Dolmatov
y,
0
y,
0
y,
y,
y,
1
y,
y,
y,
•
y,
0
1
y,
y,
y,
8
13
yksvokhsesT
y,
0
y,
y,
y,
0
0
0
y,
1
1
y,
•
y,
0
1
y,
1
8
14
insi
aduY
0
0
y,
0
0
1
0
0
y,
1
0
1
y,
•
y,
1
1
y,
7 /
15
Kuzmin
y2 y2 0
X
X
X
0
0
y,
y,
y,
0
1
y,
•
0
0
1
6 /
16
Gulko
0
1
1
0
0
0
0
y,
y,
0
y,
y,
0
0
1
•
1
y,
6 /
17
Timoshchenko
o
o
o
Y,
Y,
o
Y,
1
0
y,
y,
y,
y,
0
1
0
•
y,
6
18
Mikhalchishin
o
o
o
Y,
0
1
y2 0
y2 y2 y2 y2 0
y2 0
y2 y2 *
51/2
The chess world was still under the im­
pression of Karpov's convincing victory in 
Merano, but the qualifying events for the 
new world championship match had al­
ready begun. For Soviet players the qualifi­
cation began at the end of 1981 with the 
Premier League of the 49th USSR Champi­
onship - there was also a fight for places in
the Zonal tournament which would follow 
two months later. However, not all were 
involved in this, only 13 of the 18 contest­
ants: thanks to our high ratings, Beliavsky 
and I were admitted straight into the 
Interzonal events (July-September 1982), 
while 
Kuzmin, 
Romanishin 
and 
Tseshkovsky, who played in the Interzonals
324

Adult Games
of the previous cycle, had reservations to 
the Zonal tournament.
It was probably both the qualifying 
status, and the line-up - the youngest in 
the entire preceding history of Soviet chess!
- that made this championship exception­
ally tense and uncompromising. Although 
the 'main people' - Karpov, Tal, Petrosian, 
Polugayevsky and Geller - were not playing, 
the fans were not disappointed. The num­
ber of decisive games exceeded 5O%, and 
the intensity of the fight was maintained 
right to the end of the last round. In the 
words of one of the hundreds of spectators, 
the prominent writer Chingiz Aitmatov, ‘all 
the contestants battled as though it was the 
most important tournament of their life. ’
For almost a month there was a gripping 
pursuit race, in which my rival for the lead 
was my fellow student team member, the 
most 'Eastern' Soviet grandmaster - the 23- 
year-old Lev Psakhis from Krasnoyarsk. He 
arrived in Frunze as 1980 USSR champion, 
and few imagined that he would be able to 
do the 'golden double’, as Botvinnik, Bron- 
stein, Keres, Tal, Stein and Polugayevsky 
had managed in their time. Such an 
achievement is a sure indication of very 
high class, which for some reason the 
majority of the players before the start of 
the tournament (and during it?) thought 
that Psakhis was lacking. But Lev had done 
an enormous amount of preparatory work 
(in particular, he had included 1 d4 in his 
opening repertoire) and, with a display of 
even, confident play, he managed to go the 
whole distance without any stumbles. His 
brilliant results testified to the emergence 
in th e Soviet chess cohort of yet another 
outstanding grandmaster.
For me the tournament took a more 
dramatic course, although the fact that I 
did not need to pass through the severe
Soviet qualifying process for the world 
championship was a great psychological 
help (it will be remembered how Spassky 
and Stein, and they were not the only ones, 
suffered in USSR Zonal Championships). At 
the start I played with composure and 
scored a spectacular win over the champi­
onship debutant Viktor Gavrikov from 
Lithuania, a future grandmaster and USSR 
co-champion in 1985.
Game 63 
G .Kasparov-V.Gavrikov
49th USSR Cham pionship, 
1st round, Frunze, 27.11 .1981 
Queen's Gambit D34
1 d4 d5 2 c4 e6 3 CZJf3 c5 4 cxd5 (3) 4...exd5 5 
g3 CZJc6 6 ..ig2 CZJf6 7 0-0 fi.e7
Gavrikov had not played the Tarrasch 
Defence before, and I stopped to think what 
he might have in mind. I had already scored 
two wins, over Hort (Dortmund 1980) and 
Palatnik (Moscow 1981), in the main line -
8 CZJc3 0-0 9 ..ig5 (Game No.79). But I de­
cided to deviate, choosing a rather danger­
ous set-up which had been successfully 
employed by Timman.
8 dxcS (4) 8...fi.xc5 9 
gS 0-0 10 ctJc3
325

Garry Kasparov on Garry Kasparov: Part One
10...d4
I should remind you that 10.....te6 11 
.\txf6! (11 lt:la4 - Game No.45 in Volume II 
of My Great Predecessors) 11...'ixf6 12 lt:lxd5 
#xb2 13 Ci:Jc7 Sad8 14 'i c l  'ix c l 15 Saxc1 
and tt:Jxe6 leads to a small but enduring 
advantage 
for 
White 
(Rubinstein- 
5chlechter, Vienna 1908; Petrosian-5passky, 
16th match game, Moscow 1969).
11 ..txf6
Nothing is promised by 11 lt:le4 .lte7 12 
..txf6 i xf6 13 B c l Be8 14 lt:lel (Lasker- 
Tarrasch, Berlin 1918) 14....\te7!? 15 Ci:Jd3 
.ltf8 with equality (Nikolic-Kasparov, Niksic 
1983).
11. ..'ix f6  12 Ci:JdS 'id 8  13 Ci:Jd2 a6
A prophylactic move, preserving the 
dark-square bishop from exchange for a 
knight. Later my trainers and I came to the 
conclusion that 13 ...Se8 14 B cl .\tb6 was 
better, although against Miles (Niksic 1983) 
I barely escaped with a draw as Black, or
14. ....tf8!? 
(the source game: Timman- 
Gligoric, Bugojno 1978).
1 4 lc 1  (6) 14. ....ta7 (3) 15 tt:Jc4 (5)
The knight is eyeing the d6-square. There 
was no longer any point in playing 15 ctJb3, 
since the d4-pawn is securely defended, but
15 lt:lf4 was interesting, with the idea of
15. ....td7 
16 
tt:Je4 
(Hubner-Budde,
Bundesliga 1983).
1S....l:tb8 (16)
My old Informator recommendation
15 ... .Ith3 16 .\txh3 'ixd5 has not in fact 
found any followers - Black is unwilling to 
leave the formidable white bishop without 
an opponent.
16 ctJf4 (8)
By opening the way for the bishop on g2, 
White hopes to retain slight pressure.
16...bs?! (11)
Gavrikov moves his b7-pawn away from 
a possible attack and forces the exchange 
of a pair of minor pieces, but he weakens 
the c-file, on which White acquires addi­
tional 
invasion 
squares. 
16....l:te8 
was 
sounder 
(Gagunashvili-El 
Gindy, 
Dubai 
2003), or 16.....tf5, with a slightly inferior, 
but quite acceptable game.
17 ctJd6! (17) 17../®'xd6 (4)
Having played ... b7-b5, here Black should 
have preferred 17...tL'le5! 18 tt:Jxc8 Bxc8 19 
Bxc8 'ixc8  - although after 20 #b1(d2) 
and B c l the weakness of the a6- and d4- 
pawns would have left White with some 
advantage, Black would have faced less 
difficult problems.
18 Bxc6 Wd8 (10)
If 18 . ..'ie5 I was planning 19 ctJd3 'if5  20 
fid6, but 19 'ic2  was also good.
326

Adult Games
19 'ic2 (5)
19. ..a5?l (6)
Allowing the complete seizure of the c- 
file. Black would still have had difficulties 
after 19...i.b7 20 .Mc7 ^xg2 21 'it>xg2 ^b6 
22 Sc6 or 20. ..Sc8 21 Sc1 ±b8 22 Sxc8 
^xc8 23 <'Lld5 etc. But perhaps it would 
have been better to play 19 . ..Sb6 (exchang­
ing the active white rook) 20 .Mxb6 ,&xb6 21 
.Mc1 
: g4 or 19...i.b6 (with the idea of 
...±b7) 20 <'Lld5 ^e6!.
20 .Mcl (7) 20. ..He8? (22)
Overlooking a veiled threat. 20. ..^d7?! 21 
fld6 We8 22 <'Lld5 or 21...flc8 22 ^c6! was 
unattractive. However, the lesser evil was
20. ..^b6, covering the c7-point.
21 ,&d5?! (13)
Alas, I also missed the pretty 21 .l:!.c7! ^b6 
22 Hxf7!! 'it>xf7 (22. ..He5 23 <'Lld3!) 23 ; d5+
i.e 6  24 Wf5+ f
 25 ^ 5 +  'it>f8 26 .Mc6! d3!
27 e3! Wf7 (27. ..^ 6  28 'ilVf3!) 28 <'Llxe6+ 
.Mxe6 29 'ilVxf7+ 'it>xf7 30 'it>f1, turning to the 
conversion of the material advantage.
21...^b6 (7)
21...^b7? was bad in view of 22 ^xf7+! 
'it>xf7 23 .Mc7+ 'lt>g8 24 'i:Vb3+ 'it>h8 25 'i:Vf7, or
21...±d7?! 
22 .Mc7! .l:!.c8 (22...±b6? 23 
:, xf7+!) 23 ..l:xc8 'ilVxc8 (23...1txc8 24 'ilVc7)
24 .ltxf7+! 'it>xf7 25 'i:Vb3+ &e6 26 Sxc8
i.xb3 27 .Mxe8 'it>xe8 28 axb3 with a won 
endgame.
22 'ilVb3 (21)
22 ^xf7+!? 'it>xf7 23 'ilVxh7 looked tempt­
ing, but after 23 ... d3! the position is un­
clear: 24 <'Llxd3 'ilVg5! or 24 e3 d2 25 Hd1 
Hxe3! 26 fxe3 .!txe3+ 27 'it>f1 ^xf4 28 gxf4 
'ilVd5!. 24 'ilVg6+ 'it>g8 25 Hd6! is stronger, but 
here too by 25 ...'i:Ve7 26 Sxb6 Hxb6 27 Wxb6 
dxe2 28 fle1 'i!Vb4! 29 .Mxe2 .Mxe2 30 <'Llxe2 
'i:Vxb2 Black emerges unscathed.
22 ...He7 (8) 23 .ltf3 (3) 23 ....Me5? (12)
This obvious move proves to be the deci­
sive mistake. 23 . ..^b7?! 24 <'Lld5! .ltxc6 25 
<'Llxe7+ 'i!Nxe7 26 Sxc6 was also to White's 
advantage, but 23. ...1tf5 or even 23....Me8!? 
would still have retained possibilities of a 
defence.
327

Garry Kasparov on Garry Kasparov: Part One
24 i.h S! (24) 24...g6 (5) 25 i.xg6! (7)
25 
tLlxg6!? will also do, since 25. ..i.e6 26 
Sxe6! Sxe6 27 tbf4 Sf6 28 Wxb5 or
25 ...hxg6 26 Sxg6+ 'it>f8 27 Sxb6 i.e6 28 
Bxe6 fxe6 29 i. g4 is insufficient for Black, 
while 25 . .a4(?), which I recommended in 
Informator, loses to 26 'if3 ! h(f)xg6 27 
i  xg6. White's control of the c-file enables 
him to attack where he pleases, and not 
only on the queenside. Gavrikov underes­
timated this nuance, and the sudden 
switching of my pieces to the kingside 
caught him unawares.
2S...hxg6 26 .Uxg6+ 'it>f8 27 Sh6 (27 Scc6!?)
27 ...'ie7?! (5)
A natural human reaction to the threat 
of Bh8+ (27...'it>g7? 28 Sh7+!), yet 27...Bg5 
was more resilient: 28 Scc6! d3! (but not
28 ...i.c7 29 .Ucf6! or 28 .. ,Sb7 29 Sh8+ Sg8
30 Bch6!), although here too after 29 tLlxd3 
'ig8 30 e3 or 29 Shf6 Sg7 30 tLlxd3 Black 
cannot save the game.
28 l:.cc6!
Unexpectedly the c6-square has become 
a transit point for both white rooks, which 
have thereby invaded the black position. 
Hanging over Black are the threats of fih7 
and tbg6+!.
28. .JUS (7)
Also after 28. ..i.f5 there is the strong re­
ply 29 Wf3, but the simplest is 29 Bc(h)f6, 
when Black has no way of holding the f7- 
point (the queen is tied to the defence of 
the bishop on b6).
29 Wf3! (5)
The most accurate - switching the queen 
to the centre, although 29 'iVa3+ would also 
have been decisive, or even 29 tLlg6+ fxg6
30 fih7+ 'it>f8 31 Sh8+ 'it>g7 32 Sxd8 i.xd8 
(in Informator I rejected this variation as 
‘unclear') 33 Sxg6+! 'it>xg6 34 1Vg8+ 'it>h6 35 
Wxd8 with the threat of 1Vd6+, and the loss 
of material for Black is unavoidable.
29....i.c7 (29 . ..Se5 30 tbg6+!) 30 1Ve4+ .UeS
Or 30 ...i.e5 31 tbd3!.
31 tbg6+! (both spectacular, and effective)
31...fxg6 32 .Uh7+ 'it>f8 33 Wxg6 1-0
Times: 2.19-2.26.
Many were surprised by the speed with 
which Black's position was transformed 
into ruins. The instantaneous switching of 
attacking forces from one wing to another 
became my patent method - a distinguish­
ing feature of my playing style.
In the 2nd round I had Black against 
Psakhis, who had also started with a win. 
And, employing the Nimzo-lndian Defence 
for virtually the first time in my life, from 
the opening I obtained an excellent posi­
328

Adult Games
tion. But then, instead of comfortably 
making a draw, I was suddenly obsessed by 
some tactical mirages... More than a quar­
ter of a century later, Lev Psakhis, who had 
long since moved to Israel, remembered 
with pleasure that crazy game:
‘The most important events of the tour­
nament occurred in the 2nd round. I had 
White against Kasparov. Just imagine: the 
Soviet champion against a player who was 
rated in the top three or four in the world. 
We arrived at the game, both smiling a little, 
and we shook hands. At the time we were on 
the most friendly terms. I began with 1 d4. 
Kasparov looked at me in considerable 
surprise. After all, not long before, at a 
training session before the junior world 
team championship, we had played numer­
ous blitz games, and he roughly imagined 
what I would play against him in the King's 
Indian, which he used to employ at that 
time. He thought for some 6-7 minutes and 
played 1...e6. It was my turn to be slightly 
surprised. I thought to myself, what did he 
have in mind if I were to play 2 e4? I realised 
that he wouldn't choose the French, but 
would play 2...c5, leading either to a Sicilian, 
or to something closed, where I altogether 
had no experience. After aboutfive minutes' 
thought I played 2 c4, and he replied 2...bf66. 
I didn't know what to do. if 3 tiJf3 he would 
go into a Modern Benoni, and I would be 
unable to play the variation which I had 
prepared against the Queen's Indian. My 
knowledge was clearly lacking. I played 3 
tiJc3, he went 3...kb4, and we transposed 
into a Nimzo-lndian, having each spent 
about 20 minutes! After which we both sat 
feeling sweaty and a little frightened. But 
while he was not an expert on the Nimzo- 
lndian with Black, he had at least prepared 
it, whereas I knew absolutely nothing. After 
ending up slightly worse with White, I real­
ised in good time that I had to play fo r 
simplification.
'It has to be said that I already knew Garik 
quite well and I did not assess him as every­
one else did. As a chess player he was a quite 
brilliant tactician, but at the same time he 
remained human and he made mistakes, 
which, however, occurred extremely rarely. 
In positional play Kasparov acted like a 
machine, and at the age of 10-11 he already 
had an excellent feeling fo r which piece to 
play where and at what moment. I think 
that he was no weaker as a positional 
player, which very many people simply did 
not realise. To compete with him in tactics 
was an incredibly difficult task. Therefore, 
when in our game he initiated some in­
credible complications, the play began to 
resemble roulette. We both spent a long 
time calculating variations, and after the 
24th move we each had about two minutes 
left to the time control in an incredibly 
complicated position, with the tension only 
increasing. From the 18th to the 24th moves 
any inaccuracy by either side could have led 
to collapse. He sacrificed a piece, some 
savage pins resulted, but in the end his 
position was hopeless, and we were simply 
bashing the clock. When by somewhere 
around move 45 I guessed that the time 
control had been reached, I waited fo r my 
flag to fall and said that I was adjourning 
the game. After this Kasparov resigned.'
A deserved, but very painful defeat. For­
getting myself, I had begun playing in the 
same, excessively ‘creative' manner as in 
Tilburg! The loss sobered me up: I con­
ducted the following games in a different, 
more restrained style, mainly resorting to 
tactics only 'at the demand' of the position. 
No less critical was my 3rd round game 
with Artur Yusupov, a rival of mine since 
junior tournaments. As Black he chose a
329

Garry Kasparov on Garry Kasparov: Part One
rare line of the Bogo-lndian - 1 d4 tLlf6 2 c4 
e6 3 iLlf3 --b4+ 4 ^ d2 aS (4...'ie7 - Game 
No.69) 5 g3 0-0 6 i g2 b6 7 0-0 ..lta6 - and 
set up a solid defence. Not yet having come 
to after the previous day's knock-down, on 
the 17th move I committed an unjustified 
weakening and then 'in desperation’ I 
sacrificed a pawn.
Game 64 
G.Kasparov-A.Yusupov
49th u S s R C ham pio nship, 
3rd round, Frunze 29 .11 .19 81
23...f5?! (19)
After 23....lta6! White's compensation for 
the pawn would have been rather prob­
lematic, except that after 24 4 h l, of course, 
Black should not play 24... f5?! 25 Ii.g1 fxe4?!
26 &xe4 (suggested by me in Informator) or
26 tt:lxe4 with an 
attack, but simply
24.. 
. 'it'h8(h7) 25 S g l Sg8.
24 tt:lxc4 (2) 24...tLlxc4 25 b3 (25 e5?! b5!)
25...tt:ld6 26 e5
Having 
cramped 
Black’s 
position, 
I 
gained a new lease of life, since I realised 
that his extra pawn no longer played a 
particular role and the position was one of 
dynamic balance.
26. ..tt:lc8 (6)
A logical positional move: Black prepares 
...tt:le7 or ...b6-b5 and ...tt:lb6. After 26. ..tt:lf7 
(26...tt:le4?! 27 kxe4!) 27 &f3 followed by 
&h5, <it>hl and Hgl, although the black 
knight is closer to its king, White has an 
excellent game: he simply doubles rooks on 
the g-file, and may also be able to attack 
the b6-pawn by tt:la4.
27 .if3  'it>h7
28 .ih5 (4)
The immediate 28 'ith1 and Sg1-g3 also 
came into consideration.
28 ... fie7 (3) 29 'ith1 .f1.g8? (4)
In Informator I rightly condemned this 
move, weakening Black's control of f5, and 
gave the variation 29...kh8! 30 S g l Sg7 31
330

Adult Games
.l:.xg7+ ..txg7 32 Sg1 ilfe7 33 "ig3 Bg8 34 
ltJb1 'with the idea of lZ:ld2-f3-h4'. But after
34..."if8! (Stohl) 35 liJd2 lf'.e7 (with the 
accompanying threat of ...i.xe5) it is not 
easy to carry out this idea. It is probably 
better to play 34 ltJa4!? "if8  (34..."ixa3? 35 
lZ:lc5! and i.f7 ) 35 S(#)g2 followed by lZ:lb2- 
d3 with an unclear game.
30 Sg1 
hS
Now this natural retreat (with the inten­
tion of ...l:eg7) allows a very pretty combi­
nation. But what was there to do? If
30.....tf8, then 31 Bxg8 (against my Infor- 
matormove 31 ^ 4  it is dangerous to reply 
31. ..'i:!Vc7 32 ..tg6+!, but after 31 ...Be8!? 32 
' i 3  .M.e7 all the same White has nothing 
better than 33 Sxg8 Wxg8 34 ^ 4 !)
31...1.'xg8 32 ^
4! ‘with a strong attack' 
(Stohl), for example: 32 ...i!Vc7 33 Sg1+ 
'it>h7?! (33...l:lg7? 34 'iVf6) 34 h3! followed by 
d4-d5 or lLle2. 33 ... i.g7 34 ltJe2 f t 7  35 i.f3  
#a6 is more resilient, although here too 
White retains the initiative.
31lLle4!! (11)
A paradoxical stroke, which reminded 
me of the finish to the game Fischer-Panno 
(Buenos Aires 1970), where White landed 
an equally unexpected blow with his bishop
- 28 i.e4!! (Game No.80 in Volume IV of My 
Great Predecessors). True, that combination
was an entirely winning one, whereas here, 
as we will see, Black can still resist.
31...fxe4 (5)
The knight has to be taken - otherwise
32 lZ:lf6+. 31...Sxg1+? 32 _g,xg1 fxe4 is incor­
rect in view of 33 i.g6+ Wg8 34 ..tf7+! Wxf7
35 '+Wg2(g3) with unavoidable mate.
32 fs!
This is the whole point: the f-pawn is in­
cluded in the attack. When I was consider­
ing 31 lZ:le4, I did not work out all the possi­
ble variations to the end, but I sensed that 
here there had to be something!
32...5gS? (10)
The sudden change of scene produced a 
startling 
effect: 
in 
time-trouble 
Artur
cracked under the pressure and promptly 
committed a decisive mistake. 32 ...Seg7? 
33 ..tg6+ or 32...e3? 33 'iVc2 would also have 
been bad.
The only defence was 32...#f8! 33 f6! (the 
Informator line 33 Sxg8 Wxg8 34 f6 is 
inaccurate in view of 34...i.xf6! 35 exf6 
fig7! 36 # f4  Sg5) 33. ..i.xf6! (but not 
33 ...Meg7? 34 Sxg7+ i.xg7 35 f7! or
34....1:!.xg7 35 "ic2) 34 'W!Vxf6! (34 exf6?! 
l:!.eg7!) 34. ..l'leg7 35 i.g6+ 'it>h8 (35. ..Ixg6?!
36 Sxg6) 36 Baf1 "ixf6 (36...#e7?! 37 I\.f4!)
37 exf6 .Uxg6 38 Bxg6 'it>h7! (an important 
resource) 39 Bg2 l:ixg2 40 Wxg2 'it>g8 41
331

Garry Kasparov on Garry Kasparov: Part One
'ig3 'if7  42 'it>f4 tt:ld6 43 'ito>e5 tt:lf5 44 'it>xe4 
'it>xf6 or 39 Sxg8 'it>xg8 40 Hg1+ 'it>f7 41 
.l:!.g7+ 'it>xf6 42 Bxd7 tt:le7, and with two 
pawns for the exchange Black can hope to 
hold out in this somewhat inferior ending.
33 l:f.xg5 (3) 33...hxg5 34 f6 (now it's all 
over) 34...'it>h6 (Black is also lost after
34...'i'f8 3 5 fxe7! or 34...fie8 3 5 #e2! with 
the threat of &f7) 35 fxe7 (4)
Regaining the material, and remaining 
the exchange ahead and with an attack In 
addition, Black’s minor pieces are out of 
play.
3S ...'i'xe7 (35. ..tt:lxe7 36 'i&Vf7! ..ig7 37 2f1 or
36...'iVg8 37 'ixe7 'it>xh5 38 'Yi'xd7 was also 
hopeless for Black) 36 i.f7 ! (2)
There is nothing to prevent White carry­
ing out the final attack with the inclusion 
of his queen. The threat is Bf1 and #e2- 
h5+.
36...d6 37 2f1 g4
38 &xe6
I could not refrain from this tactical 
stroke, although 38 #g3! 'i&Vg5 39 h4! would 
also have forced rapid capitulation.
38 ... l'i'xe6 39 'i'h4+
And as he was playing 39 ..'1t>g7 Black lost 
on time (1-0) - but all the same he would 
have resigned after 40 Hf6. Times: 1.58­
2.30.
Inspired by this pretty rout, I made a 
powerful 
spurt, 
confidently 
winning 
against Mikhalchishin, Beliavsky, Tsesh- 
kovsky and Dolmatov. Especially important 
was the win in a protracted positional 
battle against one of the tournament 
favourites Alexander Beliavsky - 1980 U55R 
co-champion and the victor at Tilburg 1981 
(however, in Frunze he was not in his best 
form).
To my surprise I discovered that after the 
loss in the 2nd round I had managed to 
repeat the record of Kupreichik, established 
in the 1979 USSR Championship: five wins 
in a row! This, like my ultimate success, was 
greatly helped by my avoidance of time- 
trouble - a terrible enemy, which had 
pursued me for a whole year. An excellent 
start - 6 out of 7, but alongside was 
Psakhis, ready at any moment to 'overtake 
on the bend'.
I played the next four rounds beneath 
criticism: 11/2 points against opponents 
who were not performing very well in the 
tournament (I also experienced similar 
slumps in the U55R championships of 1978 
and 1979). At first - very difficult draws 
with Kuzmin and Kupreichik. Both games 
were adjourned in cheerless positions for 
me, and on the resumption, which took 
place after the 9th round, I saved them with 
enormous difficulty. Thanks to this I never­
theless retained the lead: Kasparov - 7 out 
of 9; Psakhis - 61/ 2; Romanishin - 51/ 2.
But in the 10th round I lost to Gulko, and 
in the 11th I drew with Agzamov after 
simply blundering away an extra pawn. 
And here I discovered that I was half a point 
ahead - of Romanishin, but Psakhis was 
now a point ahead and was confidently 
heading for his second gold medal!
Fortunately, I was able to make a new 
spurt, winning three games in a row: with
332

Adult Games
Black against Yudasin (one of my five 
Sicilian wins over Leonid), and then with 
White against Timoshchenko and Dorfman.
In these two twin games there was a 
sharp analytical dispute in the Botvinnik 
Variation, which had been revived precisely 
that year. The first to challenge me was 
Gennady Timoshchenko, the 32-year-old 
grandmaster from Novosibirsk, who soon 
became one of my seconds (but in 1993 he 
moved to Slovakia).
Game 65 
G.Kasparov-G.Timoshchenko
49th USSR C ham pio nship, 
13th round, Frunze 1 5 .12 .19 81 
Semi-Slav Defence D44
1 d4 d5 2 c4 c6 3 lLlf3 lLlf6 4 lLlc3 e6 5 jLg5 
dxc4 6 e4 b5 7 e5 h6 8 jLh4 g5 9 lLlxg5 hxg5
10 jLxg5 lLlbd7
At a training session before the champi­
onship I analysed this variation a great deal 
with Vladimirov (at that time our joint 
work was beginning), and as a result I 
decided that the time had come to fight 
against it with White. Earlier, like many 
others, I had avoided this - the positions 
arising were just too irrational, demanding
thorough preparation. But the new, mod­
ern approach to the opening was the only 
correct one: if you want to gain an advan­
tage in critical variations, you need to take 
a risk, and play concretely, move by move.
11 exf6
The alternative is 11 g3. More details of 
this and other later variations are given in 
Revolution in the 70s (pp.308-312).
11. .. ; b7 12 g3 c5 13 d5 Wb6
Until the spring of 1981 the main line 
was 13. ..lLlb6 14 dxe6 #xd1+ (14. ..jLxh1 15 
e7!) 15 l:!.xd1 ..ixh1 16 e7 a6 (16. .. i c6!?) 17 
exf8#+ 'it>xf8! 18 .Md6 fib8 19 jLe3 .Mh5! 20 
jLe2 .l:!.e5 with good counterplay on the 
queenside. But the game Polugayevsky- 
Torre (Moscow 1981) saw the thunderous 
17 h4!! .1 h6 18 f4!, when White's pawn 
armada proved stronger than the rook 
(Game No.28 in Volume Ill of My Great 
Predecessors). After this the knight move 
went almost out of use.
14 ..ig2 o-o-o 15 o-o b4 16 CDa4
In 
the 
6th 
round 
game 
Yusupov- 
Sveshnikov 16 .Mb1 jLh6 occurred, and later 
practice showed that 17 jLxh6 .Mxh6 18 b3! 
is dangerous for Black, so that the best 
defence is 16...'iUa6! 17 dxe6 i. xg2 18 e7! 
jLxf1 etc. As a result, today 16 .Mb1 has the 
reputation of being a drawing variation,
333

Garry Kasparov on Garry Kasparov: Part One
and 16 tt:la4 is still the focus of discussions.
l6...Wb5
At that time 16...Wt'a6 was thought to be 
bad because of 17 a3! b3? 18 tt:lc3 tt:lb6 19 
Wg4! tt:lxd5 20 tt:lxd5 ..ixd5 21 ; xd5 !Ixd5
22 Hadl (Razuvaev-Vaisser, Moscow 1981), 
but in the 1990s this line was revived by
17 ...i.xd5! 18 ..ixd5 tt:le5 (although 16....'YWb5 
was still considered superior).
17 a3!
By opening up the queenside, White em­
phasises the insecure position of the black 
king. 17 Sel?! tt:lb8 18 Wg4? i.xd5 (Zaichik- 
Timoshchenko, Moscow 1981) or 17 dxe6?! 
1i.xg2 18 e7 iL x fl (Ubilava-Timoshchenko, 
Volgodonsk 1981) is unfavourable for him.
17...tt:lb8
The game Kharitonov-Dorfman, played 
that October in the USSR Championship 
First 
League 
(Volgodonsk 
1981), 
went
17...exd5 18 axb4 cxb4 (18. ..d4?! 19 tt:lxc5)
19 iLe3 tt:lc5 with unclear play. Later even 
the fantastic 20 1Yg4+ l1d7 21 'li'g7?! oc­
curred (Ivanchuk-Shirov, Wijk aan 
Zee 
1996). And recently 19 ;, f4 i.h 6  has also 
been tried (Giri-Smeets, Wijk aan Zee 2011).
17. ..tt:lb8 was found during that same 
First 
League 
by the joint 
efforts 
of 
Sveshnikov and Timoshchenko, and was 
employed a few rounds later in the games
Anikaev-Sveshnikov 
and 
Rashkovsky- 
Timoshchenko. It was these games that 
Vladimirov and I had analysed.
18 axb4 cxb4 19 iLe3
Following the source game. But one of 
two queen moves was objectively better:
a) 19 'id4!? (an idea of the 1990s)
19...tt:lc6 20 dxc6 (20 tt:lb6+ axb6 21 dxc6
ii.xc6 is also unclear, Carlsen-Smeets, Wijk 
aan Zee 2010) 20....a.xd4 21 cxb7+ <;t>b8 
(21...'it>c7? 22 iLe3! e5 23 tt:lc3! bxc3 24 bxc3 
iLc5 25 cxd4 ii.xd4 26 S fb l Wc5 27 lta6! 
with crushing threats, Kamsky-Kramnik, 1st 
match game, New York 1994) 22 ) e3 e5, 
and modern correspondence games, not 
without the help of computers, demonstrate 
equality for Black in the crazy complications 
after 23 b3! c3! 24 Sfd1 -i h6 etc.;
b) 19 'ig4! 1i.xd5 (19...Sxd5? 20 Bfcl!, 
Dvoyris-Sveshnikov, Sochi 1983) 20 S fc l 
tt:lc6 21 1i.xd5 1:.xd5 22 Exc4 .:Ixg5 23 Wd4 
'it>b8 24 Bxc6 J:ixg3+ 25 fxg3 'I'Wxc6 26 S d l, 
retaining some initiative (Yusupov-Tukma- 
kov, Leningrad 1987).
19...kxdS 20 kxdS .a.xdS 21 We2 tt:lc6 22 
l:tfc1
This critical position, which occurred in 
both of the aforementioned games from 
the First League, was reached on our board 
within 20 minutes after the start of play.
334

Adult Games
5veshnikov played badly - 22 ...<i¥tb7? and 
after 23 Sxc4 tt:Ja5 24 b3! &d6 (not
24...ti:Jxb3? 25 'i!Vc2 or 24. ..Sdh5?! 25 ti:Jb2)
25 'ia2  he ran into serious problems (25 
ti:Jb2 is also strong, and if 25...a6, then 26 
Bxa5! 'tir'xa5 27 ti:a4 with a pawn for the 
exchange and an attack).
Timoshchenko tried 22 ...c3!? 23 iVxb5 
Bxb5, but with a bold piece sacrifice - 24 
ti:Jxc3!? bxc3 25 Sxc3 Rashkovsky stunned 
his opponent, and after 25...<i¥td7 (25. ..<i¥tb7?!
26 Sacl!) 26 Sa6 ti:Jd8 27 Sxa7+ 'it>e8? 28 
l:tc8 Black ended up in a difficult position. 
But the cool-headed 27 ...ti:b7! would have 
enabled him to maintain the balance. 
Perhaps, therefore, 24 bxc3!? b3 25 .l:!.cb1 is 
more promising, with very unusual play 
and somewhat the better chances for 
White.
In anticipation of 22...c3, I was intending 
to sacrifice my knight, but Timoshchenko 
'indulged in' another novelty.
22...tt:Ja5l?
22...tt:Je5! is far safer, but the chess world 
would learn of this only eighteen months 
later (Game No.82).
After making his move, my opponent 
stood up and with a proud expression 
began strolling around the other boards. I 
had to switch urgently from my polished 
home analysis to specific, calculating play. 
My wavering and the calculation of varia­
tions took a great deal of time. Intuitively I 
realised that, to cast doubts on Black's risky 
play, extreme measures were needed, i.e. 
again the sacrifice of a piece. So, forward, 
into the attack!
23 b3! (53)
After 23 &xa7 'i¥tb7 24 i.e3 (24 ti:Jb6? c3!)
24. ..ti:Jb3 25 ti:Jb6 ti:Jxcl 26 .l:!.xcl c3 27 ti:c4 
cxb2 28 "ixb2 &h6 White has no more than 
equalising compensation for the exchange.
23...C3 
(3)
Black would have lost after 23. ..ti:Jxb3? 24 
Sxc4+ 'it>b7 25 'i c 2! or 24.. .&d7 25 ii.xa7 
tt:Jxal 26 ti:Jb6+. But now White has to give 
up his knight, without having any forced 
solution to the position.
24 ti:Jxc3! bxc3 25 !1xc3+ <i¥td7
25 ...'Iitb7? was bad: 26 #c2 &d6 (26 ...'ifd7
27 l:!.c1) 27 b4! with decisive threats 
(27. ..<:tJc6 28 Sxc6!), as was 25 ...<i¥tb8? 26 
#c2 #d7 (26... 'iVb7 27 S c l) 27 &xa7+! <;i;>b7
28 ..lte3 ..ltb4 29 .l:!.c4! 'i*'d6 30 'ie 4  ti:c6 31 
Bxc6! or 28...-ltd6 29 b4 ..ixb4 (29...ii.e5 30 
bxa5!) 30 .l:i.bl ti:Jc6 31 Sc4 Sb5 32 .l:!.c5! .l:!.h5
33 flxh5 Bxh5 34 i.c5 and wins. Therefore 
the black king makes for the centre under 
the cover of its army.
26 'ic2  (3)
26. ....id6? (5)
Although no one noticed, this was the 
decisive mistake! It was only 15 years later, 
in a correspondence game (Germany 1996), 
that 26...ti:Jc6! 27 .l:!.cl ctJd8 was played, and 
after 28 fic7+ 'it>e8 29 .l:!.xa7 Shh5! (with the 
threats of ...Shf5xf6 and ...ii.c5) White 
gradually lost, after failing to find the 
deeply hidden 
resource 
30 b4! 
.l:!.hf5 
(30... ..ixb4 31 S b l!) 31 Sa8! Sxf6 32 kg5!! 
Ixg 5 33 J:xd8+ <i¥txd8 34#c8+ <;i;>e7 35 .Uc7+ 
'it>d6 36 .Mcl! with unavoidable perpetual 
check. 28 J:c8 ..id6 29 b4 ..te5 30 l!c5! .l:!.xc5
335

Garry Kasparov on Garry Kasparov: Part One
31 ). xc5 is more energetic, with an attack 
compensating for the material deficit, but, 
alas, no more than that...
27 l:!.c1 (9) 27.. .'ti'b7 (3)
Both defending, and creating the terrible 
threat of ...Sxh2!. If 27...Wb4 White wins by
28 .:1c8! l:td1+ 29 l:.xd1 .l:lxc8 30 ^ 7  'iti>e8 
(30....Uf8 31 ..ih6) 31 Sd4! etc. Now it ap­
pears that White's attack has come to a 
standstill, but he has a latent resource - 
again, as on the 23rd move, the b-pawn 
joins the battle.
#xc7+ 'it>e8 31 ..ic5. I also studied this 
possibility, but came to the conclusion that 
after 31 ..."i¥b7! 32 #xa5 Shh5! it is hard for 
White to count on any real advantage: 33 
#a3 l:!.hf5 34 ..ie7 ktd4 35 h4 fifd5 36 'iti>h2 
.l:f5 etc.
However, I couldn't help feeling that 
there was something more in the position, 
and after a long think I conceived an idea 
which demanded an introductory move by 
the rook. Black's reply is forced.
29...'iYg4 (6)
The forcing play has come to an end, and 
White's next move will decide whether he is 
able to create new threats, or Black will 
escape with a slight fright. And I again 
thought for a long time, thereby 'acknowl­
edging' that the attack was being con­
ducted largely intuitively.
28 b4!
The only way to win. It transpires that
28...1:!.xh2? does not work because of 29 
#a4+!, nor does 28...fib5? 29 bxa5 .l:i.xh2 in 
view of 30 .Uc6!, winning. It would appear 
that in his analysis Timoshchenko had 
overlooked this nuance, since here he 
stopped to think.
28...'iUxb4! (12)
Played without prejudices: Black realises 
that the check on c7 cannot in itself cause 
him any problems (the realisation of this on 
the 26th move was probably hindered by 
him being carried away by the idea of 
...^ 7  with the threat of ....l:i.xh2).
29l:!.b1! (25)
Timoshchenko, like all those watching 
the game, was expecting 29 .l:i.c7+ 
xc7 30
Before making the planned move, it was 
important for me to convince myself that 
other continuations were inadequate:30 
..if4? ..ixf4 31 #a4+ 'iti>d6 32 h3! (weaker is
32 #b4+ lite5! or 32 Se1 e5! 33 ^ 4 +  'iti>e6)
32...#g5! 33 Wa3+ 'iti>e5 34 2b4 'ikh6!, or 30 
f3?! #f5! (but not 30. ..#h3? on account of 
the spectacular 31 .l:i.b7+!! ctJxb7 32 #a4+ 
'itd8 33 iL.b6+!) 31 #a4+ 'it'd8 32 Sb cl 'ix f6
33 Wa1 'tlVe5 or 33. ...l:i.h6, and the black king 
escapes from the pursuit.
336

Adult Games
As is apparent from this last variation, 
Black need not fear the queen check at a4, 
as long as his king can calmly retreat to d8. 
This means that White should not be­
grudge spending a precious tempo on the 
elimination of the a7-pawn, which is de­
priving his bishop ofthe b6-square!
30 ..txa7!! (20)
This paradoxical decision proves to be 
optimal - the computer decision, it can be 
said: a simple capture, although it is not a 
matter of the pawn, but of the b6-square. 
Now the threat of 31 f3 is deadly: if the 
queen moves off the 4th rank, White gives 
mate by 32 'ilVa4+ 'it>d8 33 i.b6+.
By this point I had little more than 
twenty minutes left on my clock, whereas 
my opponent had used less than forty. But 
now it was his turn to think. ..
30. ..es (26)
The most natural reply: Timoshchenko 
decided to use the tempo granted for the 
creation of an escape square for his king. 
Another try is 30.....te5 (Came No.66).
31 'iVa2! (3)
Again the only move, an intuitive one! It 
unexpectedly transpires that Black is un­
able to solve a very simple question: what 
to do with the rook on d5? Here Gennady 
now sensed just how dangerous his posi-
tion was, an d he thought for almost an 
hour - after his next move he had less than 
fifteen minutes to the time control.
31...1:dl+ (57)
The best chance. Other moves would not 
have saved Black:
a) 31...<it>e6 32 f3 i'Wh5(h3) 33 Sb2;
b) 31...'i't'h5 32 h4! e4 33 '&a4+;
c) 31....'iVh3 32 f3 'iVh7 33 ..te3! (cf. the 
variation with 31...'iYf5);
d) 31...'iVf5 (a cunning move) - now 32 
2e1? (32 'iVxd5?? 'iNxbl+ 33 'it>g2 ^ 7 )  is a 
weak reply in view of 32 ...inl3! (if 32 ...We6? 
Timoshchenko gave 33 2 d l e4 34 f3! ..txg3
35 hxg3 and wins, while if 34. . . . 5  35 Sd2!)
33 f4 'iVxh2+ 34 "ixh2 2xh2 35 'ixh2 ..tb4!,
as is 32 l:.b7+? ltJxb7 33 'iVxd5 ^ 1+ ! 34 'it>g2 
ltJd8 35 .l:.b3 'iVf5!, but the quiet move 32 f3!! 
proves 
decisive, 
for 
example: 
32. ...Ua8
(32...e4? 33 "ia4+ 'it>e6 34 fxe4) 33 2a1! with 
the simple threat of '&xd5 and Sxa5, or
32.. 
.^ 7  (the most resilient) 33 ..te3! 'iNf5 
(33. ..'ie6 34 Sb5!, but not 34 Sdl?? #xh2+!)
34 ..tf2, and Black has no defence.
32 S x d l 'iVxdl+ 33 Wg2
33. ..iVhS?! (2)
But this time-trouble attempt to confuse 
matters loses by force. A more resilient de­
fence, which no one saw, was the computer 
reply 33 ...CLlb3! (interference!), after which
337

Garry Kasparov on Garry Kasparov: Part One
White could either go into an endgame - 34 
'iVxb3 'ti'xb3 35 Bxb3. although after 35...'ite6 
sooner or later Black would pick up the f6- 
pawn, retaining drawing chances in view of 
the limited material, or continue the attack -
34 Sxb3 'iVd5+ 35 f3 _g,a8 36 'iVa4+!? 'ite6 37 
Sb2! 'it>xf6 38 'i!Vh4+, condemning the oppo­
nent to a difficult defence a pawn down. But 
the fight would still have continued!
34 #a4+! (5)
Another accurate move. 34 h4? was far 
weaker in view of 34. ...Ct:c6!.
34. ..'it>e6
35 h4!
It was this obvious move, killing Black's 
counterplay, 
that 
Timoshchenko 
over­
looked. Incidentally, whereas up to the 30th 
move it was White who had been short of 
time, now the roles were reversed: Black 
was in time-trouble, whereas White still 
had a whole fifteen minutes on his clock!
35...'ie2
35 
...e4 36 'i'xe4+ 'i'e5 37 'ig4+ 'iff5 38 
Be3+ &e5 39 'i'a4! or 35...liJb7 36 Sf3 (36 
g4!?) 36...CUd8 37 &b6 'i'b6 38 'iVc4+'it>d7 39 
Sd3 was also hopeless. 35 . ..'itxf6 36 #xa5 
'it>g7 was slightly better, but after 37 Vi'd5! 
White would build up a decisive attack.
36 'ixa5  .l:a8
36. 
..'i'e4+ 37 'it>h2 (37 Sf3!?) 37. ..l:.a8 is
more resilient, although here too Black's 
days are numbered: 38 'i'a6! #d4!? 39 
#a2+! #d5 40 'ixd5+ &xd5 41 &e3 etc.
37 't!Va4! (2)
An invasion on the light squares! The 
pursuit of the black king is resumed with 
renewed vigour.
37...'it>xf6 38 'id 7 (38 !:tf3+!? 'ite7 39 h5!)
38. ..'it>g7 (3) 39 .l:f3 (2) 39...i'c4 40 'i!Yxd6 
Sxa7 41 'i'xe5+ 'ith7 42 .l:f5 (2)
In search of shelter the king has crossed 
the entire board under fire by the white 
pieces, and there is nowhere further to run.
42...'ic6+ (a 'spite' check) 43 'it>h2 1-0
Times: 2.25-2.29.
This spectacular win enabled me to catch 
Psakhis, who that day played a draw (we 
were both on 91/2 out of 13). Immediately 
after the round, debates flared up: was the 
piece sacrifice correct, and where could 
Black have played more strongly? These 
questions concerned many of the partici­
pants in the championship. A lively analysis 
after the game involved not only Ti­
moshchenko and me, but also Dorfman, and 
Sveshnikov, who as usual was showing 
where and what should have been moved. 
His voice resounded louder than the others, 
and the variations he demonstrated looked
338

Adult Games
convincing enough (no one believed that the 
sacrifice 24 .:Uxc3! was winning, but also no 
one had seen 26...cuc6!), and in the end the 
grandmaster 
consultation 
decided that 
30. .. e5 was the decisive mistake, and that
30...i.e5 would have parried the attack. All 
my attempts to refute this were unsuccess­
ful, and Sveshnikov publicly declared that he 
was prepared to defend the position after
30. ...ie5 against me in the 16th round!
On returning to the hotel, for a long time 
I was unable to get to sleep. Thoughts 
about the game just played would not leave 
me in peace. Was 30...ge5 really such a 
good move that it killed White's entire 
plan?! Without interruption I analysed this 
position in my head, and only by two in the 
morning did I find peace: analysis showed 
irrefutably that 30...i..e5 also did not save 
Black (I remember even that, when this 
happened, I said to my mother: ‘Found it!'). 
It only remained to await the penultimate, 
16th round, but life decreed otherwise. ..
The next day I played the 29-year-old 
Lvov grandmaster lossif Dorfman, USSR co­
champion in 1977 and also one of my 
future seconds (in the early 1990s he 
moved to France). The spectators assem­
bled in the spacious hall of the Sports 
Palace followed with mounting astonish­
ment the movements of the pieces on one 
of the large demonstration boards. Within
45 minutes the familiar critical position 
after White's 30th move was reached.
Game 66 
G.Kasparov-I.Dorfman
49th  USSR Cham pionship, 
14th round, Frunze 16.12.1981 
Semi-Slav Defence D44
1 d4 d 5 2 C4 e6 3 CUf3 cuf6 4 CUC3 c6 5 i.g5
dxc4 6 e4 (5) 6...b5 7 e5 h6 8 ..th4 g5 9 tt:Jxg5 
hxg5 10 .ixg 5 tt:Jbd7 11 exf6 (2) 11...i.b7 12 
g3 c5 13 d5 Wb6 14 .ig 2 0-0-0 15 0-0 b4 16 
lt:Ja4 "ib5 17 a3 cubs 18 axb4 cxb4 19 ..te3 
..txd5 20 .ix d 5 J:xd5 21 "ie 2 tt:Jc6 22 S fc1 
CUa5l? (22. ..lt:Je5! - Game No.82) 23 b3 C3 24 
tt:Jxc3 bxc3 25 J:xc3+ 'it>d7 26 "ic 2 ..td6? 
(26 . ..CUc6!) 27 Sc1 'iYb7 (10) 28 b4 "ixb4 29 
.l:!.b1 'iYg4 30 i.xa7
The chief arbiter of the tournament, 
Mikhail Yudovich: 'An amazing occurrence! 
During many, many years of participating 
in major competitions, I do not recall any­
thing similar: up to the 30th (!) move the 
players repeated a game played in the 
previous round.' I too did not believe my 
eyes...
30....; e5 (5)
This move, suggested instead of 30. ..e5 
(Game No.65), was also made quite quickly 
by Dorfman. Having taken Sveshnikov's 
word for it, he had not found time to delve 
deeply into the position and, it would seem, 
he began to see the light only after my 
reply.
31 fic5! (1)
Of course, not the suicidal 31 f3?? ..td4+!
32 'it>h1 #xg3 33 "ia4+ 'it>d8 34 Sb8+ #xb8
35 .ixb 8 i.xc3 or 32 ..txd4 #xd4+ 33 'it>g2 
(33 'it>h1 Sdh5!) 33..."id2+ 34 'it>g1 # x c 2 35
339

Garry Kasparov on Garry Kasparov: Part One
Bxc2 Bh6 and ....Uxf6. The move in the 
game is directed in the first instance at the 
exchange of the rook on d5 - the black 
king's main defender.
31...Sxc5 (21)
Forced: mate would have been unavoid­
able after, say, 31...1:ta8? 32 1:txa5! 1:txa5 33 
.Ub7+ We8 34 .l:e7+ 'it>f8 35 Wh7.
32 ..ixc5!
My night-time discovery! The fact that 
the quiet ‘backwards' capture was stronger 
than 32 'i'xc5, and that now Black has no 
defence, was not easy to grasp (I don't 
know whether I would have found it at the 
board if the previous day Timoshchenko 
had played 30. ...i.e5). In a joint blitz analysis 
we only looked at the pseudo-active 32 
'!Vxc5(?) lt:lc6! 33 .l:b7+ i c7 34 ..ib6 Sc8, 
when the attack peters out.
On encountering this surprise, Dorfman 
spent a full hour seeking a way to save the 
game, but it was already too late...
32...1t:lc6 (65)
While the opponent was considering his 
move, I checked my home calculations 
(before this I had not reached this position 
on a board, but only in my head), and I 
ascertained that White also wins after 
other replies: 32 ...Sc8 33 Wd2+ and 'i'xa5;
32...'il'c4 33 'i'd2+ 'it>c6 34 Sb6+! 'it>xc5 35
Wxa5+ Wd4 36 .l:b4; 32...i.c7 33 'ifd3+ 'ic8
34 .Ub4! Wf5 35 "t4Va6+ 'id 7 36 Sd4+;
32 ...Hb8 33 .Udl+ We8 34 ' d4! (34 f4 is also 
strong) 34....id6 35 i.a7! 1:td8 36 ..lb6!.
The computer also considers 32...'-i'f5!?
33 'iYd1+! 'it>c8 34 1:tc1! 'i!ke4 (ignoring the 
discovered check) 35 ..ld6+ 'ib7 36 'Yi"f1! 
Wd5 37 .!:i.b1+ 'it>a7 38 Sb5 ..ixd6 39 Sxd5 
exd5 40 'iVb5 lt:lb7 41 jVxd5. when the 
queen and three pawns overrun Black's 
scattered army. With a computer White 
wins easily in all variations, but at the time 
this was far from obvious.
33 'iYd3+! 'it>c8 (6)
The lesser evil was probably to go into an 
endgame two pawns down by 33 ...ctJd4 
(33. ....id4? 34 1:tb7+) 34 1:td1 'ic7 (34. ...l:!.h4?
35 Wb5+ 'ic8 36 'ifa6+ 'ic7 37 .i.b6+!) 35 
xd4 Wxd4 36 Wxd4 i.xd 4  37 1:txd4 Sh6,
although after 38 'ig2 all the same Black's 
position is hopeless (38. ..ft.xf6? 39 1:tf4!).
34 .Udl (22)
There was a pretty win by 34 'i'a6+ 'itd7
35 Sb7+ ..ic7 36 S x c 7 + ! 'ixc7  37 'i'b6+ 'ic8
38 Wxc6+ 'ib8 39 'i'b6+ 'ic8 40 'i'a6+ <tilc7
41 ..ib6+ 'it>c6 (41...'id6 42 i.a7+! <tile5 43 
f4+ Wxf6 44 i.d4+ and ..lxh8) 42 ..ia7+! c:tJc7
43 Wb6+ 'id 7 44 'i'b5+ 'it>d6 45 •= c5+ 'ie5
46 ; d4++! '>i>e4 (46...'ixd4 47 'i'h4+ and 
'iVxg4) 47 f3!. I saw these variations, but I
340

Adult Games
preferred to make a move which firmly 
guaranteed a terribly strong attack.
34...ctJb8 (if 34....l:d8 White mates by 35 
#a6+) 3S Sc1!
Emphasising the helplessness of the 
black pieces, which are unable to assist 
their king.
35...'ia4 (6)
The expiatory bishop sacrifice made by 
Dorfman merely delays the end slightly.
36 &d6+ ttJc6 37 ^xe5 !!dB (2)
38 'ib 1 ! (4)
Renewing the mating threats.
38...5d5 (5) 39 'ibB+ (2) 39...'it>d7 40 Wic7+ 
'it>e8 41 'ixc6+ Wxc6 42 Sxc6 !!xe5 43 Sc8+
1-0
In view of 43 ...'it>d7 44 Etf8. Times: 0.55­
2.26.
An unforgettable two-day battle! As a 
result I reached 10/z out of 14 and again 
burst half a step ahead. But in the 15th and 
16th rounds I slowed down, making far 
from peaceful draws with Romanishin and 
Sveshnikov (who 'in the light of newly 
discovered circumstances' deemed it wise 
to avoid the Botvinnik Variation by playing
5...h6). But Psakhis scored two crushing 
wins, moved up to 'plus eight' and before 
the last round was leading me by half a
point. This was his finest hour! I remember 
being terribly upset by the fact that my 
'plus seven' would guarantee me only 
second place.
Psakhis's position before the finish was 
clearly preferable for the added reason that 
he had White against the championship 
debutant Agzamov, whereas I was paired 
with Black against Tukmakov, who was also 
invincible in this tournament, and was two 
points behind in third place, while a draw 
would give him the bronze medal and a 
place in the next Premier League! Few 
doubted that Psakhis would be the sole 
winner, but last rounds do not always obey 
the laws of logic.
In this situation Lev took a highly com­
mitting and, perhaps, not the most correct 
decision - to play for a win against Ag­
zamov. He sacrificed a pawn and initiated a 
very complicated, lengthy struggle, which 
inspired me: now any result was possible in 
their game, which meant that my chances 
of catching my rival were also improved. 
Especially since Agzamov parried the on­
slaught, kept his extra pawn, and declined 
the offer of a draw...
And so, in the decisive game I was op­
posed by the 35-year-old Vladimir Tukma- 
kov, the remarkable Odessa grandmaster 
and trainer (without his name it is impossi­
ble to imagine modern Ukrainian chess). I 
have to admit that I myself found it hard to 
believe in the possibility with Black of de­
feating 'to order' such an experienced 
tournament fighter, but - the miracle 
occurred!
In the preparations for the duel an active 
part was played by Vladimirov, who had 
arrived specially from Alma-Ata. Nikitin: ‘In 
just one day we had to find a set-up which 
in some way would particularly tempt 
Tukmakov, forcing him during the game to
341

Garry Kasparov on Garry Kasparov: Part One
oscillate between caution and a desire to 
punish the opponent fo r his excessive risk. 
The best bait fo r this would be a pawn 
sacrifice. A few  hours before the start ofthe 
round we found an interesting and highly 
controversial game, published in the latest 
Informator, Volume 31. After spending a 
couple of hours, Garry considered himself an 
expert on the set-up, calmed down and went 
off fo r a meal... It was easier to compile the 
battle scenario: the maximum concentra­
tion, no interest in the other games, and the 
continuous building up of the pressure, 
bringing it to the boil by the last, fifth hour 
of play. An hour before the start we unhur­
riedly set off on foot. We walked in silence, 
occasionally making briefexchanges. Garry's 
thoughts were already on the stage of the 
tournament hall.'
Game 67 
V. Tukmakov-G.Kasparov
49th  USSR Cham pionship, 
17th round, Frunze 21 .12 .19 81 
King's Indian Defence E74
1 d4 lt:lf6 2 c4 g6 3 ctJc3 ;  g7
At this critical moment I turned to the 
King's Indian Defence - my old, well-tested 
weapon.
4 e4 d6 5 i.e 2 0-0 6 i.g s
The Averbakh Variation, which in those 
years was popular among the leading 
Odessa players, does not promise White 
much, but it restricts Black's active possi­
bilities.
6...c5 (6...lt:Jbd7 - Game No. 76) 7 d5 b5?l (2) 
An audacious and hardly correct pawn 
sacrifice. But I didn't want to play 7...h6 
(Game No.28) with a relatively clear game, 
which - and this was important - the 
opponent was expecting. For me the situa­
tion was unambiguous: all or nothing!
8 cxb5 a6 9 a4! (3) 9 ...h6
Of course, not 9... "ia5?! 10 ..td2! (Game 
No.58). However, my improvement only 
makes things slightly better for Black
10 i.d2 (7)
A solid move, dictated by White's desire 
to retain not so much his extra pawn, as 
the invulnerability of his position. 10 i.f4  
was also not bad, since 10...g5(?!), recom­
mended by me in Informator, together with
11 i.d2 e6 12 dxe6 i.xe6, suggested in The 
Test of  Time, is dangerous because of 13 h4! 
g4 14 'iVc1 'it>h7 (14. ..h5 15 i.h6) 15 i.d3 
with the threat of 16 e5+.
10... e6 11 dxe6 (2) 11... ; xe6 12 lt:lf3 (2)
White is a sound pawn to the good, and 
today I look sadly at my position, not alto­
gether understanding where is Black's 
‘active piece play' that was spoken about 
thirty years ago. But at the time, sitting 
opposite Tukmakov, I was radiating compo­
sure and confidence.
12 ...axb5 13 ..txb5
In The Test of Time I criticised 13 axb5?!, 
since after 13...i.b3! 14 1Vc1 .l:txa1 15 'irfxa1 
'iWe7(?!) 'the e4-pawn is doomed', but in fact 
here White has quite good prospects: 16 0-0 
ltJxe4 17 lt:Jxe4 1Vxe4 18 .l:te1 etc. Therefore 
15- ...l:!.e8! is more accurate.
342

Adult Games
13...tt:Ja6 (3) 14 0-0 (5) 14...lt:Jc7 (3)
The leap 14. ..lt:Jb4 did not appeal to me 
because of 15 ." e3, preventing ...d6-d5.
15 2 e1 (6)
15 
&e2 would have retained the bishop, 
but allowed 15 ...d5 16 exd5 lt:Jfxd5, al­
though in this case too Black has only slight 
compensation for the pawn. With 15 fie1 
White tries for more. It would appear that 
the draw, which would have satisfied 
Tukmakov in the purely competitive sense, 
had already ceased to be the guideline for 
him.
15...1.:Jxb5 (9) 16 lt:Jxb5
The simple 16 axb5 would have opened 
the way to numerous exchanges and the 
cherished drawing haven - after, say,
16...d5 
17 exd5 tt:xd5 18 l;ixa8 'ix a 8 19 ttJe4 
or 17....l:xa1 18 # x a 1 <iJxd5 19 'i'a7 Black 
would have been fighting only for a draw. 
But, apparently, Tukmakov had been seized 
by the fervour of the struggle! 'A first, 
purely psychological achievement by Black: 
the snail has been forced to come out of its 
shell.' (Nikitin)
16...d5 17 exd5 (3) 17...lt:Jxd5 18 lt:Je5! (7)
A strong, ambitious move. After 18 Wkc2 
lt:Jb4! 19 &xb4 cxb4 Black would have 
maintained the balance thanks to the 
power of his two bishops. And after 18 .l:c1,
which I recommended in Informator, both
18 ...lt:Jb4 (5tohl) and 18 ...lt:Jb6 19 b3 c4 are 
good.
18...2 e8 (18)
Continuing to reproduce the Informator 
source game. After some thought, I con­
cluded that 18... ^ 4?! was weak because of
1S 1!Vc2!.
19 :.c 1 (8)
A new and better move! The aforemen­
tioned A.Petrosian-Arbakov game (Moscow 
1981) went 19 'ifc1 #h4?! 20 'iVxc5 (20 
a5!?), and in our preparations, not seeing 
anything promising here for Black, we 
found an improvement - 19...^ f5!. I was 
also concerned about 19 lt:Jc4!? with the 
threat of an invasion at d6 - for example,
19 . ..ttJb4(?) 20 tt:cd6 Se7 21 i_c3 (Stohl) 
with an obvious advantage for White, but 
after 19 ...'iWb8!? the position would have 
been unclear.
19. ..&f5! (10)
5harpening the position further. Tukma­
kov now cracks under the intense pressure!
20 lt:Jc6?! (37)
20 
^ a 5? S x a 5 21 lt:Jc6 .:"txe1+ 22 # xe 1 is 
incorrect because of 22...'ia 8!, while after
20 lt:Jc4?! Sxe 1+ 21 &xe1 lt:Jf4 22 'ix d 8+ 
.l:xd8 for the first time Black acquires 
unpleasant threats.
343

Garry Kasparov on Garry Kasparov: Part One
However, 20 f4!? would still have laid 
claim to an advantage. In The Test of Time I 
optimistically asserted that after 20...g5?! 
(20...f6 or 20. . Ci:c7 is more solid) 21 'iVh5 
l:te7 'a position is reached where White's 
extra pawn does not play any part'. Alas, it 
very much plays a part: 22 b3 (22 \Wf3!?)
22 ...l:ta6 23 l:txc5 'irb6 24 l:tec1 tt:Jxf4 25 
..txf4 gxf4 26 'it>hl, and Black is fighting 
only for equality. But here psychology had 
an effect: Tukmakov had no wish to cast 
caution to the winds, by exposing his king 
with f2-f4.
20..."id7! (32)
This is better than 2 0 ...^ 6  (it is not be­
fitting for the queen to perform the role of 
defender of the c5-pawn!) 21 l:txe8+ l:txe8
22 tt:Ja5 Bd8! or 21 tt:Ja5 Bxe1+ (21...J:ed8 is 
also possible) 22 "ix e l - previously I as­
sessed this position in favour of White, but 
after 22 .....id3 23 tt:Jc4 "ic6 24 tt:le5 (24 b3 
l:!.e8 25 " id l l:te2 is dangerous for White)
24.....1xe5 25 "ixe5 l:te8 26 l:txc5 l:txe5 27 
Bxc6 Se2 28 l:tc8+ 'it>h7 29 ..ia5 ..ixb5 30 
axb5 fixb2 his advantage evaporates.
By sacrificing a second pawn, Black di­
verts the white rook, after which a signifi­
cant defect in White's position is suddenly 
revealed - the weakness of his back rank.
21 Sxc5 (3) 21...Hxe1+ 22 'it'xe1 (8)
Already the only move - after 22 ..txel? 
Be8! White does not have 23 fixd5? be­
cause of 23. .."ixd5!, and he is not saved by
23 g3? tt:Jf4!, 23 ..td2 tt:Jf4!, 23 ..ia5 tt:Jb4!, 23 
l:tc1 ..ixb2, or even the most resilient 23 
tt:Jcd4 ctJf4! 24 l:tc1 ..ixd4 25 tt:Jxd4 'i¥xd4! 26 
\Wxd4 ctJe2+ 27 
tt:Jxd4 28 l:tdl ctJb3, 
when the piece for two pawns should bring 
Black a win.
22. ...l:e8!
Playing for a win: this creates far more 
problems 
for 
White 
than 
the 
direct
22... Sxa4 23 b4 (23 b3 Se4!?) 23 ...l:ta1 24 
l:tc1 S x c l 25 'i¥xc1 ..ie4 with full compensa­
tion for the pawn, perfectly sufficient - foT 
a draw.
23 "ic1 (3)
Again the only move: after 23 "id l? or 23
ii.e3 Black has the decisive 23...ctJf4!, while 
if 23 " ifl?  tt:Jb6! 24 ..ie3 tt:Jxa4 25 fic l tt:Jxb2 
with a powerful initiative.
23...tt:Jb6?! (5)
A vexing error, which gives the opponent 
a new chance. 23 ...Be2?! is also inadequate 
in view of 24 h3! (an escape square for his 
king - this is what White lacks for complete 
happiness!). However, the balance would 
have been maintained by 23 . ..l:te4! with the 
terrible threat of .....ih3!!. If Tukmakov had 
found the only defence - 24 b3!, I would
344

Adult Games
have had to choose between an immediate 
perpetual check - 24... .ih 3 25 gxh3 "ixh3
26 l:tc4 'i'g4+ and very unclear play 'for any 
of three results' after 24. ..'ih7!?.
24 b3! (4) 24...Se2 (2)
25 i.a5?! (2)
Here I sensed that Tukmakov was not 
fully aware of the danger threatening him. 
He had two other possibilities:
a) 25 i.e3?! ..tb2! 26 'iff1 k d3 27 
d4!
(there is nothing else: 27 'id l?  .i.xb5!)
27...1:td2 28 'ife1 Se2 29 'ilt'd1!? ..txb5 30 
Sxb5 .l:te6! (not Stohl's variation 30. ..ii.xd4
31 "ixe2 "ixc6 32 h3) 31 Sxb6 ..txd4 32 
:tb8+ <;t>h7 33 Sd8 ..txf2+! 34 <;t>xf2 'i¥xc6, 
and the exposed position of White's king 
denies him winning chances, or 27. ..:te8(e6)
28 "ixd3 .l:te1+ 29 't/Vf1 't/Ve6 30 Se5 Sxf1+ 31 
Wxf1 'ixc6  32 ..txb2 Wh7 with the idea of 
...tt:d5 and a probable draw.
b) 25 .i.c3!, and in the event of 25 ...l:tc2?!
26 "iVe1 ..txc3 (26. ...ie4? 27 ltle5! "Yfle7 28 
Sc7 We6 29 tt:f3 and wins) 27 tt:xc3 the 
move given by me in The Test of Time
27...'iVe6(?) is bad because of 28 'id1! ii.g4 
(28..."ixb3 29 h3!) 29 ^ 1 !  Sb2 30 "ia 1 ! 
Sxb3 31 tt:d4 (Stohl) or 30. ..'ixb3 31 h3! 
(threatening Sb5) 31..Wc2 (31.. . .i. e2 32 
i'c1!) 32 'iVe1! -i d7 33 a5, and Black cannot 
hold out. 27 ...'t/Vd6 is more resilient, but
after 28 b4! tt:xa4 29 tt:xa4 Sxc5 30 tt:xc5 
"ixc6 31 h3 White simply has an extra 
passed pawn.
Therefore the immediate 25....ixc3! is 
necessary: 
26 tt:xc3 
(26 Sxc3?! tt:d5!)
26. .l:te6! 27 a5 'ie8!? (27. ..Sxc6 is also 
possible) 28 Se5 'ixc6 29 .l:txe6 ..txe6 30 
axb6 "ixb6 31 'ixh 6  ii.xb3, gaining a draw 
thanks to all the pawns being on one wing.
It is hard to say how the play would have 
developed after 25 ii.c3. Instead of this, 
Tukmakov took his bishop out of harm's 
way and at the same time attacked the 
knight, but now the activity of the black 
pieces increases sharply.
25 ...ii.e4l (14)
With the obvious idea of 26 ..txb6? 'i'g4. I 
rejected the safe 25 ... ..tb2 because of 26 
"if1!, when to avoid the worst I would have 
had to force a draw - 26 ...Se6 (26. .. i  d3 ?!
27 tt:b4!) 27 tt:b4 'i'd2! 28 tt:c6! "id7!. The 
move in the game provokes wild complica­
tions, in which it is easy to go wrong. The 
enormous energy stored up in the black 
pieces is about to break out.
26 tt:Je5 (6)
Again a natural move, but hardly the 
best in terms of neutralising the threats. 
White should have considered 26 "if1 
.l:tb2!? (26...fla2 27 Sc1 Cbxa4 is a simpler
345

Carry Kasparov on Garry Kasparov: Part One
way to draw) 27 .Uc1! (27 ..ixb6?! is less 
good: 27. ..l:i.b1! 28 .l:!.c1? Ji.xg2!) 27. ...Ct:Jd5 28 
fie1 or 27. ....ixc6 28 ..ixb6 fixb3 29 'li'c4, 
and Black merely has good compensation 
for the material deficit.
26...'iWe7! (8)
Attacking new targets.
27 ctJd4? (6)
By continuing to bring into play the pieces 
stuck on the queenside, Tukmakov commits 
a decisive tactical mistake: on d4 the knight 
is subject to various attacks. White had more 
than one acceptable defence:
a) 27 Ji.xb6 Ji.xe5 28 fixe5!? 'ixe5 29 
i. d4 'ie 6  30 h3 with full compensation for 
the exchange;
b) 27 ctJf3!? - it is hard for a human 
player to decide on this in view of 27.....ixf3 
(27 ...ctJbd5!? 28 tt:Jbd4! .l:!.a2 29 .te l is equal)
28 gxf3 ^ 4 , although after 29 'if1 ! ..ie5 
(29. ....l:!.a2?! 30 : xb6 :l.a1 31 # xa1 ..ixa1 32 
a5!) 30 l:i.xe5 ..l:!.xe5 31 f4! 'Yi'xf4 32 ctJd4 
White is out of danger;
c) 27 Wf1! l:i.a2! (27 ...'Yi'xc5 28 #xe2 'i:i'xe5
29 
xb6 'Yi'a1+ 30 'Yi'f1 is problematic) 28 
.i. xb6 ■’ xe5 29 tt:c3, and the best for Black 
is perpetual check after the spectacular
29 .....ixh2+! 30 'it>xh2 'Yi'h4+ 31 'it>g1 Ji.xg2!
32 'it>xg2 #g4+.
In any other game such a draw would
have provided enormous creative satisfac­
tion, but not in this one! Fortunately, my 
opponent relieved me of the need to seek 
illusory chances...
27. ..Sa2! 28 ..txb6 (3)
The game ends catastrophically after 28 
tt:Jdc6? 'i:i'xc5!, 28 tt:ef3? ..txd4 29 tt:Jxd4 
'i!Vxc5!, or 28 tt:Jdf3? tt:Jd5! 29 tt:c6 'Yi'f6 (with 
the threat of ... J xf3 and ... :l.a1) 30 ctJd2 ..l:!.a1
31 tt:Jxe4 Wb2! 32 Ji.d2 ctJc3! (Stohl).
28... ^ xe5
Black has managed to get rid of his bad 
knight on b6, by exchanging it for the active 
knight on e5, and suddenly all his pieces 
have become very aggressively placed.
29 'Yi'e3? (13)
Confusion. The mass of threats and 
shortage of time provoked this 'inexplica­
ble' blunder, which loses the game in one 
move (as does 29 'Yi'xh6? 'Yi'xc5! - here it is, 
the weakness of the back rank!). True, 29 
l:i.xe5 Wxe5 30 f3 Ji.d3 etc., would also not 
have saved White, and the best defence 29 
'Yi'e1! would merely have prolonged the 
resistance and offered practical chances:
a) 
29...'id6(?) 30 tt:Je2(?) ..ixh2+(?) 31 'it>h1 
'i:i'xb6 32 Sc8+ 'it>h7 33 'it>xh2 Ji.b7 (not the 
Informator move 33. ....ixg2? in view of 34 
'ic3!) 34 He8 with equality, or 31...ii.e5 32 
tt:c3! etc., parrying the attack (The Test of
346

Adult Games
Time). However, there is a win by 30.....ib7!
31 a5 i.xh2+ 32 'ih 1 ..ie5 33 lt:Jc1 fixf2!. 
But 30 lt:Jb5! 'i'f6(e6) 31 J:!.xe5 'i'xe5 32 i.d 4 
gives drawing chances;
b) 29..Sf6(?) 30 lt:Je2! (30 lt:Jf3? Sa1 or 30 
l:i.xe5? 'i'xe5 31 f3 'i'g5 32 g3 'i'f6! 33 Wxe4 
'i¥xb6 is bad for White - cf. variation 'c')
30....1:!.a1 31 .l:!.c1 Wg5 32 Wf1! (not 32 g3? 
f
 with the threats of ...'i'f3 and ...Wxb6 
or 32 f3? ; xf3 33 g3 Sa2 - Stohl) 32 ....l:!.xc1
33 lt:Jxc1 Wf4 ‘with a strong attack' (The Test 
of Time), but after 34 f3 Wxh2+ 35 'if2  
'i'h4+ 36 'ie2 White holds on;
c) 29...#g5!? 30 g3 Wf6! 31 fixe5 (31 Sc4? 
..id5! 32 fic8+ 'ih7! 33 i.d 8 Wa6! and wins)
31...#xe5 32 f3 Wf6(d6) 33 Wxe4 Wxb6 34 
'i'e8+ 'it>g7 35 'i'e3 'ih 7!, and the power of 
the black rook is decisive, although I would 
still have had to find an accurate way to the 
goal;
d) 29 ...'ih7!. A quiet move, creating the 
threat of .....ixd4. Now 30 l:i.b5? (30 flc1? 
Wg5!; 30 .l:!.c4? ; d5!) is weak in view of
30. ....ixh2+ 31 'ixh2 Wh4+ 32 'ig1 Wg4!, 
but also hopeless is 30 lt:Jf3 r b2! 31 Sc7 
'i'e6! 32 ^ 4  ..ie5! (again the back rank!) or
30 fixe5 'i'xe5 31 h3 fib2 32 lt:Jf3 'i'd5! 33 
'i'c3 Sxb3 34 'i'f6 'i'e6! 35 Wxe6 fxe6 36 a5 
..ixf3 37 gxf3 .l:!.a3, and in the ending the 
rook overcomes the bishop.
29 ...Wxc5! 0-1
This position will always shine for me 
with the brilliance of my first USSR cham­
pion's gold medal! Times: 2.19-1.59.
Nikitin: 'In this titanic battle there was 
significantly more psychology than chess.' 
Some fifteen minutes after my unexpect­
edly quick win, the Psakhis-Agzamov game 
also concluded: in a complicated position, 
where Black's extra pawn was compen­
sated by White's extra minutes, Lev decided 
not to take a risk and he agreed a draw.
The result was that the leaders, who had 
been exchanging places throughout the 
tournament, crossed the finishing line 
together. Yudovich: 'In thefinal result there 
is a higher competitive justice: Kasparov and 
Psakhis undoubtedly deserved to win - they 
played best of all in the tournament. I don't 
recall such a championship of the country in 
which both winners, I must emphasise - 
both winners, finished 202 points ahead of 
their nearest pursuer!'
Viktor Vasiliev: 'Psakhis and Kasparov 
once again confirmed that in their persons 
Soviet chess now has two young players of 
the highest class. I think that Psakhis's rise, 
which has been somewhat unexpected but is 
now seen to be justified, will have a favour­
able influence on Kasparov. As it seems to 
me, Garry should now lose his feeling of 
exclusivity, which often hinders players 
whose talent is revealed so early.'
Psakhis: 'I can’t be unhappy with a tour­
nament which brought a gold medal, al­
though the first medal gave me greater joy. 
In the competitive sense I played more 
forcefully on this occasion, trying to exploit 
every chance, if Kasparov had not been in 
the tournament, I would not have scored so 
many points. By competing, we constantly 
drove each other on. Garik played very well,
347

Garry Kasparov on Garry Kasparov: Part One
and he won several brilliant games, includ­
ing the one in the last round. His play at the 
World Junior Championship made a great 
impression on me, and his success in the 
championship does not surprise me.'
I also paid tribute to my opponent, and 
expressed my gratitude to my trainers, 
while about my performance I said: 'I 
conducted the tournament better than I 
expected. In Frunze I think that I began to 
approach a more harmonious way of play­
ing than earlier.'
Botvinnik: 'The greatest danger fo r a 
young player is dizziness due to success. 
After his unsuccessful autumn performance 
in Tilburg, Garry Kasparov has begun play­
ing 
more energetically, 
evaluating 
the 
position more deeply. The set-back in Tilburg 
was very opportune fo r Kasparov. Ahead he 
has the Interzonal Tournament... ' Many 
experts, including Botvinnik, thought that 
in this cycle three of the participants in the 
championship of the country - Kasparov,
Psakhis and Beliavsky - had every chance of 
qualifying as one of the eight contenders 
for the crown.
Meetings with Soviet grandmasters were 
a good schooling for me. The rapid im­
provement in my results in the Premier 
League was encouraging: from 9th place I 
had moved to 3rd-4th, and now I had 
shared 1st-2nd. USSR champion at the age 
of 18 was an impressive record! Previously 
the youngest champions of the country 
were the 20-year-old Botvinnik (1931) and 
Tal (1957), and after them the 21-year-old 
Beliavsky (1974).
In Baku my triumph caused a great stir: 
on 8th January 1982 my mother and I were 
invited to a reception for the second time 
(after May 1979) with the leader of Azerbai­
jan, Geidar Aliev. 'My next objective is the 
fight for the title of world champion,' I said 
at that reception. ‘And all the tournaments 
in which I participate I will regard as prepa­
ration for this main objective.'
Dress Rehearsal
International Tournament in Bugojno (6-25 May 1982)
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
0
1
2
3
4
1
Kasparov
*
Y.
Y.
Y.
Y.
Y.
1
1
Y,
Y,
1
1
1
1
9Y4
2
y
sveagluol
Q.
Y.
*
Y.
Y.
1
Y.
o
Y.
Y.
1
Y.
1
1
Y.
8
3
icvi
jeoj
-O u
’.IT
Y.
Y.
*
Y.
Y.
Y.
Y.
Y.
1
1
Y.
Y.
Y.
1
8
4
Spassky
Y,
Y.
Y.
*
Y.
Y.
1
Y.
Y.
Y.
Y.
Y.
1
Y.
7YZ
5 HUbner
Y.
O
Y,
Y,
*
y2
y,
1
y2
y2
y2
1
1
Vh
6 Andersson
y,
y,
y,
y,
y,
*
0
y2
y2
1
y2
y2
1
y2
7
7 Larsen
0
1
O
Y,
1
•
y,
0
0
1
1
1
y2
7
8 Petrosian
0
y,
y,
y,
y,
y2
y2
*
y,
1
y2
y2
y2
1
7
9 Ivanovic
Y.
Y.
O
Y.
O
Y.
1
Y.
*
1
Y.
0
0
1
6
10
Timman
y,
0
0
y,
y,
0
1
0
0
*
1
1
y,
y,
SV2
11
Kavalek
0
y,
y,
y,
y,
y,
0
y,
y,
0
*
y,
y,
y,
5
12
ojdaj
N
0
0
y,
y,
y,
y,
0
y,
1
0
y,
*
y,
y,
5
13
icri
oigGl
0
0
y,
0
0
0
0
y,
1
y,
y,
y,
*
1
41/*
14
lvkov
0
y,
0
y,
0
y,
y,
0
0
y,
y,
y,
0
*
yh
348

Adult Games
Many people, not only chess players, were 
asking: who will become the challenger in 
1984? At heart I was hoping for success, but 
since the time of Tilburg I knew that I would 
be unable to get through the Interzonal 
stage unless I gained experience of playing 
in top-class foreign tournaments.
Early in 1982 I received personal invita­
tions from the organisers of no less than 
three forthcoming and interesting super­
tournaments - in London, Turin and Bugo- 
jno. After weighing up everything for and 
against, my trainers and I opted for Bugo- 
jno: in Yugoslavia I played best of all. It 
appeared that the necessary permission of 
the Soviet Chess Federation and the Sports 
Committee was no more than a formality: 
how could they refuse the young USSR 
champion? However, Nikolai Krogius, the 
head of the Sports Committee Chess Ad­
ministration, offered me a run-of-the-mill 
category 10 tournament in Dortmund. This 
was humiliating for one of the strongest 
five grandmasters in the world! When I 
asked Krogius what was the meaning of all 
this, he replied with disarming frankness: 
'We have a world champion, and we don't 
need another one.'
Nikitin: ‘After Garry's victory in the 
championship ofthe country, somewhere in 
the upper reaches o f the Party a “directive 
opinion" was formed about the need to use 
all available measures to keep Anatoly 
Karpov on the chess throne. For this it was 
necessary above all to halt the rise in the 
competitive achievements of Kasparov, who 
was considered the most realistic contender 
for the crown. The strategy chosen fo r this 
was simple. From then on Karpov and Kas­
parov were not to meet in the same compe­
tition, so as to rule out a repetition of the 
embarrassment that occurred in the match- 
tournament o f USSR teams (1981), when the
world champion finished behind Garry on 
their individual board. In addition, in order 
to prevent the steady and rapid convergence 
of their ratings, it was deemed advisable to 
lower the level o f the international tourna­
ments to which the Soviet Chess Federation 
sent the young champion of the country.'
This plan was quite feasible, but... fate 
was kind to me. In March 1982 I was invited 
to speak at a Congress of the Azerbaijan 
Komsomol. I don't know who invited them, 
but Vitaly Sevastyanov, chairman of the 
USSR Chess Federation, and Viktor Ivonin, 
deputy chairman of the USSR Sports Com­
mittee with a special interest in chess, 
unexpectedly arrived in Baku. On seeing 
them at the Congress, I directly appealed to 
them and also to Geidar Aliev, who was 
present too (he knew about this burning 
question from our January meeting). The 
result exceeded all expectations.I was 
given permission to play in Bugojno!
The May super-tournament of fourteen 
grandmasters in Bugojno assembled an 
evenly-matched field and a whole constel­
lation of big names (but no Karpov: the 
two-times winner of these tournaments 
preferred to play in London and Turin). I 
was already listed among the favourites, 
along with Petrosian, Spassky and Po­
lugayevsky, while of the foreign partici­
pants the main contenders for first place 
were considered to be Timman and Larsen, 
who in the past had scored many memora­
ble tournament victories. But there was no 
particular fight for the main prize: my high- 
tempo start proved beyond the powers of 
my rivals.
In my first round game with Svetozar 
Gligoric, the living legend of Yugoslav 
chess, I played the opening experimentally 
and, after quickly exchanging the queens, 
did not gain any real advantage. But then
349

Garry Kasparov on Garry Kasparov: Part One
my opponent went wrong, and in the end I 
was as though able to stalemate his pieces.
Game 68 
G.Kasparov-S.GIigoric
Bugojno, 1st round, 7.05.1982 
Queen's Indian Defence E12
1 d4 tLlf6 2 c4 e6 3 tLlf3 b6 4 a3
My favourite variation provided me with 
two more wins in Bugojno - over Najdorf 
and Ivkov (in rounds 3 and 4), and also a 
short draw with Ljubojevic just before the 
finish.
4...C5
I 
did not seriously expect this sharp con­
tinuation from Gligoric. 4...i.b7 was far 
more often played against me (Game Nos. 
43, 52, 61, 73, 75, 85, 98).
5 d5 ..lia6 6 Wc2 exd5 7 cxd5 g6
Black succeeds in the fianchetto of his 
bishop. Weaker is 7.d 6 8 tLlc3 tLlbd7?! 9 
..lif4! (Game No.32).
8 ..lif4
A comparatively new idea, which, how­
ever, later faded into the background, since 
it does not set Black any great problems. 
The usual set-up is 8 tLlc3 ..lig7 9 g3 0-0 10 
..ltg2 d6 11 0-0 l;!e8 12 lie1, and here
12. ..'ic7!? is interesting (Kasparov-Fedoro- 
wicz, Graz 1981). 8 e4 .itxf1 9 4xf1 d6 has 
also been tried, avoiding the unclear gam­
bit 9 .....lig7 10 e5!? tLlxd5 11 'ie 4  tLlc7 12 
..lig5 'ic8 13 h4 (Rajkovic-Gligoric, Yugosla­
via 1981).
8... d6 9 tLlc3 gg7 10 ifa4+ ifd7
The 
natural 
reply. 
The 
aggressive
10...b5?! 11 tLlxb5 0-0 does not give Black 
sufficient compensation for the pawn after
12 tLlc3 or 12 Sd1.
11 .txd6 'ifxa4 (not 11...CLlxd5? in view of 12 
'iVxd7+ 'it>xd7 13 ge5!) 12 CLlxa4 lt:Jxd5 13 
0-0-0
Before this 13 e4 had also occurred:
13 ... i x f1 14 Sxf1 lt:f6 15 0-0-0 tLlc6 16 lt:c3 
0-0-0 17 lt:Jg5 Sd7 with equality (Vaganian- 
Tukmakov, Yerevan 1980).
13...CLle7
A solid move, but 13 ...tLlf6 14 CLlc3 lt:Jc6 is 
at least no worse, since after 15 g3, given by 
me in Informator, there is the strong reply 
15. . .tLlg4!, while 15 e4 
x f1 16 fix fl leads to 
a position from the previous note.
14 e4 (accepting the exchange of the light- 
square bishops, but at least depriving the 
black knight of the f5-square) 14...gxf1 15 
l:thxf1 lt:bc6 16 tLlc3
Not 16 e5?! lt:Jf5 (Darga-Ligterink, Graz 
1979).
350

Adult Games
l6...l:!.d8?!
This is not yet a direct mistake, but an 
inaccuracy, giving 
White an 
enduring 
initiative, as does 16...0-0-0?! 17 !Ji.xe7 t:Dxe7
18 t:Db5 or 17 t:Dg5 ii.xc3 (notthe Informator 
suggestion 17 ... !Ji.h6? 18 f4!) 18 bxc3 l:!.df8 
(Soln-Psakhis, Dresden Zonal 1998) 19 f4!?.
16...!ixc3! 17 bxc3 is correct, and here 
Black initially played 17. ..l:!.d8 (Browne- 
Timman, Las Palmas Interzonal 1982), but 
because of the reply 18 .i.e5! (Dreev-Vallejo, 
Biel 2002), he switched to 17. ..0-0 (Atalik- 
Fedorowicz, 5an Francisco 2002) or my old 
recommendation 
17..-f6!? 
(M.Gurevich- 
Istratescu, France 2003), endeavouring to 
nullify 
White’s 
already 
modest 
active 
possibilities.
17 t:DbS (now Black's queenside is under 
constant pressure) 17...l:!.d7
There is no reason to give up a pawn by
17 ...CDd4? 18 t:Dfxd4 cxd4, since here apart 
from the simple 19 .i.xe7 cJixe7 20 t:Dxa7, 
there is the strong 19 e5! f6 20 CDxd4 or
19 ...CDf5 20 Bfe1. After 17...f6 the 18 e5!? 
breakthrough is also unpleasant - after the 
comparatively best 18 ...'it>f7 19 .l:!.fe1 the 
position of the king at f7 causes alarm.
18 !Ji.f4!
After 18 !Ji.g3 l:!.xd1+ 19 .l:!.xd1 0-0 20 l:!.d7 
Black could have replied 20. ..f5! 21 exf5 (21
e5?! is weak because of 21...f4!) 21...t:Dxf5 22 
t:Dxa7 t:Dcd4 23 t:Dxd4 t:Dxd4 with quite good 
compensation for the pawn, or 21...a6!? 22 
t:Da7 .l:!.xf5 with chances of equalising.
18. ..l:!.xdl+
An attempt to strengthen the defence. A 
game played a month earlier, Ostermeyer- 
Karlsson (Dortmund), went 18... CDc8?! 19 
CDc7+ 'itd8 20 .l:!.xd7+ 'itxd7 21 B d 1+ 'ite7 22 
CDd5+ with advantage to White. He also 
stands better after 18. ..CDd4 19 !Ji.e5!, for 
example: 19...!Ji.xe5 20 t:Dxe5 Hd8 21 t:Dxd4 
cxd4 22 f4 f6 23 CDf3 t:Dc6 24 .l:!.f2 etc.
19 l:!.xdl 0-0 20 l:!.d7 l:!.a8 (now 20...f5? is bad 
because of 21 e5, when Black begins to 
suffocate) 21 
d6
21 
!Ji.g5!? f6 22 ii.h4 came into considera­
tion. After the invasion of the white rook at 
d7 I needed to find the correct way to 
develop my initiative, but, alas, this part of 
the game, right up to the 27th move, I did 
not conduct very well.
21...t:Dc8 22 t:Dc7
The knight manoeuvre to a6 is interest­
ing, but it needs White to follow up with 
energetic and concrete action.
22... 
l:!.b8 23 t:Da6 (23 t:Dd5!?) 23 ... l:!.a8 24 !Ji.f4 
(24 !Ji.c7!? with the idea of b2-b4) 24 ...CD8e7
25 !Ji.d6
For the moment repeating moves, al­
351

Garry Kasparov on Garry Kasparov: Part One
though White should have preferred the 
unexpected 25 lL:lb8! Wf8 26 lL:Jxc6 lL:Jxc6 27 
.l:c7 or 25...i.f8 26 ..id6!, when 26...lL:lxb8? is 
bad in view of 27 Sd 8 Wg7 28 S e 8 or 28 
'it>c2, and therefore Black faces a difficult 
choice:
a) 26...f6 2 7 lL:Jxc6 lL:Jxc6 28 i.x f 8 S xf8 29 
l:tc7 lL:le5 30 l:txa7 t:Lld3+ 31 'ic 2 lL:lxf2 32 
l:tb7 and Hxb6, with hopes of exploiting the 
speed of the outside passed a-pawn;
b) 26 ...Sxb8 27 ..ixb8 lL:Jxb8 28 S xa 7 
t:Llbc6 29 l:tb7 lL:Jc8 30 g 3 or 30 .t!.c7, and the 
endgame with rook and pawn against two 
minor pieces is also in White's favour.
25 ...lL:Jc8 26 i.g3 (26 ..ic7!?) 26 ... ltJ8e7 27 
i.h4?!
It was not yet too late to -play 27 lLlb8!.
27...i.f8?
Gligoric cracks under the pressure - by
27 ...f6! he could have practically equalised, 
since if 28 e5 there is the excellent reply
28 .. . ::'td8!, when my Informator recommen­
dation 29 S xd 8+ t:Llxd8 30 exf6 i.h 6+ 31 
'it>c2 t:Llf5 3 2 i.g 5 gives only a draw:
32 ...lL:Jd4+! 33 lL:Jxd4 i.xg5 34 lL:lb5 lL:Jc6 35 
b4 cxb4 36 lL:lxb4 t:Llxb4 37 axb4 a5.
28 .'»f6
Not rushing with the tempting 28 ..ixe7 
t:Llxe7 29 t:Lle5. With a greater number of 
pieces it is more difficult for Black to de­
fend.
28....M.d8 29 l:tc7! l:te8
A passive move, but 29...Sc8 is also 
cheerless - after 30 ..ixe7 Sxc7 (30. ..lL:Jxe7?! 
31 Hxa7) 31 ..ixf8 Sd7 32 i.h 6 White has 
two pieces for a rook, but his knight is stuck 
at a6, and Black has saving chances; on the 
other hand, the cool-headed 30 .l:.b7!? h6 31 
h4 or 30. ..Se8 31 Wc2 retains all the advan­
tages of his position.
30 g4!?
Perhaps Gligoric was hoping somehow to 
hold out a pawn down in the variation 30
:ixe7 lL:Jxe7 31 Sxa7 lL:Jc6 32 Sb7 l:txe4 33 
Hxb6. But White plays for a bind, exploiting 
the poor placing of the black pieces, in 
particular the knight on e7.
30. .. g7 (30. ..lL:la5 31 lLle5!; little is changed 
by 30. .. I c 8 31 .l:.b7) 31 gS J.f8 32 Wc2 Hc8
33 l:tb7!
After 33 ..ixe7? l:txc7 34 i.x f 8 .l:d7! 35
i.h 6 Se7 White's two unfortunate pieces - 
the knight on a6 and bishop on h6 - would 
have denied him any hope of success.
33 ...lL:ld4+?
A time-trouble check at the most inap­
propriate moment. However, after 33. ..Se8
34 'it>c3, with his pieces almost stalemated, 
Black would also have no hope.
34 lL:lxd4 cxd4+ 35 'it>d3 (now the mopping- 
up begins) 35...lL:Jc6 36 f4 i.d6 37 es i.f8  38 
b4 lL:ld8 39 ..ixd8 Sxd8 40 Sxa7 h6 41 h4 hs 
42 lL:lc7
42 a4! was more forceful, but as it was 
Black resigned (1-0).
Then, after a short but sharp drawn 
skirmish with Ivanovic, I faced over the 
board the famous Argentine grandmaster 
Miguel Najdorf - he, like Gligoric, had 
played in the epochal Candidates Tourna­
ment in 1953!
I first saw Don Miguel at the 1980 Olym­
352

Adult Games
piad. Sensing a kindred chess spirit in me, 
he very openly and emotionally supported 
me (which unnerved the Soviet sports 
authorities). Najdorf arrived in Bugojno as a 
guest and corespondent - in general he 
often visited Yugoslavia, where he had 
many friends and acquaintances. It sud­
denly transpired that one of the invited 
participants had not arrived. Then Spassky 
took the initiative and suggested: ‘Listen, 
Miguel, would you like to play in the tour­
nament?' You should have seen how the 72- 
year-old Najdorf's eyes lit up. Spassky asked 
the other participants whether anyone 
objected, but none did. And Najdorf played 
in the tournament! After our game, which 
took place in the 3rd round, I made the 
followi ng entry in my diary:
'Already at breakfast a discussion began 
about the meeting of the oldest and the 
youngest. It is a unique instance, when the 
participants are separated by 53 years!! 
Najdorf kept repeating: "He is like my 
grandchild.” He arrived for the game very 
grandly dressed: in a three-piece suit and 
tie. Already in the opening I had an oppor­
tunity to take my opponent by force. I 
sacrificed two pawns and opened fire. In 
analysis it transpired that Black had a draw, 
but Najdorf cracked under the pressure and 
quickly lost. Later he was distressed and 
sighed sorrowfully: "I missed a draw, how 
could I?!" After the game the deputy chief 
arbiter Litmanovic reprimanded me for 
having castled incorrectly, i.e. for first 
picking up the rook and then the king, 
whereas the rules prescribe the opposite 
course of action. I courteously agreed, but I 
thought to myself: "Litmanovic is after all 
an old friend of Najdorf.”
'Before going to sleep, already after mid­
night, I decided to relax a little and I opened 
a volume of Esenin's poems. Suddenly the
telephone rang: "Hello, this is Najdorf. I am 
interested in a few  variations from our 
game. I am writing a reportfor Buenos Aires. 
You wouldn't like to call in on me?" I ex­
cused myself and asked if we could discuss 
it on the phone. For some four minutes we 
discussed one possible continuation. When 
Najdorf hung up, I glanced at my watch. 
One o'clock in the morning! No, chess is not 
just a sport!'
One day after dinner Najdorf sat down 
with me and initiated the following conver­
sation: 'Why do you live in the USSR? Until 
you move away, you will never become 
world champion! Go to America -yo u ’ll be a 
millionaire. Now Karpov does not want to 
play you, but when you become an Ameri­
can, a Karpov-Kasparov match will take 
place the very next day!' I timidly tried to 
object: 'But my mother?' 'What about your 
mother?’ cried Najdorf, gesticulating ani­
matedly. 'You will send her lots of money, 
and she will be happy. Come to Argentina, 
we will arrange an enormous banquet in 
your honour. When Petrosian was with us, 
one and a half thousand Armenians assem­
bled in celebration. It is easy fo r you to 
travel, you have no family. Ask Petrosian, 
and he will tell you that I am right. Don’t 
think about it, just go straight into some 
embassy and request political asylum, only, 
of course, not in Yugoslavia!’ and so on, and 
so forth. Najdorf realised what Soviet power 
in fact amounted to. I thanked him for his 
advice, but said that, unfortunately, I 
couldn't use it...
In the 4th round I defeated Ivkov and 
reached 3/2 out of 4, but here I ran into a 
'dense atmospheric layer': ahead were 
three games with my formidable compatri­
ots - Polugayevsky, Petrosian and Spassky. 
It was they that decided the outcome of the 
fight for first place.
353

Garry Kasparov on Garry Kasparov: Part One
Against Polugayevsky I gained a draw in 
a long forcing variation of the King's Indian 
Defence (cf. Game No.28, note to Black's 
12th move). And in the crucial game with 
Petrosian, who had twice beaten me with 
Black in 1981, on this occasion I decided to 
play in quiet manoeuvring style, similar to 
his own. I was greatly helped by a useful 
piece of advice offered by Spassky the 
evening before. According to him, the 
Achilles' heel of 'iron Tigran' was the de­
fence of slightly inferior positions without 
counterplay; moreover, the positional vice 
should not be squeezed with all one's 
might, but cautiously, unhurriedly, and 
without any abrupt movements.
Game 69 
G.Kasparov-T.Petrosian
Bugojno, 6th round, 15.05.1982 
Bogo-lndian Defence E11
1 d4 ctJf6 2 C4 e6 3 ctJf3 i.b4+
Avoiding a repetition of the discussion in 
the 3...b6 4 a3 variation (Game No.S2).
4 ii.d2 We7 5 g3 1 xd2+ 6 "ixd2 0-0 7 ii.g2 
d5 S 0-0
8 ...dxc4?!
Having decided to play as simply as pos-
sible, Petrosian follows in the footsteps of 
Andersson, but this is an unfortunate 
exchange: White obtains a favourable 
version of the Catalan. 8...2d8 is more solid, 
as they began playing in 1983, for example:
9 'ic2  tt:lc6 (9 ...l2Ja6 10 a3!? Kasparov-
Ljubojevic, Tilburg 1989) 10 cxd5 exd5 11 
ctJc3 ii.g4 (Timman-Korchnoi, Tilburg 1986), 
or 9 l:!.cl c6 10 #e3 ii.d7 11 l2Jbd2 i.e8  (an 
example: 
Kasparov-Timman, 
Belgrade
1989).
9lLla3!c5
‘Dictated by the conviction that the re­
sulting tedious position is not to Kasparov's 
taste and that a draw agreement is close' 
(Nikitin). Before this Black held the some­
what inferior position after 9....:d8 10 tt:lxc4 
c5 11 H fdl (Speelman-Andersson, London
1982) or 10 'i!\Yc2 c5 11 dxc5 'i'xc5 12 .Ufdl 
l2Jc6 
13 
't4Vxc4 'i'xc4 14 l2Jxc4 (Ivkov- 
Andersson, Bugojno 1982).
10 dxc5 "ifxc5 11 Sac1 l2Jc6 12 l2Jxc4 
An important moment.
12...'i'e7?
Too slow. After 12...Sd8 13 iff4  (in In­
form ator I suggested 13 'i'c2 ii.d7 14 'ib3, 
but then 14. .l2Ja5! is good) 13. ..i.d7 14 
lbfeS or 14 e4 (but not 14 ctJd6 "Yib6!) 
White's advantage would not have been so 
obvious and I would have had to make far
354

Adult Games
more creative effort.
13 tt:JfeS!
Now Black's position is difficult, if not 
already lost: he is quite unable to develop 
his queenside.
13 ...tt:xes
13. ..gd7?! was worse: 14 tt:Jxd7! "ixd7 15 
*xd7 tt:Jxd7 16 .l:.fd1 and tt:Jd6, or 14. ..tt:Jxd7
15 jLxc6 (15 'i'd6!?) 15 ...bxc6 16 tt:Ja5 c5 17 
::jc6 'il:Ve8 18 "id6 etc.
14 tt:JxeS
White's pieces are far more active, but 
:he conversion of the advantage is hindered 
by the absence of weaknesses in the oppo­
nent's position. If Black should succeed in 
driving the knight from e5, White's initia­
tive may gradually evaporate. And Petro­
sian begins preparing ...f7-f6.
14...tt:JdS (14. ...ld8 15 iia5!) 15 S fd l! tt:Jb6
16 'i!VaS! (paralysing the queenside) 16 ...g6 
Alas, 16...f6? does not work in view of 17
£ic4! tt:Jxc4 18 Sxc4 with a decisive invasion 
of the heavy pieces (18...b6 19 'tj'c3 or
18...1:tf7 19 ge4!?). Instead of this Black 
plans ...J:ld8, exchanging a pair of rooks.
17 :td3! tt:JdS
Now 17...Sd8? also does not work be­
cause of 18 'iVc5! .l!e8 (18...#xc5?! 19 J:xd8+ 
®f8 20 Sxf8+ 'it>xf8 21 S c7 with crushing 
threats, similar to the finish in the game)
19 'iVxe7 l:txe7 20 Sd8+ 'tg7 21 a4! a5 22 
l:tc5, and Black is lost.
18 e4 (it doesn't matter that the pawn 
blocks the diagonal of its bishop - now it is 
more important to dislodge the knight 
from d5) l8...tt:Jb6
The c7-square has to be covered -
18 ...ti:Jb4? 19 S c7. Black would also have lost 
after 18 ...b6? 19 'i'd2 tt:Jb4 20 Sd6(d4), to 
say nothing of 18 . . .'ifb4? 19 Sxd5!. Petro­
sian is again hoping to play ...f7-f6.
19 iL fl
A prophylactic move, of which I was very 
proud. ‘Just a year ago Garry would have 
been unable to devise such a move...' 
(Nikitin). I thought that the routine 19 h4 
would allow the opponent to free himself 
by 19...f6 20 tt:Jc4 tt:Jxc4 21 Sxc4 b6 22 "ic3 
jLa6 (exploiting the undefended rook on 
d3) 23 l:tc7 Wi/xc7 24 Wixc7 ..txd3. In Informa­
tor I assessed this position as ‘unclear', but 
after 25 'li'd7 or 25 e5 Black loses a pawn, 
and with it most probably the game.
There were some more energetic alterna­
tives: 19 tt:Jg4!?, 19 :tb3!? '\fYd6 20 tt:Jg4, or 19 
Sdc3!? gd7 (19 ...f6?! 20 .E!.c7 'ilkd6 21 lt:Jg4)
20 l:tc7 l:tfc8 21 Wid2! and wins.
19...l:te8?!
Here Black should have given up a pawn
- 19 ... f6! 20 tt:Jc4 ..td7! 21 tt:Jxb6 axb6 22
355

Garry Kasparov on Garry Kasparov: Part One
'i!Vxb6 
.tc6, 
although 
after 
23 
a3! 
(23 ....txe4? 24 Sc7) I would surely have 
been able to convert my material advan­
tage.
20 l:Ldd1 (the number of tempting rook 
moves - 20 l:f.d2, 20 Sdc3 and 20 Sb3!? - is 
simply dazzling!) 20. ..Sf8
20...f6 was again bad in view of 21 lt:Jc4 
lt:Jxc4 (21.....id7? 22 lt:Jd6!) 22 Sxc4 b6 23 
'ic3  .l:!.d8 24 .nxd8+ ifxd8 25 e5! .i.b7 (25. ..f5
26 .l:i.d4! "ife7 27 'id 2 and wins) 26 exf6 .l:!.c8
27 'i'e5 when White dominates.
Now Black can only hope for a miracle - 
or the haste and inexperience of his oppo­
nent. On the experience of our previous 
meetings, the latter seemed more probable, 
but the lessons received from Tigran Var­
tanovich in Moscow and Tilburg had taught 
me a great deal.
21a3!
The most important, according to Spass­
ky, was to avoid sharp advances! Insignifi­
cant moves such as this demonstrate to the 
opponent just how helpless his position is. 
21. ..'it>g7
The pawn sacrifice 21...f6 22 lt:Jc4 .i.d7 
(22. ..lt:Jxc4 23 Sxc4 b6 24 #c3 Sd8 2 5 
.l:!.xd8+ 'Yo!Vxd8 26 e5!, as in the note to Black's 
20th move) has become even less attractive 
in view of 23 lt:Jxb6 axb6 24 'Yi'xb6 .i.c6 25
.tb5!.
22 b3 (with unhurried haste, I approach my 
goal: a3-a4 is threatened and, after the 
queen moves, a4-a5) 22 ...'ito>g8
There is nothing that Black can do: now
22 .. .f6 23 lt:Jc4 .i.d7 does not work because 
of 24 lt:Jxb6 axb6 2 5 ' i 4 ! .
23 a4
This gradual suffocation was the most 
unpleasant for Petrosian.
23...l:Ld8?!
Overlooking a tactical stroke, but even 
without this the game would not have 
lasted long, for example: 23. ..&g7?! 24 'Yikc3 
'ig 8 25 a5, or 23...f6 - this should have 
been played, although after 24 lt:Jc4 lt:Jxc4
25 Sxc4 b6 26 'Yo!Vc3 Sd8 27 Sc7! (27 
.l:!.xd8+!?) 27- ..ifxc7 28 'Yi'xc7 S x d l 29 'ir'c6 or
29 'ig2 all the same White would have 
won.
24 'i/Vc5!
And in view of 24 . .'i:!Vxc5 (24 . .'Yo!Ve8 25 
lt:Jg4!) 25 Bxd8+ "iff8 26 Sxf8+ <i;xf8 27 Sc7 
Black resigned (1-0).
This was a very important win for me 
over a difficult opponent, signifying my 
emergence onto a new level. Nikitin: ‘I don't 
remember Tigran Petrosian losing to anyone 
in such style. After seeing this masterpiece of
356

Adult Games
positional skill, I realised that there was 
nothing more I could teach Garry about 
chess. All that remainedfor me was to offer 
help in preparing fo r competitions and the 
advice of an experienced master.'
My black game from the 7th round with 
Spassky, which ended in a draw, took an 
extremely tense and fighting course. After 
scoring 2 out of 3 in the games with my 
compatriots, I retained the lead (Kasparov - 
51/2 out of 7, Polugayevsky - 5), and I sensed 
that I had good chances of first place. And 
subsequent wins in rounds 8 and 9 practi­
cally resolved this problem.
Bent Larsen played the same line of the 
Old Indian Defence against me as in the 
previous autumn in Tilburg (Game No.62). 
From the opening I gained some advantage, 
but I threw it away with my nondescript 
21st move.
An audacious move, offering chances of 
success. The virtue of it is that it does not 
spoil anything!
2S...bxc6?
After thinking for 20 out of his remain­
ing 25 minutes, Larsen resolutely removed 
the white rook from the board: he was not 
one of those who took the opponent 'at his 
word'. But Black should have simply ig­
nored the impudent rook!
True, in the event of 25 .....tf7?! 26 .l:txc8 
(in The Test of Time I gave 26 ..tg4 tt:Jxg4 27 
l:txc8+ #xc8 28 hxg4 # c 1+ 29 \t>h2 # d 2? 30 
#c4! and wins, but after 29...i.g6 Black is 
alright) 26...#xc8 27 tt:Jgf5 White has some 
initiative. However, 25...etJc7! 26 .l:tc3(c4) 
tt:Jce8 was quite safe, improving the posi­
tion of the knight and maintaining equal­
ity. Now my idea proves justified.
26 dxc6+ Wf7 27 i c4 ds 28 tt:JxdS
Game 70 
G.Kasparov-B.Larsen
Bugojno, 8th round, 17.05.1982
In this roughly equal position I was able 
to find an interesting combinative possibil­
ity.
25 Sc6!
28...\t>h8
28...\t>f8, with the idea of giving up the 
queen in a favourable version, runs into an 
elegant refutation - 29 tt:Jb6! axb6 30 i.xf7  
..txf7 31 #d3 or 29....l:txc6 30 = xf7 i.xf7  31 
#a3! with the idea of 31...fixb6 32 b5+.
29 tt:Jb6! Wc7 30 tt:Jxc8 Wxc8 31 bS!
Larsen underestimated this move. After 
the game he told me that for some reason 
he had only reckoned on 31 ..txa6?! #xa6,
357

Garry Kasparov on Garry Kasparov: Part One
stopping the passed pawns (although even 
here after 32 iVe6! Black faces difficult 
problems). But White has no reason to 
exchange his strong bishop.
31...'LlcS 32 'ifa3 (32 'i'e3!? f
 33 c7 would 
also have been decisive: 33 ...'Llfd7 34 iVg5 
or 33 ...h6 34 a5) 32 ...'Llce4
32...'lf8, attempting to keep the knight 
on c5, would have been parried by 33 c7! 
'Llfd7 34 ..ie6!.
33 Wie7 'Llxg3
34 c7! (34 fxg3 was also sufficient, but I 
decided to play prettily) 34 .....ifs 3S fxg3?l 
At this point my attention was diverted 
by the flag on my opopnent's clock, which 
was still holding up by some kind of mira­
cle, and suddenly I mechanically captured
the black knight. There was an instant win 
by 35 Wid8+! 'Lle8 36 ..if7 or the more ele­
gant 36 b6! axb6 37 ..ia6!.
3S...hS
Larsen promptly makes an escape square 
for his king, ruling out the variations given 
in the previous note. But the armada of 
white pawns is still irresistible.
36 as e4 37 b6 axb6 38 axb6 Wh7 (38. ..'lib7 
is also hopeless: 39 'if d8+ '1t>h7 40 ^ 8  ..ic8 
41 ..ie6!) 39 '!loVc5
And as he was playing 39 .....id7 Black 
nevertheless lost on time (1-0). However, 
after 40 '\!a5 or 40 ..ib5 he would have had 
to resign.
Asriyan: 'The super-tournament, which he 
had striven so hard to take part in, was 
conducted brilliantly by Kasparov I phoned 
him in Bugojno from the editorial office 
after the 8th round, in which he had beaten 
Larsen. Garik was in an excellent mood. He 
was confidently leading, and he was very 
happy not only with the result, but also the 
quality of his games, especially singling out 
his win over Petrosian. One sensed that 
Kasparov was in no doubt that he would win 
the tournament.'
In this positive mood I gained a spectacu­
lar win in the next round over the highly- 
experienced Ljubomir Kavalek, a partici­
pant in several Interzonal Tournaments, 
two-times champion of Czechoslovakia, and 
after 1968 - also of the USA!
Game 71 
L.Kavalek-G.Kasparov
Bugojno, 9th round, 19.05.1982 
King's Indian Defence E90
1 C4 g6 2 CLlc3 gg7 3 d4 CLJf6 4 e4 d6 S CLlf3 
(5 h3 0-0 6 ..ie3 - Game No.10) s...0-0 6 h3
358

Adult Games
(6 i.e 2  - Game Nos.21, 42) 6 ... e5 7 dS
An insidious variation, which Makogo- 
nov employed in his time.
7...ct:la6
7 
...a5 is also popular, and in former times 
there were heated debates over 7..ct:Jbd7 8 
.te3 ct:Jc5 9 ct:ld2 a5 10 : e2 ct:le8 11 g4 f5 
(Makogonov-Boleslavsky, 15th U55R Cham­
pionship, Leningrad 1947) or 10 g4!? (an 
example: Kavalek-Kestler, Bundesliga 1982).
Another tabiya arises after 7..ct:Jh5 8 ct:lh2 
(one of the important ideas of the varia­
tion) 8.. .'ie8 9 .te2 ct:lf4 10 .tf3  f5. Now 
sharp play results from 11 h4 ct:la6 12 g3 
tt:lc5!? (Black is not satisfied with the obvi­
ous 12 ...tLlh3) 13 gxf4 exf4 14 e5! dxe5 15 
.i e2 
Wile7 
(Kavalek-Ouinteros, 
Bauang 
1973). After 1976 they began sacrificing a 
pawn - 11 g3 (Bagirov) 11 ...tt:lxh3 (more 
critical than 11... fxe4 12 ct:Jxe4 tt:Jh5 13 lt:Jg4, 
Kasparov-Lanka, Leningrad 1977) 12 ..tg2, 
but after 12. ..fxe4! 13 ;  e3 tt:Ja6 14 tt:Jxe4 
.tf5 15 f3 (15 #d2? lt:Jf4! Andreykin- 
Radjabov, Moscow (blitz) 2010) l5...h5 (but 
not 15 ...lt:Jf4?! 16 gxf4 exf4 17 ..td4!, Flear- 
5trikovic, Mesa 1992) or 13 tt:Jxe4 ..tf5 14 
^g4 (14 ..te3?! tLlf4!) 14...h5 the complica­
tions are probably in favour of Black.
8 ; e3
Nowadays 8 ; g5!? is in fashion (Bron-
stein-Kapengut, 40th U55R Championship, 
Baku 1972; Kavalek-R.Byrne, Chicago 1973).
S...tt:lh5!?
White was ready to meet 8...tt:Jc5 with 
the typical 9 lt:Jd2 (cf. 7 ... tt:Jbd7 8 .te3 ct:Jc5)r 
but a surprise awaits him: noticing the not 
altogether happy position of the bishop at 
e3 in the lines with ...ct:Jh5 and ...f7-f5, Black 
reverts to this plan.
9 ctJh2
Kavalek 
follows 
the 
new 
routine, 
whereas the old one was 9 ct:ld2 \'ie8 10 
ctJb3 (10 i..e2 tLlf4) lO...f5 with double­
edged play (Uhlmann-Kapengut, 
Berlin 
1967).
9.. .'ie8 10 .te2 ctJf4
Possibly it would have been preferable to 
play lO ...f5 11 exf5 ct:lf4! 12 .txf4?! exf4 13 
fxg6 #xg6 with excellent compensation for 
the pawn (Chernin-J.Polgar, New Delhi
1990), or 12 0-0 ..txf5 13 E e l 'i¥f7! with a 
comfortable 
game 
(C.Hansen-Kasparov, 
2nd match game, 5vendborg 1990).
11 
f
 fS 12 h4
On seeing that the inclusion of the 
moves ...ct:la6 and .te3 has made 12 g3?! 
tt:Jxh3 13 i.g2? unacceptable because of
13...f4 (with gain of tempo!), Kavalek 'dug 
up the past' - again, as he did against 
Ouinteros, he moved the h-pawn out of
359

Garry Kasparov on Garry Kasparov: Part One
range, in order nevertheless to play g2-g3. 
This is an ambitious plan, but 12 0-0 is 
sounder 
(G.Kuzmin-Gufeld, 
40th 
USSR 
Championship, Baku 1972).
12....'iVe7
Later 
Black 
successfully 
tried 
both
12 ...Ct:Jb4, and 12.....id7 (my Informator 
recommendation) 13 g3 ctJb4!? - I consid­
ered only 13 . ..CtJh3 14l:tf1, but here 14. ..We7 
or 14...f4 15 ..ic l We7 favours Black, and 
therefore 14 h5! is better, maintaining a 
shaky equality.
13 g3
The first critical moment.
13...ctJb4!?
Impressive! The idea of leaving the 
knight en prise seems even more audacious 
than 
in 
the 
aforementioned 
Kavalek- 
Quinteros game: here the c5-square is 
under the observation ofthe bishop on e3, 
but there is another way that leads to d3... 
However, today I am not sure that this is 
definitely the strongest move. Its strength 
largely lay in its surprise value: the oppo­
nent was probably only expecting 13...CtJh3. 
In The Test of Time I then gave 14 l:tf1 f4 15 
..\tcl, ‘when there appears to be no way for 
Black to develop his initiative, and his 
knight remains in an offside position', but 
after 15. ....1td7 or 15. ..CtJc5 (with the idea of
16 b4 4:'ld7) White would have faced an 
unpleasant defence. However, the active 14 
h5! would have retained an unclear situa­
tion: 14...4:'lb4 15 hxg6 hxg6 16 a3 f4 17 ..icl 
tt:Ja6 18 b4 or 14...gxh5 15 ..ltxh5 4:'lb4 16 f3 
f4 17 4:'lg4!.
14 'i!Ub3?
The unexpected knight sortie apparently 
dismayed Kavalek, and he immediately 
made a decisive mistake. He should have 
either moved his king, or accepted the 
Greek gift:
a) 
14 0-0. After this in The Test of Time I 
recommended 14 ... g5(?!) ‘with good pros­
pects for Black', and in Informator I gave a 
variation supposedly confirming this: 15 
gxf4 gxf4(?!) 16 ..ic1 'i!Uxh4 17 'it>hl(?!) l:!.f6
18 l:tg1 Bh6 19 l:!.g2 fxe4 20 Ct:Jxe4 ..ih3 . 
However, after 21 l:tg5! ..ltf5 22 l:tg2 or 22 
'i!Ug1 White is quite alright, and moreover, 
17 exf5 i. xf5 18 CtJe4 gives him the better 
chances, but the most accurate is 16 ..ltd2! 
'i!Uxh4 17 exf5 ..ltxf5 18 4:'le4 with an obvious 
advantage 
(Hausrath-Kaminski, 
Chania 
1994). 15. . .exf4 (Stohl) is better, but here 
too after 16 ..ltd4 ..ltxd4 17 'iVxd4 Ct:Jc2 18 
Wd2! tt:Jxa1 19 hxg5 Wxg5+ 20 <it>h1 'it>h8 21 
l:txa1 things are not easy for Black. He also 
does not have full equality after 15 exf5 
..ltxf5 16 ..lte4 (Stohl) or 16 i.g4.
360

Adult Games
Therefore castling should be answered 
by 14. ..lLlh3+! (14. ...lt:Jfd3? 15 a3!) 15 'itg2 f4
16 .tc1 h5 17 a3 tt:la6 18 b4 c5 or 18 ...i.d7 
followed by ...!lf7 and ...Saf8 - here Black 
does indeed have quite good prospects;
b) 14 gxf4!.
Analysis diagram
After 14. ..exf4?! 15 
xf4 fxe4 16 .tg5! 
Black still has to demonstrate that he has 
compensation for the piece: 16...iVe8 17
ii.e2 t2Jd3+ 18 .txd3 exd3+ 19 .te3 .txc3+ 
20 bxc3 'i¥e4 21 'it>d2 etc. In the pre­
computer era I did not rate the capture of 
the knight very highly because of 14. ..fxe4, 
but here too White has good counter­
chances:
b1) 15 fxe5 exf3 16 e6! (Stohl's move 16 
a3 is risky because of 16....txe5! 17 axb4 
#xh4 18 4d2 #xc4) 16...'iVxh4 17 a3 tt:Jc6!? 
(17...ctJa6 18 'i'd3!) 18 dxc6 ii.xe6 19 cxb7 
Sab8 20 'ifh3, and Black merely has com­
pensation for the piece (20....txc4 21 tt:lf1!) 
or 15...ctJd3+ 16 'itd2 (16 &e2? tt:lxb2)
16...#xe5 (16. ..Sxf3 17 tt:lxf3 .tg4, given by 
me in Informator, is not to be feared in view 
of 18 e6! .txf3 19 'ifb3) 17 'ic2  tt:Jxb2 18 
#xb2 exf3 19 l:tae1 with double-edged
play;
b2) 15 tt:Jxe4! (this looks somewhat safer)
15 ...exf4 16 .td2 t2Jd3+ 17 'it>f1! (I gave only 
the cooperative 17 'it>e2? tt:lc5 and wins)
17...tLlxb2 (17...f
 18 lLlg5!) 18 'i'c2 tt:Jxc4
19 Se1 (19 ilc3 f
 - Stohl;19 'i¥xc4!? 
.t x a l 20 'it>g2) 19...t2Jxd2 20 'ixd 2 'i¥xh4 21 
lLlg4 'id 8 22 t2Jh6+, and although Black 
now has four pawns for the piece, his 
attack has petered out and White has no 
reason for concern.
14.. 
.'t:Jfd3+
Such a thing is not often seen on the 
14th move: the black cavalry, after by­
passing the opponent's advanced centre 
from the flanks, has begun to pursue the 
white king.
15 'it>e2 f4! 16 .td2
16...fxg3?
After quickly achieving a winning posi­
tion, I became confused by the mass of 
tempting continuations, although the only 
genuinely strong one was 16... a5! with the 
idea of 17 a3 tt:Jc5! 18 'i¥d1 l2lbd3 or 17 tt:Ja4 
b5! 18 cxb5 .td7 with a winning attack.
In Informator and then in The Test of 
Time 
I 
recommended 
the 
'resolute'
16...tt:Jxf2(?) 17 'it>xf2 t2Jd3+ 18 'it>g2 (18 'it>e2? 
tt:lc5 etc.) 18...fxg3 19 'it>xg3(?) Jlf4!, and 'the 
entire black army takes part in the decisive 
offensive'. Indeed, here White is lost:
a) 20 lLlg4 .txg4!? (20 ...h5!?) 21 .txg4
361

Garry Kasparov on Garry Kasparov: Part One
'i¥f6! 22 'i*'d1 (22 .ie 2  Sf8! or 22 .ie3 
J:txg4+! 23 Wxg4 lt:Jf2+! and ..JH8 is no 
better for White) 22. ...g 4 + ! 23 "ixg4 'ViVf2+
24 'it'h 3 'i¥xd2! and wins;
b) 20 tt:Jfl l:.xf3+ 21 'it>xf3 'if8+ (but not
the earlier 21 .. ilt'f6+? 22 We2 lt:Jc5 because 
of the saving 23 .ig5! 
g4+ 24 We1 'i¥f3 25
Wd1! lt:Jd3+ 26 Wd2 'ilt'g2+ 27 lt:Je2! or
26 ...'i'f2+ 27 Wxd3 \Wd4+ 28 Wc2 .ixd1+ 29 
Sxd1 'i'xc4 30 .ie3) 22 We2 lt:Jc5 23 Vic2 
..tg4+ 24 We1 'if3  and wins;
c) 20 ..txf4 exf4+ 21 Wg2 \Wxh4 22 S h fl 
..th3+ 23 Wh1 ..ltxf1 24 Sxf1 lt:Jf2+ 25 l:txf2 
"ixf2 26 \Wxb7, and instead of the previ­
ously suggested 26... Sf8(?), which is unclear 
because of 27 'ilt'xc7! (27 lt:Je2? "i!Vb6!)
27...'iWxb2 28 lt:Je2 'i'b8 29 'i'e7, Black wins 
by 26. ...l:!e8! 27 "ixc7 .&d4 28 lt:Je2 Sxe4!.
However, if White attacks the knight on 
d3 - 19 lt:Ja4!, then after 19...lt:Jf4+ 20 Wxg3 
.ih 6 21 'i*'c2 .id7 22 ctJc3 or 19..<:tJf2 20 
'it>xg3 lt:Jxh1+ 21 £lxh1 ..ltd7 22 'i.Vd1 ::tf7 23 
lt:Jc3 Saf8 24 ^ g2 it is hard for Black to 
count on any advantage.
17 fxg3
17 ...Sxf3?!
Again playing for brilliancy. And again
17. .. a5! was correct, although because of 
the impetuous 16 ...fxg3? White has ac­
quired the important defensive resource 18
.ie3!, for example: 18. . . J. d7 19 a3 a4 20 
Wd1 tt:Jxb2 21 ^ 1  lt:J4d3 22 Wd2! c5! 23 
Ba2 tt:Jxc4+ 24 <4’xd3 b5, and Black has an 
enduring attack, but as yet by no means a 
win.
18 lt:Jxf3 Jl.g4
19 l:!.af1
19 
Shf1! ltf8 20 .ie3 was more accurate, 
since here if 20. ..Sf6(f7) there is the excel­
lent idea 21 'it>d2! J. xf3 22 a3, immediately 
solving all White's problems.
19. ..fif8
The culminating moment of the game.
At first sight, things seem brilliant for 
Black.after from the direct ..."iVf7 he is 
threatening a double exchange on f3 
followed by the invasion of his queen (say,
362

Adult Games
20 a3? .Mxf3! etc.). Therefore White must 
urgently cover the f2-square. It gradually 
becomes apparent that the threat of ...#f7 
is not deadly, if the d2-square is vacated for 
the king...
20 CLJd1?
Cracking under the pressure, Kavalek 
overlooks the only saving move 20 .te 3 !, for 
example:
a) 20...'it'f7 (20...'id7? 21 a3) 21 4d2! 
(previously I recommended 21 a3(?), not 
noticing 21...CLJc1+! 22 .txc1 .txf3+ 23 <;e1 
CLJd3+ 24 <;d2 CLJc5! 25 'i'a2 #e8 and wins) 
21. ....1ixf3 22 a3 'i¥d7 23 Ehg1, capturing the 
knight, when Black has quite good play 
with a pawn for the exchange, but not 
more;
b) 20....th 6 21 a3 (21 tL'ld1? Ix f3  22 1:!.xf3 
'i'f8! - 5tohl) 21....txe3 (I recommended the 
'winning' 21.J!xf3(?) 22 Exf3 .txf3+ 23 
*xf3  'i"f6+ 24 'it>g2 .txe3 25 :1f1(?) CLJe1+!, 
missing the defence 25 CLJd1!) 22 'it>xe3 
Jl.xf3 23 J:hg1 .tg 2! 24 Sxf8+ #xf8 25 axb4, 
maintaining equality not without difficulty, 
or 21 .txh6! Sxf3 22 Sxf3 .txf3+ 23 'it>xf3 
#f6+ 24 'it>g2 'ilf2+ 25 Wh3 'Wf3! 26 4h2! 
(not my earlier 26 .l:h2? because of
26 ...CLJf4+! 27 ..lixf4 exf4 28 t2Je2 CLJd3! 29 
Sg2 fxg3 and wins) 26. ..tL'Jf2!? 27 .l:fl! tL'lg4+
28 'it>h3 'i'xf1+ 29 ..t>xg4 CLJd3! 30 'Wxb7 (30 
tL'ld1? 'ile2+ 
31 ^h3 
g5!! 
and wins)
30...CLJf2+ 31 <4'f3! CLJd1+! with perpetual 
check (a very pretty draw!);
c) 20..J:if7!? (perhaps the most interest­
ing) 21 a3! (bad is 21 ttJb1? #f8! 22 tL'lbd2 
.:Llc1+! 23 Sxc1 Sxf3 with the murderous 
threat of ....th6!) 21...#f8 22 axb4 l:txf3 23 
Sxf3 ttJf2!? (23...'i¥xf3+ 24 'it>xd3 'ix h 1 25 
'Wia4! is equal) 24 'it>d2! (an accurate reply, 
forcing a draw) 24...'i/Uxf3 25 Sh2 CLJxe4+ 26 
.'Llxe4 'i'xe4 27 'i'c2! 'i'f3 28 .l:f2 'i!kxg3 29 
#a4! h5 30 #e8+ &h7 31 If7  'Wh2+ 32 ..lif2 
f
 33 l:txg7+, and again perpetual check.
It may seem strange that after 20 .te3 
Black does not have more, but the efficiency 
of his pieces is not so great (in contrast to 
the position after 16... a5!).
20. ..'i'f7l (now the white knight is doomed, 
whereas Black's is immune: 21 .txb4? 
tL'lc1+) 21 .te3 .txf3+ 22 Wd2 'i'd7
23 :h g 1
Or 23 :x f3  l:.xf3 24 a3 cuc5 (5tohl) 25 
#xb4 'iVg4 and wins. 23 a3 was more 
resilient, but after 23 ... ; xh1 24 .l:xh1 a5! 25 
axb4 tL'lxb4 the extra pawn plus the ex­
posed position of the white king assure 
Black of a win.
23...'iVh3 24 a3 .txe4 (24. ..Wh2+!? 25 '1t>c3 
a5!) 25 Sxf8+ .txf8 26 axb4 'i¥h2+ 27 'it>c3 
cuc1! 0-1
An elegant finish, enabling this game to 
finish second in the competition for the 
best game in Informator Volume 33.
My lead over the second-placed Po­
lugayevsky reached one and a half points, 
and after the 10th round, in which I quickly 
drew with Ljubojevic, while Polugayevsky 
lost to Larsen, the fate of first place seemed 
to be conclusively decided: Kasparov - 8 out 
of 10, Polugayevsky - 6.
Three rounds before the finish I rather 
prematurely reckoned that everything was
363

Garry Kasparov on Garry Kasparov: Part One
decided, and I relaxed. My 11th round game 
with Jan Timman nearly became that fly in 
the ointment which spoils the impression 
of any success. A frivolously played King's 
Indian gave me an unenviable position, on 
the 15th move I overlooked a veiled pawn 
thrust - and to avoid the worst I gave up a 
whole rook (!), in order to expose the white 
king. On encountering this unexpected 
resistance, Timman became nervous and 
began throwing away his advantage. After 
my spectacular 27th move he went pale - 
one glance sufficed for him to realise that 
there was no longer a win . ..
The miraculous escape in this difficult 
game with Timman secured me at least a 
share of first place, a draw in the 12th
round with Hubner put me out of reach of 
my rivals, and the finishing touch was a 
short last-round draw with Andersson.
This was how this important ‘defence 
review' concluded - a dress rehearsal 
before the Interzonal Tournament starting 
three months later. On the whole I man­
aged to avoid the mistakes and the uncer­
tainty that had pursued me in Tilburg. I did 
not lose a single game and I won the tour­
nament, finishing one and a half points 
ahead of my closest pursuers.
Botvinnik: ‘Whereas previously I thought 
that 
Kasparov might 
become 
Karpov's 
opponent no earlier than the next cycle, 
after Bugojno I am inclined to admit that 
this may possibly happen sooner.'
364

Chapter Three
Challenger
Decisive Finish 
Interzonal Tournament (Moscow, 6-25 September 1982)
1
2
3
4
5
6
1
Kasparov
*
y,
y,
y,
y,
y,
2
>1
svia
"5CO
y,
*
1
y,
1
1
3 Tal
y
0
*
y,
y,
y,
4
Andersson
y,
y,
y,
*
0
y,
5 Geller
y,
0
y,
1
*
y,
6
G.Garcia
y,
0
y,
y,
y,
*
7 Murey
0
1
0
0
y,
0
8 Sax
0
1
y,
y,
1
0
9 Christiansen
0
0
y,
y,
0
1
10
icvi
oir
lim
el
V
0
0
0
y,
0
0
11
van der Wiel
0
1
0
0
y,
0
12
iuhi
groehG
0
0
y,
0
y,
y,
13
Rodriguez
0
y,
0
y,
0
1
14
Quinteros
y,
0
y,
0
y
0
In the three Interzonal Tournaments of 
this cycle, which took place in Las Palmas, 
Toluca and Moscow, each had two qualify­
ing places to the Candidates matches. 
Twelve leading Soviet grandmasters were 
admitted: 
Polugayevsky, 
Tal, 
Spassky,
7
8
9
0
1
2
3
4
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
y,
10
0
0
1
1
0
1
y,
1
8Yz
1
y,
y,
1
1
y,
1
y,
8
1
y,
y,
y,
1
1
y,
1
8
y,
0
1
1
y,
y,
1
y,
7YZ
1
1
0
1
1
y,
0
1
71/2
*
1
y,
y,
y,
y,
1
1
61/2
0
*
y,
y,
0
y,
y,
1
6
y,
y,
*
0
y,
y,
1
1
6
y,
y,
1
*
y,
1
1
y,
51/2
y,
1
y,
y,
*
y,
0
y,
5
y,
y,
y,
0
y,
*
1
y,
5
0
y,
0
0
1
0
*
1
41/2
0
0
0
y,
y,
y,
0
*
3
Petrosian 
(Candidates 
in 
the previous 
cycle), Kasparov, Beliavsky, Balashov (on 
rating), Yusupov, Psakhis, Tukmakov, Geller 
(winners ofthe Zonal Tournament) and the 
61-year-old Smyslov, whom the Soviet 
Federation gave a place from the USSR Zone
365

Garry Kasparov on Garry Kasparov: Part One
without him having to qualify.
To us, the young players, the last-named 
seemed like a kind of chess dinosaur, a piece 
of living history, and in no way a real con­
tender for the world championship. But 
Vasily Vasilievich unexpectedly overturned 
all the forecasts and for the first time in a 
decade and a half he reached the Candidates 
(Las Palmas 1982: 1. Ribli, 2. Smyslov). But 
the other Soviet participants did not finish in 
the first two, either in this or the next Inter­
zonal, held in the summer (Toluca 1982: 1-2. 
Portisch and Torre). The only remaining hope 
was Moscow, where apart from me, Tal, 
Geller and Beliavsky were playing.
My direct preparations for the Moscow 
Interzonal Tournament began soon after 
Bugojno. True, in June I found time to visit 
Kislovodsk and play for Spartak in the USSR 
Team Cup (4 out of 7). But I spent July, as 
usual, on the banks of the Caspian Sea in 
Zagulba - nowhere have I been able to work 
so well! Apart from my mother, who for many 
years constantly dealt with all the organisa­
tional, and sometimes also psychological 
problems, my team then comprised Nikitin, 
Shakarov, Vladimirov and Timoshchenko.
The mornings, naturally, were spent on 
the beach. We would swim and play football
- crazy beach football, unlike anything else 
on earth. I did not join in straight away, but 
only after my daily run: three kilometres 
barefoot along the seashore, on wet sand, 
which made running difficult (everyone 
realised that without physical exercise it was 
not possible to withstand the tension at the 
top level). After returning from the beach I 
would always sleep for an hour. I would 
begin working with my trainers in the 
afternoon, after our traditional post-lunch 
cup of tea. Our optimal time, found by 
experience, was five hours. But if we en­
countered some fascinating idea, time
would naturally beforgotten...
No less fruitful was the second, August 
training session, which took place 350 km to 
the west of Baku, at the stunningly beautiful 
Gek-Gel mountain lake.
Nikitin: 'July 1982 can be regarded as the 
starting-point ofthe powerful, creative team 
which worked with Kasparov for nearly four 
years. For six weeks the four trainers worked 
with Garry, far away from crowds and vari­
ous temptations. In such a calm atmosphere 
we were able to do a great deal. At the end of 
the session Garry played a training match 
with Vladimirov. The unexpected result (3-3) 
was an excellent antidote against dizziness 
before the start of the competition, the 
outcome of which none of the experts ven­
tured to predict. At the Interzonal Tourna­
ment Garry was helped my me, Shakarov and 
Valery Chekhov. As usual, Botvinnik restricted 
himself to general directives and lengthy 
telephone conversations; his general instruc­
tions and advice were of great benefit to 
Garry, even when he was fighting Karpovfor 
the crown. Roughly five years of conversa­
tions with the Teacher were effective psycho­
therapy fo r Garry, and later they became a 
kind of ritual.’
As this was the first time I had taken part 
in an Interzonal Tournament, I was natu­
rally nervous, and this told on my play. 
Nevertheless the start went well. In the first 
round my opponent was the experienced 
Hungarian grandmaster Gyula Sax.
Game 72 
G.Kasparov-G.Sax
Interzonal To urnam ent, 
1st round, M oscow , 7.09.1982 
Grunfe/d Defence 086
1 d4 tiJf6 2 c4 g6 3 t2lc3 ds 4 cxds ttJxdS S e4
366

Challenger
tt:Jxc3 6 bxc3 Ji.g7 7 iiLc4 (2)
Earlier I had regularly employed the 
variation with 7 tLlf3 (Game Nos. 38, 48), but 
Sax was a fervent supporter of the Grunfeld 
Defence, and he had a good knowledge of 
its subtleties and, of course, the latest 
developments. Therefore it was decided to 
choose not the most fashionable continua­
tion.
7 ...0-0 (8) 8 ..ie3
Also not hurrying with the usual 8 tt:Je2. 
In preparations for the game my trainers 
and I noticed that in both cases Sax replied
8...b6, and for the moment we preferred not 
to block the white queen's path with the 
knight, in order to employ a more aggres­
sive development set-up, championed by 
the German grandmaster Rainer Knaak.
8... 
b6 (2)
In principle a rather dubious move, 
which does not solve the chief strategic 
objective of the opening - the undermining 
of White's pawn centre. The typical 8...c5 9 
tt:Je2 tt:Jc6 is better.
9 h4 (2)
It was because of this attacking thrust 
that I first developed my bishop at e3. But 
this plan did not become popular, and now 
I regard less optimistically the idea of 
opening the h-file and I am inclined to­
wards the solid 9 tLlf3 (Korchnoi-Gulko, 
Manila Interzonal 1990).
9...ii£.b7
With the aim of diverting the opponent 
from his home preparation, Sax avoids his 
move 9...tt:Jc6, which he twice employed 
successfully against Knaak (Budapest 1977; 
Tallinn 1979). In the second of these games 
after 10 hS! tt:Ja5 11 hxg6! hxg6 (it is bad to 
play 11...tLlxc4? 12 'ifil5! fxg6? 13 'i'xh7+ 
'it>f7 14 tLlf3 or 12. ..h6 13 ii£.xh6 fxg6 14 
'iVxg6 Sf7 15 ii£.xg7 flxg7 16 'i'c6! etc.) 12 
..id3 e5 (12. ..c5 13 'i'c1!?) 13 tLle2 (13 tLlf3!?) 
13 ....l:e8 14 'i'd2 White retained slightly the 
better chances.
10 'i'f3 (8) 10...'i'd7 11 tt:Je2 (not 11 h5? 
because of the double attack 11...#c6!)
1 1. ..hs (12)
Forced, otherwise h4-h5, and it is not ap­
parent how Black can defend. But now a 
different question arises: how is White 
going to attack?
12 ..igs (12)
Beginning a regrouping with the aim of 
creating a powerful striking force on the 
kingside and landing a blow against the 
black king's defences. This plan was trium ­
phantly realised in the well-known game 
Knaak-Uhlmann (Eggesin 1978), which the 
two players follow as far as the 15th move.
367

Garry Kasparov on Garry Kasparov: Part One
But since after accurate defence White's 
attack would have petered out, the simple
12 0-0!? may have been better, with the
possible 
continuations 
12 ...c5 
13 
lLlf4,
12...Wg4 13 "ixg4 hxg4 14 e5 or 12...l2Jc 6 13 
fifd l lLla5 14 iLd3 (14. ..'i'a4 15 Sdbl!), with 
some claims to an advantage.
12...12Jc6 (3)
Of course, not 12. ..b5?! (Knaak-Uhlmann, 
Groditz 1975) 13 Sb l!. Black is intending to 
play ...e7-e5 or ...e7-e6, maintaining the 
tension and endeavouring to show that the 
manoeuvre ..te3-g5 was pointless.
13 lLlf4 (4)
The time spent in thought, beginning 
with my lOth move (does not White have 
anything better?), proved unproductive. 
Again 13 0-0 came into consideration, and 
if 13...lLla5 14 ..td3.
13 ...e6! (of course, not 13 ...lLla5? 14 lLlxg6! 
lLlxc4 15 lLlxe7+) 1 4 S d l (10) 14.. .lLlaS (6) 15 
..td3
A critical moment.
White is planning to advance g2-g4 or 
else destroy the opponent's defences with a 
piece sacrifice -l2Jx h 5 and . i f 6! followed by 
Sh3. 15 ...f6? does not work in view of 16 
lLlxg6 fxg5 17 'Y/Nxh5 'ti"f7 18 f3! with crush­
ing threats. Looking very nervous, 5ax came 
up with a novelty. ..
1s...es!? (5)
Uhlmann attacked the centre from the 
other side - 15...c5, but this allowed 16 
lLlxh5! gxh5 17 ..ltf6 ..\txf6 (1 7 .e 5 is worse in 
view of 18 l:!.h3 ..txf6 19 Sg3+! kg7 20 "if6 
"ig4 21 :t.xg4 hxg4 22 #g5!) 18 'txf6 #d8 
(18...Sfc8? 19 Sh3! 'it>f8 20 Sf3 and wins - 
Knaak) 19 ^ 16, and after 19...f6(?) 20 'iVg6+ 
Wh8 21 e5! f5 22 "ilih6+ 'it>g8 23 Sh3! 'it>f7 24 
Sg3 Black resigned.
Annotating the game in Informator Vol­
ume 25, Knaak considered 19 ...f5(!) 20 
#g6+ Wh8 21 'i‘xh5+ 'it>g8 22 exf5, demon­
strating a win for White after 22...exf5(?) 23 
#g6+ 'it>h8 24 't!rh6+ Wg8 25 i.xf5! and
22...#e7(?) 23 f6! Sxf6 24 l:!h3. Because of 
these variations, I (and, apparently, 5ax) 
erroneously assumed that 15 ...c5 ‘would 
have lost almost by force' and that after 19 
'likh6 'against the threats of e4-e5 and Sh3 
there is no satisfactory defence' (as I gave in 
The Test of Time). However, the cool-headed
22...#f6! 23 l:th3 Sf7! extinguishes the 
attack: 24 !!.g3+ Sg7 25 Sxg7+ 'it>xg7 etc., 
and 22 #g6+ Wh8 23 ®h6+ 'it>g8 24 Sh3 f4!
25 ®xe6+ !!.f7 is also no better.
Thus 15... c5 would nevertheless have led 
to a draw, although in a practical game it is 
extremely unpleasant to come under such 
a powerful attack. Incidentally, I considered 
Knaak's recommendation 15. .."ifc6 to be 
insufficient on account of 16 .ib1 - for 
example, if 16 ....ia6?!, then 17 "ig3! is 
strong, with the threats of ct:Jxh5, e4-e5 and 
..ltf6. Apparently Black is already obliged to 
play either 15. ..c5, or 15 ... e5.
16 dxeS (5) 16.....\txeS?!
This move suggests itself, but 16...Sae8! 
is more subtle, with the idea of 17 0-0 Sxe5, 
immediately solving all Black's problems. If
17 'iVe2 fixe5 18 lLlxg6 fxg6 19 ..\tc4+ there 
is an excellent queen sacrifice - 19...lLlxc4!
20 flxd7 !txe4 21 Sxg7+ (21 i.e3 ; xc3+ 22
368

Challenger
4>d1 gc8!) 21...'ixg7 22 ..ie3 l:tfe8, while if 
17 e6 there is an interesting exchange 
sacrifice - 17- ..gxc3+ 18 'if1  l:txe6 19 tt:Jxe6 
Wxe6 with good compensation for the 
small material deficit.
17 0-0
17 .. .ilig4 (13)
The correct idea: finding himself under 
the threat of an attack, Black switches his 
queen to the defence of his kingside.
17...'ifa4?! is risky - although after my 
Informator suggestion 18 g4 there is the 
reply 18 ...ctJc4! 19 'i!Ve2 (19 gxh5 tt:Jb2 20 
hxg6 fxg6) 19...ctJd6 20 gxh5 tt:Jxe4 21 
tt:Jxg6! fxg6 22 ..ic4+ 'ih 7  23 hxg6+ 'ixg6
24 f4! 'ife8!, after 18 ctJd5! White can de­
velop a dangerous initiative: 18.....ixd5 19 
exd5 'ifxa2?! 20 .Mfe1 or 18. ..f6 19 .1i.e3 
..ixd5 20 exd5 'i!Vxh4 21 g3 'i!Vg4 22 'ifxg4 
hxg4 23 .1i.h6 fifd8 24 ..ixg6 ..ixc3 25 'ig 2 
etc.
18 'ife3 (3) 18...l:tfe8 (19) 19 ..ie2 (3)
19 f3 suggests itself, but after 19. ..'i'l'g3!
20 ctJe2 'iVh2+ 21 'if2  = d6 White is not able 
to exploit the advanced position of the 
black queen.
19.....1.f4 (5)
The dark-square bishop has to be given 
up for the knight, since in the event of
19...'ifc8?! 20 ctJd5 ; xd5 21 l:txd5 White has
the two bishops and excellent prospects.
20 ..ixf4
Another critical moment.
20...tt:Jc4?
A fatal mistake - a tempting combina­
tion, which to Black's misfortune meets 
with a far from obvious rejoinder. Intui­
tively I sensed that Sax would fall into this 
trap: as a player with a sharp attacking 
style, the position with an extra pawn after
20...'ifxh4 21 e5 'ife7 22 'ifg3 'ih 7  23 .l:i.fe1 
was clearly not to his taste - White controls 
the dark squares and firmly holds the 
initiative.
21 .1/.XC4 (2) 21...l:txe4 22 f3! 'ifxf4 (12)
23 .1i.xf7+!
Such a stroke can be overlooked; Sax saw
369

Garry Kasparov on Garry Kasparov: Part One
it, but he overlooked the following cunning 
move by the white queen.
23 ...'it>g7
23 ...<>i>f8 was completely bad: 24 ' i f 2! (24 
ir'xf4 .l:txf4 25 
xg6 is also possible)
24...l:e5(e7) 25 ..txg6 etc.
24'i'd 3 !'ie 3 + (16)
The weakness of the g6-pawn forces 
Black to go into an endgame a pawn down, 
where White, thanks to the activity of his 
pieces (his rook, dominating the 7th rank, is 
especially strong), the weakness of the g6- 
pawn and the insecure position of the 
enemy king, has every chance of winning.
25 ir'xe3 Sxe3 26 I1d7 'it>h6 (6) 27 I1xc7 ..ia6
28 Sd1 ..id3 (2)
Also after 28...I1d3 29 I1e1! there are no 
particular problems with the conversion of 
the advantage.
29 Sd2 (3)
The immediately winning 29 'it>f2! S e 2+
30 'it'g3 .Jif5 31 Sd6 was more forceful. But 
also after the solid rook move the white 
king is ready to enter the battle, and its 
black opponent will soon imperceptibly end 
up in a mating net.
29.....1fS (3) 30 'it'f2 .:e s 31I1dS (5)
31 .l:td6! .l:!.c5 32 Hxc5 bxc5 33 .l:!.a6 ..id3
34 c4 would have won more quickly.
31...flxds (3) 32 ..ixdS I1d8 33 c4 (2) 33...bs
The bishop endgame after 33....l:!.d7 34 
Sxd7 ..1xd7 35 'it>e3 g5 36 hxg5+ ..t>xg5 37 
g3 etc. was also bad for Black.
34 'it>e3! (6)
Avoiding the unclear variations possible 
after 34 Sxa7 ..id3!.
34...aS (again the exchange of rooks was 
hopeless - 34. ..bxc4 35 .txc4 .l:!.c8 36 l:txc8 
..ixc8 37 f
 ..td7 38 *e5!) 35 Wf4 (11)
(6)
3S.....tb1?! (3)
This loses immediately, but Black would 
also have failed to save the game after the 
more resilient 35. ..bxc4 36 .txc4 a4 (if 
36 ....l:td4+ 37 'it>e5! Sxh4?, then 38 f4! with 
the unavoidable ..ig8 and £lh7 mate) 37 
..if7, gradually preparing g2-g4.
36 g4! (the threat of mate puts an end to 
the torture) 36...hxg4 (4) 37 fxg4 Bf8+ 38 
'it>g3 1-0
In view of 38 . ..g5 39 cxb5. Times: 1.33­
2.20.
In the 2nd round I made a draw with 
Black against Quinteros, and in the 3rd 
round I again won with White - this time 
against an old acquaintance of mine, the 
ex-Muscovite Jacob Murey, whom I had met 
back in my first master tournament (1976). 
5ince then he had emigrated to Israel, been
3 70

Challenger
one of Korchnoi's seconds at the match in 
Baguio, 
and 
become 
an 
international 
master (and within a few years, also a 
grandmaster!).
Game 73 
G.Kasparov-J.Murey
Interzonal To urn am ent, 
3rd round, M oscow , 9.09.198 2 
Queen's Indian Defence E12
1 d4 tZ:lf6 2 c4 e6 3 tZ:lf3 b6 4 a3 ..ib7 (4...c5 - 
Game Nos. 32, 68) S CLJc3 dS (5. ..tZ:le4 - Game 
No.6l) 6 cxds tZ:lxdS 7 'iVc2
It was after my two wins in the Inter­
zonal Tournament that this move, instead 
of the usual 7 e3 (Game Nos. 43, 52, 85), 
became popular.
7...cs (3)
7...CLJd7?! 8 lLJxd5 exd5 9 ..ig5 (Game 
No.98) is dubious for Black. The best choice 
is 7 ...tZ:lxc3 8 bxc3 
(8 #xc3 h6!, 
Po- 
lugayevsky-5ax, 
Biel 
Interzonal 
1985)
8.....1e7 9 e4 0-0 10 ..id3 c5 11 0-0 'i'c7(c8), 
and here, despite White's ideal pawn 
centre, as yet he has not managed to devise 
a promising plan. But topical at that time 
was the game Portisch-Christiansen (Lon­
don 1982), where after 11 ... cxd4(?!) 12 cxd4
tZ:lc6 13 ..ib2 .l:c8 14 'i!Ve2 i.f6  15 Sad1 a 
tabiya of the 7 e3 variation was reached 
(Game No.85, note to Black's 14th move).
8 e4
The main rejoinder to 7...c5 has become
8 dxc5! ..1xc5 9 ..ig5 'ifc8 10 Sc1, when 
White holds the initiative (an example: 
Kasparov-van der Wiel, Amsterdam 1988).
8...1L:lxc3 9 bxc3 tZ:lc6
In the 
12th round Gheorghiu tried
9.....1e7?! (Game No.75). But six weeks later 
(Olympiad, Lucerne 1982) 5osonko sur­
prised me with 9 ...CLJd7 10 ..id3 'iYc7! 
(threatening 11 ...cxd4) 11 'i'd2 g6 12 0-0 
..1g7 with an excellent position for Black, 
and I was happy to agree a draw. The 
situation changed only after the game 
Portisch-Korchnoi (Montpellier Candidates 
1985), where an excellent pawn sacrifice 
occurred: 10 ..1f4! cxd4 (10.....ie7 11 d5) 11 
cxd4 l:!c8 12 ^ 3 !  with the idea of
12.....1xe4 13 i.a6 .
10 ii.b2 (4)
Later, when this plan lost its successful 
reputation, both 10 ..1e3 and 10 ..ic4 came 
into fashion (but Black maintained the 
balance without particular effort), as well 
as the more interesting 10 ..id3.
10...5c8 (11)
In the event of 10...cxd4 11 cxd4 l:!c8 
Black also has to reckon with 12 #d2!? ..id6
13 .i.d3 0-0 14 0-0 2e8 15 Sfd1 (5akaev- 
Grischuk, Moscow 2002).
11.:!.d1
It is rather early for 11 d5 exd5 12 exd5 
(12 .l:!d1 d4!, Gelfand-Lautier, 2nd match 
game, Groningen 1997) 12 ... 'ir'xd5 13 ..id3 
(Agdestein-Lau, Dortmund 1987) 13...i.e7, 
and after 14 0-0-0 there is the strong reply
14...tZ:ld4!, while if 14 0-0 - at the least
14...'i!Vh5 (defending the h-pawn) and then
15...0-0.
11...cxd4 (29) 12 cxd4
371

Garry Kasparov on Garry Kasparov: Part One
12. ..a6? (10)
It turns out that this defence against 
J.b5 loses an important tempo. Since the 
late-1980s Black began playing 12 .....id6! 
(the source game: Petursson-Lautier, Mar­
seille 1988), completing his development 
and intending by ...'i/e7 to attack the a3- 
pawn (cf. Game No.101 in Revolution in the 
70s).
13 'iVd2! (9)
The d-pawn is preparing to march as far 
as d7! The immediate 13 d5 also looked 
tempting - for example, 13...Ci:le5(?!) 14 
Wb3 li:Jxf3+ 15 gxf3 exd5(?), recommended 
by me in The Test of Time, did not work 
because of the spectacular stroke 16 J. xa6!. 
But after 13. ..^b4 there was a risk of selling 
the advantage too cheaply: 14 'i!Va4+ b5 
(was this the line Murey was hoping for 
when he chose 12 ...a6?) 15 ..ixb5+ axb5 16 
..Wxb5+ 'iVd7 17 'iVxd7+ '>ti>xd7 18 dxe6+ 
'it>xe6, and after 19 li:Jg5+ '>ti>e7 20 axb4 f6 or
19 li:Jd4+ 'if6 ! (not 19 ...'ie5? when the reply
20 o-o! is very dangerous) even a pawn 
down Black would have retained real draw­
ing chances.
13.. 
.li:JaS (6)
Murey pins his hopes on counterplay. Of 
course, 
13 ...li:Je7 
stops the 
immediate 
breakthrough in the centre, but after 14
..id3 Black faces the same problems, and his 
kingside makes a pitiful impression.
14 ds! (4) 14. .. exds (8)
After 14..li:Jc4 15 il.xc4 Sxc4, apart from 
the simple 16 'iVe2, there is also a pretty 
combinative solution - 16 0-0 Sxe4 17 li:Jg5 
Sg4 18 li:Jxf7!, and in all variations Black 
loses material.
15 exds ..id6?
This involves an oversight and it loses 
quickly. Another counterattacking attempt
15 ... 'i!Ye7+ 16 ..ie2 li:Jc4 would have run into
17 
d6!!. 
After 
the 
forced 
17...li:Jxd6
(17 ...Wxd6 18 il.xc4 or 17...li:Jxd2 18 dxe7 
li:Jxf3+ 19 il.xf3 would have lost a piece) 18 
0-0 li:Je4 19 'iff4 it would have been ex­
tremely difficult to defend the king caught 
in the centre.
More resilient was 15...f6 16 d6 Wd7 17 
il.e2 and here not 17. ..Sc6? 18 We3+ 'if7  
(18...'id8 is even worse because of the same 
reply 19 li:Je5! fxe5 20 'i'g5+) 19 li:Je5+!! fxe5
20 
..Wf3+ 'it>g8 (20. . ,'ie8 21 W115+ '>ti>d8 22 
'i!Yg5+ etc.) 21 Wd5+ iff7  22 d7 ::.e6 23 'iVxe6 
Wxe6 24 d8'i¥ and wins, but 17...li:Jc4! 18 
..ixc4 M.xc4, hoping to play the king to f7 or 
d8, using the d6-pawn as a screen and on 
no account aiming to win it quickly, al­
though after 19 0-0 Black's position is 
unenviable.
372

Challenger
16 i.xg7 (4) 16...#e7+ 17 ..te2 Itg8 18 'iVh6!
(it is all over: if 18....Mc2 there is 19 ti:Jd4)
18 ...f5 (5) 19 ..if6 (2) 19...#f8 (5)
The exchange sacrifice 19..Itg6 would 
have been most simply parried by 20 
1Wxg6+ hxg6 21 .i.xe7 <tixe7 22 h4!? ..txa3
23 h5.
20 #xh7 (2) 20. . . f  (11)
If 20....Mxg2, then 21 ti:Je5! is quickly deci­
sive.
21 'iYxf5 .Mg6 (2) 22 iVe4+ (3) 22...<tif8 23 
tt:Jg5 Itxg5 (2) 24 ..txg5 Ite8 25 i.h6+ <tig8
26 iVg4+ 1-0
Times: 0.43-1.43.
In the 4th round I gained a difficult draw 
in a Sicilian with Geller. Then I had two 
Whites in a row against two other very 
dangerous rivals - Tal and Beliavsky. This 
was the first key moment of the tourna­
ment race.
Against Tal, who was half a point ahead 
of me (3V2 out of 4!), I employed the then 
rare ‘Anti-Moscow Gambit' - an audacious 
set-up, with a novelty which took him by 
surprise. Up to the 17th move it all went 
well for me. All I had to do was land a 
combinative blow, giving White a fearfully 
strong attack, but I was tempted by an­
other, showy continuation - and I ended up 
on the verge of disaster. Fortunately, Tal, 
with a piece for a pawn, accepted my offer 
of a draw (cf. Game No.82, note to Black's 
5th move). Even so I felt shocked, since I had 
gone wrong in tactical 
complications, 
which I regarded as my natural element! I 
tried to forget this game, and to distract 
myself somehow. But I couldn't rid myself 
of the thought: ‘How could I so miscalcu­
late?!' I had the anxious feeling that I could 
make another mistake. And the next day, 
unsettled by an unexpected move from 
Beliavsky, after an hour's thought I blun­
dered a pawn, and then sacrificed the 
wrong knight! However, after a sharp battle 
this nervy encounter also ended in a draw.
Shortly before the half-way distance the 
leading group looked like this: Guillermo 
Garcia - 5V2 out of 6 (one of the Moscow 
sensations, who frayed the nerves of the 
favourites); Tal and Andersson - 4/2; Kas­
parov - 4; Beliavsky - 3/2; Geller - 3. Over 
the next few days those last three launched 
a desperate pursuit.
In the 7th round I won a tense game with 
Black against the 26-year-old American 
Larry Christiansen, several times champion 
of his country and a two-time winner at 
Linares.
Game 74 
L.Christiansen-G.Kasparov
Interzonal To urn am ent, 
7th round, M oscow , 16.09 .19 82 
King's Indian Defence E76
1 d4 ti:Jf6 2 c4 g6 3 tt:Jc3 .i.g7 4 e4 d6 5 f4 0-0
(4) 6 ti:Jf3
The choice of variation was evidence of 
my opponent's aggressive intentions. Well, 
that evening I was also in a fighting mood.
6...c5 (3) 7 d5 e6 (3) 8 dxe6
A rather rare set-up (in contrast to 8 i.e2
- Game No.53). In exchanging his strong 
d5-pawn, White hopes to exploit his supe­
rior control over the central squares and 
the activity of his e4- and f4-pawn pair.
8...fxe6 (7)
The natural 8...i.xe6 gives White an eas­
ier game after 9 ..id3 and f4-f5 (Murey- 
Kasparov, Baku 1976). Therefore I chose a 
dynamic and little-studied continuation.
9 i1.d3 tt:Jc6 10 0-0 tt:Jd4l (3)
Black immediately exploits the main ad­
vantage of his position - his control of d4.
3 73

Garry Kasparov on Garry Kasparov: Part One
11 tt:JgS?! (10)
An artificial manoeuvre, allowing Black 
to seize the initiative. White could also not 
have been satisfied with 11 tt:Jxd4 cxd4 12 
tLle2 e5 or 11 tLle2 tt:Jxf3+ 12 flxf3 e5!? 
(12....i.d7 is also good). The prophylactic 11 
'it'h1 or the developing 11 .' d2 (Vaganian- 
Torre, Buenos Aires 1978) was compara­
tively better. 
u ...e s ! (19)
More active than 11. ..'ife7 with the same 
idea of ...e6-e5 (S.Garcia-Tatai, Bucharest 
1971). There was no point in Black weaken­
ing his kingside - 11...h6?! 12 tt:Jf3!.
12 fs (5)
‘Consistent, but 12 fxe5 would have been 
more cautious', I stated in The Test of Time, 
while in Informator I gave 12...dxe5 13 tt:Jd5 
with equality. Indeed, after 13 ...'iY'd6 14 'iY'e1 
.i.d7 the game is roughly equal. However, it 
is more accurate to interpose 12...i.g4!, and 
after 13 'tl!Ve1 (13 tt:Jf3? tLlh5!) 13 ...tLld7!? 
(13 . dxe5 is also not bad - now 14 tt:Jd5? is 
weak because of 14...h6!) 14 exd6 tt:Je5 
Black's unexpected activity more than 
compensates for the sacrificed pawn.
12... h6 (4) 13 tLlh3 (21)
Yes, Christiansen had plenty to think 
about. After the inglorious return of the 
knight to its former post - 13 tt:Jf3 Black
would have played 13 ...gxf5 14 exf5 tt:Jxf5, 
winning a pawn: 15 tt:Jxe5(?) dxe5 16 i.xf5  
is bad because of 16 ...'tl!Vd4+! 17 'ixd 4 (17 
'it'h1? i.xf5  18 Sxf5 tt:Jg4!) 17. ..cxd4 18 tt:Jb5 
.i. xf5 19 l:i.xf5 tt:Je8, when the pair of con­
nected passed pawns in the centre wins for 
Black However, perhaps it is worth seeking 
compensation for the pawn after 15 'ie1!?.
In later games the knight sacrifice 13 
fxg6 hxg5 14 .txg5 occurred, but here my 
Informator 
recommendation 
14. ..i.e6! 
proved good, with the idea of 15 h4 'iY'd7!, 
15 tt:Jd5 i.xd5 16 exd5 'id7! (my suggestion
16...e4(?!) 17 i.xe 4  'ie 7  18 i.d 3 .Uae8 is, 
however, unclear in view of 19 .tf4!), or 15 
.: xf6 .txf6 16 'iWh 5 'ie 7  17 tt:Jd5 ..ixd5 18 
exd5 Ylg7!. To all appearances, White does 
not have full compensation for the piece.
13 ...gxfs (3) 14 exfs bs?!
A rare flank blow with the aim of gaining 
predominance in the centre. It later tran­
spired that this was a novelty. But 14. .. \'i'e8! 
was objectively stronger, and if 15 g4?! 
(Niklasson-Boersma, Ramsgate 1979) there 
is the unpleasant 15 ...e4!, while after 15 
tt:Jf2 .i.xf5 16 .i.xf5 tt:Jxf5 Black is simply a 
pawn up (17 tt:Jfe4 'iWe6!).
15 ..ie3? (6)
It is not possible to reinforce the c4-pawn
- 15 b3? (Hausner-Zsu.Polgar, Kecskemet
374

Challenger
1983) 15 ...b4!, and the k n ig h t h a s no n o r­
m a l square to m o ve  to: 
16 'Lle2 e4 17 
..tc2(b 1) d5, o r 16 'L le 4  ..txf5 17 'Llx f6 +  
'(/Vxf6! 18 ..txf5 'Llxf5 w in n in g  a p a w n  (19 
'(/Vd5+ 'it'h7!, G le k -B a ra sh , 17 th  U SSR C o rre ­
sp o n d e n ce  C h a m p io n s h ip  1986).
But th e  p a w n  sacrifice  sh o u ld  have been 
a cce p te d  -  15 'Llxb s! (15 cxb5?! d5 is w o rse  
for W hite), m a in ta in in g  a p p ro xim a te  e q u a l­
ity: 15 ...e4 16 ile 2  (16 ..tb1!?) 16...'Llxf5 17 
'Llf4, a n d  th e  ‘bad ' k n ig h t com es into play, or
15 ...'Llxb5 16 cxb5 d5 17 $.e2, and a lth o u g h  
the p o w e rfu l p a w n  centre give s B lack go o d  
co m p e n sa tio n  fo r the p a w n , the p o sitio n  is 
co m p le te ly u n clea r.
B u t C h ristia n se n , lik e  5ax, w a s a p la y e r 
w ith  a d y n a m ic  style, and he d id  not like to 
concede th e  in itia tiv e . T h e re fo re  he d id  n o t 
take  th e  paw n, b u t trie d  to solve h is p ro b ­
lem s b y  ta c tic a l m e a n s.
1S...bxc4 (6) 16 3 xc4+ Wh8! (9)
A v o id in g  a tra n s p a re n t tra p  -  16...d5? 17 
'Llxd5! 'Llxd 5  18 ..tx d 4  c x d 4  19 # b 3 , a n d  
th re a te n in g  b o th  ...d6-d5 and ...'Llxf5.
17 ..\txd4?! (11)
17 i d3 fib 8 ! 18 .S.b1 d5 or 17 * e6 'Llxe 6
18 fxe 6  l:tb8! 19 b3 ..txe 6  w a s  a lso  u n a ttra c ­
tive, b u t n o w  th e  p o w e r o f B lack's ce n tral 
p a w n s g re a tly  in cre ase s.
17 ...cxd4 (2) 18 CLJd5
18. ..ila 6l? (15)
B lack sa c rific e s th e  a d v a n ta g e  o f th e  tw o  
b ish o p s to  e n a b le  h is k n ig h t to o c c u p y  a 
d o m in a tin g  post at e3. B u t it w o u ld  a p p e a r 
th a t 18 ...I'f.b8! w a s even  stro n g e r, fo r e x a m ­
ple: 19 b 3 'Llxd 5  20 ..txd 5  i.x f 5  21 'iVh5 
..th7! 22 l:txf8+ 'i#'xf8 23 S f l  'ir'c8! 2 4  'Llf2 
# c 2 ! , or 19 CLJxf6 !:txf6 20 iY h 5  (20 b3 d5 or
20 g4 l:i.f8 is a lso  b a d  fo r W h ite ) 20...!txb2
21 .l:tae1 'J/ilc7 22 ..td3 W f7 a n d  w in s.
19 CLJxf6?! (24)
In a search  fo r ta c tic a l c o u n te r-c h a n ce s 
C h ristia n s e n  sa c rific e s th e  e xch a n g e , n ot 
w is h in g  to c o n d u c t a d iffic u lt d e fen ce  a fte r
19 ilx a 6  'Llxd 5  20 W h5 'Lle3 21 I f 2  d5.
19.....txc4 20 CLlh5 ..\txf1 (16) 21'i¥g4 'iVd7 22 
.Uxfl
It m a y  seem  th a t W h ite 's th re a ts on th e  
k in g sid e  are d a n g e ro u s, b u t if  B lack p lays 
a cc u ra te ly  he has n o  re a so n  fo r co n cern .
22...d3?!
The illu s io n  o f  a q u ick  w in ! The go al 
w o u ld  h a ve  b e en  a ch ie ve d  w ith o u t p a rtic u ­
la r p ro b le m s a fte r b o th  22 . ...S.f7 23 b3 l:laf8
24 ® g 6  (24 'Llg3 d5) 24...S g 8! 25 'Llg3 ..lif8
26 # h 5  d5, a n d  22. ..1:!ac8 23 'Llf2 S c7 24 
'Lld3 ..if6  w ith  th e  in te n tio n  o f . ..ilg 5 .
23 '(/Vf3?! (11)
Both p la y e rs u n d e re s tim a te d  th e  d e fen ce
23 'Llf2! (23 # e 4 ?  d 2!) 23 ...d2 2 4  'Lle4 flx f5
375

Garry Kasparov on Garry Kasparov: Part One
25 .l:txf5 d1'i+  26 'iVxdl 'iVxf5 2 7 t'Llxd6 
'i'g6(e6) 28 tt:lxg7 'ixg7 29 h3 with hopes of 
saving the game. Christiansen will not have 
a second chance.
23...d2! (2) 24 g4 (22)
The mercurial d-pawn denies White the 
possibility of playing actively: 24 f6? )  xf6!
25 t'Llxf6 ite6, regaining the pinned knight. 
24. ..fiac8! (4) 25 'ifd3 (3)
White would like to bring the knight into 
play as soon as possible - 25 t'Llf2, but here 
too after 25 ...Sc2 there is no way of saving 
the game.
25...'ia4 (7) 26 t'Llf2 'ifd4!?
Not the only way to win (26 ...Wb4! was 
also strong), but a sensible one from the 
practical point of view: with the exchange 
of queens White's chances of exploiting the 
insecure position of the black king disap­
pear.
27 'ti'xd4 exd4
Outwardly the tripled pawns make a 
pitiful sight, but here the strength of the 
pawns is determined by their degree of 
advancement. The main role continues to 
be played by the d2-pawn.
28 tt:lf4 (2) 28...Sfe8! (3) 29 tt:le6 (blocking 
the entry of at least one of the rooks)
29 ...Sc1
The immediate 29.....if6! 30 tt:ld1 ..ih4!
would have been more quickly decisive, 
with the idea of 31 'ig2 S c l 32 'if3?! .i.e l 
3 3 'it>e2 d3+!.
30 tt:ldl (3) 30. ...i.f6 (30. ..d3 or first 30. .J:lb8 
was also tempting) 31 'if2  i.g5 (22)
It was now too late for 31. ...i.h4+?! 32 
'it>e2 ..ie l in view of 33 l:.f3!, when the d- 
pawn is halted and the black bishop is out 
of play. But 31 ...l:.b8 was good, with the 
pretty variation 32 'it>e2 Sxb2! 33 tt:lxb2 
d3+!.
32 'it>e2 fic5 (the alternative tothis regroup­
ing was 32...'ig8!? 33 'id3 S a l or 33 h4 
.i.xh4 34 'ixd2 Sec8) 33 'id3 (5)
If 33 h4, then 33. ..Se5+ 34 'id 3  Se1 35 
flf3 > xh4 36 'ixd2 l:.g1 and wins.
33. ..fie5 34 tt:lxg5 (2) 34. ..hxg5!
More correct than the showy 34. ..Se1 35 
flf2 hxg5 36 Sxd2 l:.8e4 or 35 tt:lf7+ 'ig 8 36 
Sf2 'it>xf7 (after 36. . .Sxd l? 37 tt:lxd6 White 
is out of danger) 37 l':xd2 l:.8e4.
35 Sf2 (after 35 'ixd2 the crude 35 .. • J:!e2+
36 'it>d3 flxh2 would have been decisive, but 
the black rook could also have performed a 
‘staircase' - 35. ..Se4l? 36 h3 l:.f4, and White 
is essentially stalemated: 37 S h l 'it>g7 or 37 
Sg1flf3!) 35. ..Se4
36 h3?! (3)
Allowing a little combination. The resis­
tance would not have been prolonged for
376

Challenger
long by 36 Sg2 'it>g7 37 'it>xd2 Se1 38 h3 d5
39 .l:h2 Hg1 and wins.
36....1:!.e3+! (2) 37 <&xd4 (4)
Of course, not 37 tt:Jxe3? dxe3, while if 37 
'it>xd2, then simply 37. ..Sxh3. But now 
comes the finest hour of the d2-pawn, 
which appeared to be doomed after the 
impulsive advance on the 22nd move.
37....1:!.8e4+! 38 'it>ds l e 2 39 Hf3 (3) 39. ...l:!.el
40 f6 (or 40 fld3 fix d l 41 'it>xe4 He1+)
40....1:!.f4
Here Christiansen took the envelope to 
adjourn the game, but after 12 minutes' 
thought he stopped the clocks and offered 
me his hand (0-1). Times: 2.40-2.25.
No less important were the wins by Be­
liavsky over Tal (the Lvov grandmaster was 
playing very strongly!) and Andersson over 
Murey. The position of the leaders (Garcia -
6 out of 7; Andersson - 51/ 2; Kasparov - 5; 
Beliavsky and Tal - 41/ 2) pointed to the 
prospect of a gripping finish.
In the 8th round I had White against the 
unexpected leader at the start - the 28- 
year-old Cuban grandmaster Guillermo 
Garcia. A win in this game could have 
sharply improved my chances of overall 
success, but, alas, things did not work out. I 
decided not to try and swim against the 
tide and on the 24th move, after exhaust­
ing all the fighting resources, I offered a 
draw. I remember the apt comment made 
in passing by Geller: 'It is very hard to win 
against any grandmaster who is on a surge.'
That same day Tal crushed Velimirovic in 
spectacular style, Beliavsky won against 
Christiansen, and Geller, who was begin­
ning his finishing spurt, inflicted the first 
and only defeat on Andersson. The battle 
for the two places under the sun intensified 
in the extreme: Garcia - 61/2 out of 8; Kas­
parov, Beliavsky, Tal and Andersson - 51/2;
Geller - 41/ 2.
Another key moment in the tournament 
came in the 9th round. Beliavsky accom­
plished a genuine competitive feat - he 
defeated Garcia with Black, making it a hat- 
trick of wins! Geller also won and contin­
ued his pursuit of the leaders, since Tal had 
to be satisfied with a draw as Black against 
Christiansen, as did I against Andersson.
That day I made a mistake at the very 
start of the game, by choosing an incorrect 
objective: I was unnerved by the fact that I 
couldn't get into the lead, and I tried to play 
for a win with Black (although, taking 
account of my comparatively easy finish, a 
quiet draw would have been far more 
sensible!). And in the Classical Variation of 
the King's Indian, instead of the customary
6...e5 (7 0-0 tt:Jc6 - Game No.21), fearing 
Andersson's favourite exchange 7 dxe5 
with the transition into an endgame, I 
chose 6 ... tt:Jbd7 7 0-0 e5, which was alien to 
me. In this unfamiliar situation I played 
extremely uncertainly, then I suddenly 
launched a reckless counterattack and lost 
a pawn. Soon Andersson won a second 
pawn, and I ended up in a desperate posi­
tion. But here my self-preservation instinct 
operated: instead of nervously pacing 
around the stage, I sat at the board with an 
imperturbable expression. Not long before, 
in Bugojno, self-control had rescued me in 
my game with Timman, when I gave up a 
rook. 5omething similar occurred on this 
occasion. In a time scramble, which was 
more serious for my opponent, I abruptly 
played 28 ... d3!. Ulfput his head in his hands 
and sank into thought. The tension became 
unbearable! Sensing that my opponent 
could not see a decisive continuation and 
was rattled, I offered a draw (a small viola­
tion of the rules: a draw should be offered 
immediately after making a move). Be-
377

Garry Kasparov on Garry Kasparov: Part One
liavsky later said:'/ am sure that, if the 
game had continued, its outcome would 
have been fa r from clear.' The flag on 
White's clock rose inexorably, and after a 
minute's hesitation Andersson accepted 
the draw offer.
This miraculous save gave me a great 
charge of positive emotions and helped me 
to escape from the crisis, although not 
immediately. After nine rounds the situa­
tion remained confused: Beliavsky and 
Garcia - 61/ 2; Kasparov, Tal and Andersson - 
6; Geller - 51/ 2.
Asriyan: 
‘Gan'k’s tournament position 
was not very secure. He was obviously nerv­
ous, and he almost lost to Tal and Anders­
son. At just that time I interviewed Petro­
sian, and, despite his liking fo r Garik, he 
remarked that up till then Kasparov had 
been very lucky. Of course, he particularly 
had in mind the games with Tal and Anders­
son ... But at the finish Kasparov developed a 
furious pace, and it was no longer possible 
to stop him.'
In the lOth round Tal and Geller drew 
their games, Garcia continued his decline 
by losing to Christiansen, while the Be- 
liavsky-Andersson game was adjourned in a 
better endgame for Black. I had White 
against the Filipino master Ruben Rodri­
guez, who was 260 rating points lower than 
me. After encountering the Cambridge 
Springs Defence (cf. Game No.90, note to 
White's 7th move), I gained only a slightly 
better endgame and in the fifth hour of 
play I became angry: my opponent was 
obviously in no hurry to lose! Even so, with 
his 40th move, the last before the time 
control, he moved his king to the wrong 
square and lost a pawn. Here the game was 
adjourned, and now everything depended 
on the secret move, sealed by Rodriguez: in 
the best case for him Black would have
retained real drawing chances... But since 
the game was due to be resumed only after 
the 12th round, at first more urgent prob­
lems had to be solved.
From this point I stopped feeling nervous
- and my form returned! In the 11th round
I easily crushed van der Wiel in 22 moves, 
Beliavsky adjourned in a winning position 
against Rodriguez, while the remaining 
rivals advanced by only half a point.
For my game in the penultimate, 12th 
round with the highly experienced Roma­
nian grandmaster Florian Gheorghiu (once 
also a world junior champion!), I arrived in 
an up-beat, fighting mood, realising per­
fectly well that a win would practically 
guarantee me one of the cherished top two 
places.
Game 75 
G.Kasparov-F.Gheorghiu
Interzonal To urnam ent, 
12th round, M oscow , 22.09.1982 
Queen’s Indian Defence £12
1 d4 CL:lf6 2 c4 e6 3 CL:lf3 b6 4 a3 (2)
Gheorghiu himself like employing this 
variation with White, and now he tried 
defending it with Black.
4...i-b7 (4... c5 - Game Nos. 32, 68) s CL:lc3 ds 
(5. ..CLJe4 - Game No.6l) 6 cxds CL:lxds 7 1iVc2 
(7 e3 - Game Nos. 43, 52, 85) 7...cs (8)
As has already been said, the quality of 
this 
move 
is 
somewhere in 
between
7 ...CL:ld7?! (Game No.98) and 7.. CL:lxc3!.
8 e4 (11) 8...CL:lxc3 9 bxc3
After my win in the 3rd round over 
Murey it seemed incredible that any of the 
tournament participants would repeat this 
variation. Nevertheless, closer to the finish 
a twin game was played, similar to the 
prototype not only in content, but also in
37 8

Challenger
length. With mounting interest I followed 
my opponent's opening moves - what had 
he prepared?
9.....1e7?!
It is better to play 7..g_e7 with the pawn 
on c7 (even allowing 8 ttlxds or 8 ..td2). But 
here Black should play either 'a la Murey' -
9...1Dc6 (Game No.73). or ‘a la 5osonko' -
9...'Dd7.
10 ..ib5+! (4)
A strong reply, disclosing the drawback 
to Black's rather strange move. However, as 
we will see, the fears regarding his position 
were slightly exaggerated.
10.....1c6 (10)
The position of the bishop on c6 will pro­
vide the motif for various combinations, 
but 10...tt:Jc6? would have lost a pawn: 11 
tt:Je5 #C7 12 # a4 l!c8 13 #xa7 .
11 ..id3! ctJd7 (8) 12 0-0 (2) 12 ... h6?! (22)
A non-forced loss of a tempo. After
12 .....ib7?! there is the unpleasant 13 d5! 
exd5 14 exd5 ..ixd5 15 l!d 1, and if 12...0-0 
Gheorghiu was afraid of 13 d5, but practice 
has shown that after 13...exd5 14 exd5 
..ixd5 15 ..ixh7+ 'it>h8 16 ..te4 i.xe 4  17 
'¥Vxe4 ..if6 or 17...tt:Jf6 White's achievements 
are slight, and therefore he has looked for 
an advantage by 13 Itd l, 13 'Yie2 or 13 ..if4.
12 ...iVc7 (preventing ..if4) is also interest­
ing: 13 'ie2 0-0 14 d5 ..ib7! (Papin-Motylev, 
Moscow 2008), or 13 fiel!? (intensifying the 
threat of d4-d5; if 13 .!:!d1 l!d8!) 13 .....ib7 14 
d5! (the more modest 14 We2 0-0 is equal, 
P.Cramling-5passky, 
Copenhagen 
1997), 
and 14. ..exd5? 15 exd5 ..ixd5 16 'iVe2 ..ie6
17 'Yi'e4 allows White a powerful attack, 
while after 14...c4 15 ..if l he retains some 
initiative (Borne-De 5ousa, Bagneux 1993).
It is amusing that in the event of
12 ...cxd4 13 cxd4 Sc8 14 'ie 2 ..ib7 15 ..ib2 
0-0 a position from my game with Akesson 
(Game No.43) could have arisen, but 15 a4! 
is more energetic. In general, as is readily 
apparent, nothing catastrophic for Black 
has yet occurred.
13 Sd1 (41)
13 
'¥Ve2 0-0 14 ..if4 or the immediate 14 
e5 was steadier, exploiting the unfortunate 
move ...h7-h6. But I very much wanted to 
break through in the centre!
The immediate 13 d5!? exd5 14 exd5 
..ixd5 15 l:d1 looked very tempting, when
15.....1c6 16 f
 or 15...'iVc7 16 ..ib5 ..ic6 17 
..if4! is advantageous to White, as is
15...1.xf3 16 gxf3 a6 (recommended by 
5tohl) 17 #a4!. However, 15 .....ie6 seemed 
unclear to me in view of the exchange 
sacrifice after 16 ;. e4 l!c8 17 ..if4 0-0 18 
tt:Je5 (somewhat better than 18 ..ib7)
379

Garry Kasparov on Garry Kasparov: Part One
18...1.f6 19 tt:lc6 Bxc6 20 ..txc6 'i¥c8 21 i.d 5 
or 16 .itf4 0-0 17 i.h7+ 'ith8 18 i.e4. I 
rejected the variation 16 i f5!? ..txf5 17 
#xf5 because of 17...'i'c8!, although 18 
#g4i would have given White a strong 
initiative for the pawn.
13...'i'c7? (7)
The culmination of the game. Gheorghiu 
does not sense the imminent danger! 
Black's position is also very dismal after
13 ...0-0?! 14 d5 exd5 15 exd5 i.b7 16 c4. 
However, he should have preferred
13...cxd4!. In Informator and then in The 
Test of Time I parried this with the 'unex­
pected' 14 tt:lxd4 'fifo 15 tt:lxc6 'iUxc6 16 
#e2! with the threat of ..tb5, and ‘the pin 
on the a4-e8 diagonal may prove fatal'. 
Thus 16...#c7 17 i.b5 0-0-0(?!) 18 a4 (5tohl) 
or 18 i.e3 is to White's advantage. But after 
the cool-headed 17...I1d8! the pin does not 
give anything: 18 'i¥g4 #xc3i 19 i.e3 0-0!
20 i.d 4  tt:lf6 with equality, or 18 'i!Vd3 a6! 19
xa6 0-0 or 19 .ltf4 'i¥xf4 20 ..txd7+ f
 21 
#xa6 # c7 with good compensation for the 
pawn.
After the normal 14 cxd4 I1c8 15 'iVe2 
.t a4 16 He1 0-0 17 ..tf4 White's chances are 
slightly better, but there is still all to play 
for. Now, however, my plan fully justifies 
itself.
14 d5! (7)
Here, in view of White's lead in develop­
ment, this typical pawn breakthrough in 
the centre is especially effective.
14...exd5 (3) 15 exd5 ..txd5 16 ..tb5 a6? (7)
Already the decisive mistake. 16...i.e6? 
was also bad: 17 \We4! !1d8 18 i.f4  'iic8 19 
tt:le5, since if 19...0-0 White wins by 20 
tt:lxd7 .itxd7 21 i.d3! (5tohl).
The only chance was 16. ....tc6, although 
after 17 .itf4! White would have retained an 
obvious advantage: 17...®xf4 18 i.xc6  0-0-0
19 a4! with a powerful attack, or 17...'i'b7
18 ..txc6 iVxc6 19 I1e1! 'itf8 (19 ...tt:lf8? 20 
tt:le5 Wb7 21 'i¥f5!) 20 Sad1 Be8, and my 
earlier continuation 21 #f5(?) tt:lf6 22 tt:le5 
#c8(?) 23 tt:ld7+! is unclear because of
22 .. .'iia4! (Crouch), but after 21 #e2! Black 
would have faced a difficult defence. Al­
though nominally he is a pawn up, he is 
effectively playing a whole rook down:
21...tt:lf6?! 22 'ic4! (with the threats of tt:le5 
and 'ixf7+!) or 21...'#c8?! 22 'iUd3! tt:lf6 23 
Bxe7! Bxe7 24 i.d 6 (Crouch) is bad for 
Black, and 21...g5 (21...g6 22 'i¥a6!) is insuf­
ficient in view of 22 .id6 ..txd6 23 #xe8+ 
'itg7 24 'iVe2(e4).
Apparently in these variations Gheor- 
ghiu was concerned about his restless king, 
but now Black goes from the frying pan 
into the fire...
17 .ltf4!
This forces the opponent to throw cau­
tion to the winds and bring his king into 
the centre of the board. 17 ..txd7+? 'i'xd7
18 c4? i.e4! would have been too naive.
17 ...#'xf4 (13)
17...WVb7 was also hopeless: 18 i.xd7+ 
#xd7 19 c4 'i'g4 20 !;.xd5 # xf4 21 .i:!.e1 .:a7 
(21...'iUf6 22 tt:le5! with the threat of tt:ld7)
22 tt:le5 
(threatening tt:lc6) 
22 . ..0-0 (if
22....Mo? the simplest is 23 'ifa4+! b5 24 
'iUa5 .Mc8 25 tt:ld7(c6), although the old line
380

Challenger
23 tt:lg6!? fxg6 24 #xg6+ # f7 25 Sd8+! will 
also do) 23 g3 Wf6 24 tt:ld7 I!xd7 25 Sxd7 
.td6 26 #e4 with unbearable pressure.
18 ixd7+ 'it>xd7 19 SxdS+ 4c7
Earlier I thought that 19...'it>c8 with the 
idea of ..JJ.a7-c7 would have made it hard 
for White to convert his advantage, but the 
resolute 20 fif5 'ic 4  21 S e ll .; f6 22 Sxf6! 
gxf6 23 'Vif5+ 4b8 24 'ix f6  (Stohl) or
21...Sa7 (or 21. ...td6) 22 Se4! ^ 5  23 Sxf7 
would have dispelled this illusion.
20 S e 1! (2) 20...i_d 6 (12)
After 20. ..jL,f6 21 S.e4 the queen is 
trapped, while if 20...fihe8 not only 21 fide5 
is strong, but also 21 Sf5 '>/Wd6 22 fixf7.
21 Hfs i}'c4 22 .Ue4! (even in such a position 
it is not too late to make a mistake: 22 
tt:ld2? She8!) 22...'ib5 23 Sxf7+ (2) 23...'ito>b8
24 fie6 (5) 24....:.da (3) 25 c4 (2)
Remarkably, Gheorghiu later found a 
follower! 
The 
game 
Yakovich-Akesson 
(Stockholm 1999) continued 25 We4 .tc7 26 
g3, and in view of 26...2d1+ 27 CZJe1 .i:f.a7 28 
He8+ Black resigned.
2S...i}'c6
If 25 ...i\Wa5 there was the immediately 
decisive 26 #e4 fia7 27 Sxd6! or 26....tc7
27 .Ue8 (27 ctJd4!?) 27.jSa7, when White has 
a pleasant choice between 28 2Je5! (Stohl) 
and 28 iVe5!!.
26 ttJes Wc8 (2) 27 Wkb1! 1-0
Not the only way, but the most elegant 
one (27 . ..b5 28 cxb5 with unavoidable 
mate). Times: 1.22-2.00.
In the meantime, misfortune struck the 
other leader, Beliavsky: with an extra rook 
and a completely won position against van 
der Wiel, in a time scramble he even missed 
a draw! Tal too was desperate for a win, but 
with White he was unable to overcome the 
inspired play of Quinteros. But Geller won 
against Velimirovic and finally caught up his 
rivals. The leading positions became: Kas­
parov 8 out of 11 (plus one adjourned 
game), Tal, Geller and Garcia - 71/2 out of 12, 
Andersson - 7 (+1), Beliavsky - 61/2 (+2).
Next came the highly important ad­
journment day before the final round. It 
immediately transpired that in his ad­
journed game with me Rodriguez had 
sealed a losing move! I quickly converted 
my advantage and, by reaching 9 points, 
secured a place in the Candidates.
Beliavsky had to endure far more diffi­
cult trials. First, an exhausting eight-hour 
adjournment session with Andersson - a 
draw on the 108th move! Then, on the day 
of the last round, a morning adjournment 
session with Rodriguez, during which the 
Lvov grandmaster, when just a couple of 
steps away from a win, suddenly left a 
piece en prise and only by a miracle gained 
a draw (which gave me sole first place 
ahead of schedule: now all five pursuers 
were one and half points behind). And after 
such sufferings, that evening, composed 
and imperturbable as always, Beliavsky 
came on to the stage to join battle against 
Gheorghiu with Black. And, by winning, he 
won the second qualifying place into the 
Candidates matches! This was a deserved 
reward for courage...
381

Garry Kasparov on Garry Kasparov: Part One
The other contenders no longer had the 
strength for a final spurt: Andersson and Tal 
agreed a draw on the 17th move, while in 
terrible time-trouble Geller and Garcia lost 
with Black to Sax and Rodriguez respectively.
At the finish I had to battle with grand­
master Dragoljub Velimirovic - a legendary 
expert on Sicilian attacks. The game did not 
affect the allocation of places in the tour­
nament, but Velimirovic had White and he 
was eager for a fight! He very much wanted 
to become the first Yugoslav player to win 
against me (in fact it was to be Ivan Sokolov
- in 1999!). I did not risk employing the 
Sicilian Defence against him, and so I chose 
the solid Caro-Kann (cf. Revolution in the 70s, 
p.226). But here too a sharp fight developed, 
in which fortune was on my side: after 
passing through a very dangerous position, I 
won. And as a result I scored 10 points out of
13 - even more than in Bugojno!
Not everything went smoothly for me 
over the course of this fierce race, and 
things were very difficult for me in the 
games with my main rivals (in this respect 
it was one of my worst tournaments!), but 
the sensibly chosen tournament strategy 
helped me to overcome both my excessive 
anxiety, and my lack of experience. Closer 
to the finish I endeavoured above all to 
control my emotions, so as not to get car­
ried away and not to end up in time- 
trouble. Lack of time was felt occasionally, 
but not once was I in serious time-trouble. I 
also had hardly any adjournments.
A study of the experience of the other 
two Interzonal Tournaments allowed me to 
conclude that the main thing was to pace 
myself correctly. Indeed, in Las Palmas and 
Toluca victory went not to the player who 
had a brisk start (and then was constantly 
wondering how not to fritter away his 
lead), but to the one who retained his
strength for a finishing burst. And when at 
the end I managed to win four games in a 
row, it became clear that I had paced myself 
correctly.
In my view, the Moscow Interzonal was 
the strongest in terms of the main con­
tenders, and the most fighting of the three 
tournaments. 
There 
were 
hardly 
any 
'grandmaster' draws, and the number of 
decisive games comprised 549%, against 
50.6% in Las Palmas and 46.2% in Toluca. 
Just think: before the last round in Moscow 
no less than five players were in contention 
for second place!
And so, at the end of September all eight 
grandmasters, who were to meet in the 
Candidates matches the following year, 
1983, had been determined. In the 'upper' 
half of the pairing list were Korchnoi, 
Hubner (finalists in the previous cycle), 
Kasparov and Ribli (outright winners of the 
Interzonals), and in the 'lower' half - Por- 
tisch, Beliavsky, Smyslov and Torre. The 
match pairings were due to be made two 
weeks later in Lucerne, at the end of the 
Olympiad.
Ahead lay one-to-one battles with top- 
class players, and I optimistically awaited 
these new, unknown tests. However, I was 
concerned about the fact that, in nearly all 
the key games of the Interzonal Tourna­
ment, against the strongest opponents I 
had dubious positions. A warning signal! 
Obviously there was still an enormous field 
for improvement. Within exactly two years 
the match with Karpov was to show that I 
had not even imagined the extent of this 
field.
First 'Oscar'
25th World Chess Olympiad (Lucerne, 30th 
October - 16th November 1982): 1. USSR - 
42V2 out of 56; 2. Czechoslovakia - 36; 3-4.
382

Challenger
USA and Yugoslavia - 3S1/2; S-6. Hungary 
and Bulgaria - 331/ 2; 7. Poland - 33; etc. 
(altogether 92 teams). The winning team 
comprised Karpov (61/2 out of 8), Kasparov 
(81/2 out of 11), Polugayevsky (6 out of 9), 
Beliavsky (7 out of 10), reserves Tal (61/2 out 
of 8) and Yusupov (8 out of 10).
After the achievements of the Hungarian 
team at the two previous Olympiads, the 
forthcoming Olympiad in the Swiss town of 
Lucerne was destined to answer a burning 
question: would the Soviet grandmasters 
be able to demonstrate their superiority, or 
had the times of the hegemony of one chess 
power irreversibly passed?
The USSR team was undoubtedly the 
strongest, while the next teams on the 
rating list - USA, Hungary, Yugoslavia and 
Czechoslovakia - looked roughly equal. 
However, the general opinion was that the 
only teams that could really compete with 
us were the Hungarians (led by Portisch 
and Ribli) and the Americans with their 
uniform 
grandmaster line-up 
(Browne, 
Seirawan, Alburt, Kavalek, Christiansen and 
Tarjan). True, also with a good line-up were 
the Yugoslavs (in the end their leader 
Ljubojevic scored 11 out of 14!) and the 
Czechs (Hort, Smejkal and the swiftly pro­
gressing Ftacnik).
In the first found we crushed New Zea­
land - 4-0 (I won with Black against Sara- 
pu), and in the second round Chile - 31/ 2-1/2. 
But the race was led by the American team, 
who won both matches by a whitewash. 
The crucial USSR-USA battle took place in 
the third round.
In that memorable match I played for the 
first time against a defector - Lev Alburt, 
and around such games there was always 
an especially tense atmosphere. Before the 
round the managers of the Soviet team
insistently advised me to avoid the tradi­
tional handshake with my opponent. Feel­
ing terribly nervous, I arrived for the game 
and stood a metre away from the chess 
table, to avoid accidentally running into the 
approaching 'deserter'. But Alburt fully 
appreciated my position: he calmly sat 
down at the board and made his first move. 
A few years later Lev told me that before 
the game he had discussed this problem 
with Korchnoi and Igor Ivanov, and they 
decided not to put me on the spot (inciden­
tally, before his game with Karpov at the 
1980 Olympiad, Alburt demonstratively 
held out his hand, but the world champion 
equally demonstratively disregarded it). 
The game began - and all my anxiety 
immediately vanished.
Game 76 
L.AIburt-G.Kasparov
W orld Chess O lym piad, 
3rd round, Lucerne 1.11.1982 
King's Indian Defence E73
1 c4 g6 2 d4 i.g7 3 tt:Jc3 tt:Jf6 4 e4 d6 5 i.e 2 
0-0 6 ..igS lbbd7
In Daugavpils in 1978 I managed to win 
against Alburt in the problematic variation
6 ... cS 7 ds h6 (not 7 ...bs?! - Game Nos. 58, 
67) 8 ..if4 e6, but later it transpired that 
White's play can be improved, and Black's 
counter-improvement leads only to a draw 
(cf. Game No.28). And on this occasion I 
followed a different, less forcing course, but 
again I encountered a surprise!
7 '! c l
This seemingly artificial move has a logi­
cal justification: after the usual 7 'iWd2 e5 8 
dS tt:JcS White is forced to defend his e4- 
pawn with the unaesthetic 9 f3 or 9 ..if3, 
whereas now there is the simple 9 b4!. And
383

Garry Kasparov on Garry Kasparov: Part One
if first 8...a5, then after 9 ctJf3 etJc5 the white 
knight will occupy the vacant d2-square. 
Here there is nothing terrible for Black, and 
he can calmly complete his development, 
but that was what the opponent was 
expecting ...
I pondered for a long time over the vir­
tues and drawbacks of 7 Wc1 and finally 
decided to act in the spirit of the Benko 
Gambit.
7...c5 (48) S d5
5...b5!?
8...iYa5 is too sluggish: 9 i.d2! a6 10 ctJf3 
(Alburt-Zapata, New York 1980). At that 
time information travelled slowly around 
the world and I did not know of the exis­
tence of this game.
9 cxb5 a6 10 a4 (11)
A well-tested method of play against all 
varieties of the Benko Gambit: by reinforc­
ing his b5-point, White restricts the oppo­
nent’s counterplay on the queenside.
10...'i:!Va5 (2) 11 .i.d2
The position resembles my Tilburg game 
with 5passky (Game No.58), but there the 
useful move fla3 had been made, whereas 
here White has played the useless iVc1, 
which Black is able to exploit.
11... 
axb5! (2)
A timely exchange, ruling out the reply
a4xb5. After 11...iVb4?! 12 f3 the queen 
would have risked being trapped.
12 etJxb5 (6)
This is somewhat stronger than 12 .i.xb5 
i.a6 ! 13 ctJf3 'iVb4 or 13 etJge2 'iVb4 14 f3 
etJe5 15 0-0 ctJc4 with adequate counter­
play.
12...'iVb6 (2) 13 'iVc2 (2)
White wants to develop his pieces har­
moniously, without making any positional 
concessions. 
Previously I criticised this 
move, which leaves the rook at a1 unde­
fended, but there is nothing better. After 
the modest 13 'iVb1 there would have been 
the good reply 13...c4!? 14 .i.xc4 ctJg4 
(14 ...ctJc5!?) 15 ctJh3 etJc5, while in the event 
of 13 f3 etJe5 Black also has excellent pros­
pects: 14 f4?! etJed7 15 Wc2 c4! or 15 Wc4 
i.a 6  etc.
13. ..i.a 6  (27)
The sacrifice of a second pawn looked 
very tempting - 13...c4!? 14 Wxc4 etJc5, for 
example: 15 e5 etJxd5! 16 a5 i  e6! 17 b4 
ctJd7 or 15 f3 i.d7, aiming to exploit 
White’s retarded development. 14 ctJf3!? 
etJc5 15 0-0 with the idea of .i.e3 and i.xc4  
is safer. After some hesitation I chose the 
more traditional course.
14 ctJf3 (10)
I also criticised this natural developing
384

Challenger
move and suggested the prophylactic 14 
I:!.a3, after which Black could either play
14...I:!.fe8 and ... e7-e6, or try to exploit his 
lead in development by 14...c4!?. After 14 
I:!.dl, which I gave in Informator, 14. ..c4! is 
also strong.
14.....txbs! (7)
Successfully avoiding the temptation to 
sacrifice the queen in another way -
14...CtJxe4? 15 'i/Vxe4 ..ixb5 16 ..ixb5 'i!Vxb5
17 axb5 .l:!.xa1+ 18 'it>e2 I:!.xh1 19 'i/Vxe7 
would have led to disaster: 19...CtJb6(e5) 20 
'i!Vxd6, while if 19...CtJf6 White decides 
matters with the elegant 20 b6! I:!.b1 
(20. ..Se8 21 'i/Vxe8+!) 21 b4! ttJxd5 22 #e4! 
(instead of the drawing line 22 'i!Vxf8+? 
..ixf8 23 b7 CtJf4+! 24 'it>e3 CtJd5+ 25 'it>e2, 
but not 25 \t>e4? l2Jxb4! 26 b8# f5+ winning 
the newly-born queen).
15 ..ixbs Wxbs 16 axbs .l:!.xa1 + 17 ..ic1 
l2Jxe4
After the fall of this pawn the fate of the 
d5-pawn is also decided. After 17....l:!.b8?! 18 
0-0 I:!.xb5 19 ..td2! White would have con­
solidated his position, retaining a material 
advantage.
18 0-0 l2Je f 6
Previously I assessed this position in fa­
vour of Black, who for the queen has rook, 
knight and at least one pawn (after
...ttJxd5). Also obvious is the weakness of 
White's queenside pawns and the great 
mobility of the black pieces, especially the 
knights, which have convenient posts. But 
now I think that the position is one of 
dynamic balance, although it is not easy for 
White to find the correct plan. He must aim 
to 
create 
counter-threats 
or 
advanta­
geously exchange pieces, in order to exploit 
the power of the queen.
19 b4!? (14)
At the cost of the d5-pawn (which all the 
same is doomed), White breaks up Black's 
pawn group in the centre and increases the 
value of the passed b5-pawn. However, also 
suitable was either 19 CtJd2 I:!.b8 20 l2Jc4 and 
: d2(g5), or the immediate 19 ..ig5!? with a 
sound enough position.
19...l2JxdS (4)
In the event of 19 ...I:!.b8 20 ..td2 I:!.xfl+ 21 
'it>xfl I:!.xb5 22 'i/Vc4 I:!.b8 23 bxc5 I:!.b1+ 24 
CtJe1 CtJxc5 25 'ia 2  Black's achievements are 
also slight.
20 ..td2! (9) 20....l:!.fa8! (13)
Here too I had to resist the temptation of 
a pretty variation: 20....l:!.xf1+ 21 'it>xfl cxb4
22 ®c6?! b3?! (22...CtJ7b6 is equal) 23 'ixd5? 
b2 24 'ia 2  I:!.c8 and wins. Alas, all the bril­
liance is ruined by 23 ..ia5! b2 24 l2Jd2, and 
earlier by the simple 22 ^ 3 !.
385

Garry Kasparov on Garry Kasparov: Part One
21 bxc5
In The Test of Time for some reason I rec­
ommended preparing a shelter for the king 
by 21 g3(?!) and I myself indicated 21...Sla2!
22 We4 e6 with the initiative for Black.
21 ... Bxf1+ (trying to drive the white king 
into the centre, although the immediate
21 ../L:lxc5!? would have been more 'nor­
mal') 22 'it>xf11:.a1+ 23 'it>e2 (4) 23../t:xc5
24 'iYc4? (5)
Only this mistake changes the character 
of the play to Black's advantage. My Infor­
mator suggestion 24 l"Lle1 Sa3! would also 
have suited him. However, 24 l"Llg5! (with 
the idea of l"Lle4, which disappears after 24 
'Wc4?) 24. ...l:.a4 25 f3! (the white king's 
placing is no worse at e2 than at fl)
25 ...l"Llb6 26 l"Lle4 Sc4 27 ^ 1  lt:ca4 28 ..1a5 
or 27...l"Lle6 28 ..1e3 would have maintained 
the dynamic balance.
24...e6 (now, to all appearances, the b- 
pawn is doomed) 25 b6!? (5)
Immediately sacrificing the pawn for the 
sake of activating the queen. It would also 
have been lost after the unhurried 25 g3 (of 
course, it was not for this that Alburt 
played his queen to c4) 25. . ...1c3!? 26 b6 (26 
..ixc3?! Sa4!) 26.....ixd2 27 lt:xd2 Sa2 28 b7 
ltb2 29 ifc1 Sb4! (29 ...fixb7 30 l"Lle4!) fol­
lowed by ...l"Llxb7.
2S...ct:Jxb6 (5)
It was tempting not to move the knight 
away, but after 25 ...Sb1 26 'i¥a2! Sxb6?! 
(26...l:!.a1!) 27 1Va8+ f
 28 ..ih6 l"Lld7 29 
..ixf8 (or 29 'iYd8 Sb8 30 Wxd7 ..ixh6 31 g3! 
with equality) 29. ...Ct:xf8 30 l"Llg5 White 
would have achieved his aim - equality 
thanks to the maximum activation of his 
pieces: 30...Sb2 + (30. ..Ct:f6 31 1Vd8! or
30 ... h6 31 l"Llh7! is no better, while my 
Informator suggestion 30...'ig7(?) is even 
fatal because of 31 'tta7!) 31 'it>e1 lt:b4 32 
ct:Jxh7 CLld3+ 33 'it>d1 l"Llxf2+ 34 'it>c1 CLld3+ 35 
'it>d1 'it>xh7 36 'iYxf8, andthe queen guaran­
tees a draw.
26 "Vi'b5 l"Llbd7 27 ..1e3 (5) 27.....1f8 (9)
Black is temporarily forced to retreat, 
retaining the hope of gradually advancing 
his central pawns.
28ctJd4 (22)
Now White cannot afford to wait, but 
with pieces alone Black's position cannot be 
broken up. The energetic 28 g4 or 28 h4!? 
came into consideration.
28...l:ia2+ (3) 29 'it>f1 Sa1+ (checks to gain 
on the clock with time-trouble imminent)
30 'it>e2
30...e5
30. ..d5 looks more natural, but I wanted 
to restrict the white bishop, assuming that
386

Challenger
the opponent would be unable to exploit 
the weakness of the d5-square. However, it 
was not essential to determine the placing 
of the pawns immediately: the preparatory
30...1.1.a6(a7) was also good.
31 t2Jc6 (3) 31. ..Sa2+ 32 Wf1 (4) 32...l:!a1+ 
33 'it>e2 .Ua2+ 34 ' i f l  Sa6!? (2)
Continuing 
to 
look 
for 
ways 
to 
strengthen his position, Black tries to evict 
the knight from c6. Alburt did not like this...
35 ..ixcs?! (9)
In the event of 35 i2Jd8?! d5! 36 ..ixc5 
t'bxc5 37 'i'e8 2f6! the d5-pawn is taboo: 38 
#xe5 l:txf2+! 39 'ig1 t2Je4 (40 'i&'xd5? .I:tf5! 
and wins). But 35 t'bb4!? 2al+  36 '>t>e2 Bb1
37 'ir'a5 came into consideration, when 
what Black should do next is not clear. 
Possibly he would have had to regret play­
ing 30. ..e5.
3S. ..t2JxcS?!
An error in reply. At this point, in con­
trast to the similar situation on the 22nd 
move, it was definitely better to interpose
35... 
l:ta1+! 36 '>t>e2 l:ta2+, and only after 37 
'it>fl(e3) - 37...tt:Jxc5.
36 g3l (now the king acquires a shelter, and 
Black's chances of success are reduced)
36...fia1+ 37 'it>g2 t'be6 38 'it'b8 (6) 38...l:!d1
(38 . ..'it>g7? 39 tL:Jxe5! with equality) 39 'ib2 
(6) 39...l:!ds (2) 40 'i'b8 (2) 40...ScS (2)
40. ..Bd2 or 40. ..'>t>g7, recommended by 
me in The Test of Time, is no better.
Here the game was adjourned, and it 
was resumed two hours later. In a brief 
joint analysis with Yusupov and our team 
trainer Makarychev some promising ideas 
were found. However, the position is a 
'practical' one, in which what proves deci­
sive is not so much analysis, as inventive­
ness during play. To fight for an advantage 
it is desirable to exchange the white knight 
(then the queen is deprived of support), but 
this is not easily done.
41 t2Je7+ (20)
The sealed move. The superficial 41 
i2Jb4?! 
would 
have 
allowed 
41...tt'lc7! 
(threatening ...Bb5) 42 tt'ld3 Sc3 43 t2Jb4 
l:!b3! with the unavoidable exchange of 
knights, after which White would be forced 
to passively await the advance of the black 
pawns.
41 ..'it>g7 42 t2Jc8
The only move which preserves the 
knight. 42 'ie8?! ii.xe7 43 'it'xe7 d5 favours 
Black, while in the event of 42 'i&'xd6? h5! 
White would altogether lose a piece: 43 
'it>g1 'it>h7! with the threat of ... Sc7, or 43 h3 
e4 44 'it>g1 'it>h7! 45 'itb8 ..ixe7 46 'ie8 ..ig5 
47 'ifxf7+ tt'lg7 etc.
42....1:!.ds 43 'i'a8 (5)
The struggle revolves around ...d6-d5. It 
was also quite acceptable to play 43 'iVb7 
l:td2 44 'Wb4! (previously I considered only
44 t2Jb6(?) d5! 45 tL:Jxd5 i.c5 or 45 i2Jd7 
tt'lc5!) 44...l:td4 45 ' i s .
43...1:!d2 (7) 44 i2Jb6 (6) 44. .• tt'lcS (9)
The impatient 44...d5? would have al­
lowed White to force a draw by 45 Via5! 
Sc2 (45 ...:tb2 46 t2Jc4!) 46 tL:Jxd5 i.c5 47 
t2Je3!.
45 tt'lc4 (2) 4S...ld 4 (4) 46 t2Je3 ..ie7 (2) 47 
h4 (1)
Defending against .....ig5, but allowing
387

Garry Kasparov on Garry Kasparov: Part One
the fixing of the kingside pawns and weak­
ening the g4-square, to where the black 
knight can leap. 
Nevertheless, White's 
position is still quite solid.
47...hs (2) 48 tt:Jds (3) 48....td 8!
Tactical nuances (49 'iVxd8? :lxd5 is sui­
cidal) again help the overall strategic idea! 
Black is ready to carry out the manoeuvre of 
his knight to f6 (and possibly to g4), as 
planned in our analysis, for example: 49 
# c 6 tt:le4! 50 tt:le3 tt:lf6.
49 'itf3?! (7)
White's thoughts are aimed at parrying 
the ...tt:le4-f6 manoeuvre, but, despite the 
limited amount of material remaining, it is 
dangerous to bring the king into the centre! 
After 49 tt:lc3! tt:le6 (49...jLe7 50 tt:Jd5) 50 
'i!Ya7 it would hardly have been possible for 
Black to strengthen his position (50. ..tt:lc7
51 ^
8).
The move made by Alburt surprised me: 
just before the time control White securely 
sheltered his king, and suddenly on the 
resumption he again brought it into the 
centre - obviously the wrong place! I was 
tuned up for a lengthy adjournment ses­
sion with a completely unclear result, but 
the opponent's unexpected 'activity' led 
quickly to disaster.
49...tt:le6l (3)
With the positional threat of ...tt:lc7. The 
previous plan with 49 ...tt:le4 would have run 
into one of two refutations: 50 'i'xd8 tt:ld2+ 
51 &e2 fixd5 52 g4! hxg4 53 h5! tt:le4 
(53. ..tt:lf3 54 h6+! 4xh6 55 ' i f 8+ and 'i'xf7) 
54 hxg6 tt:lf6 55 gxf7, relying on the open 
position of the black king, or 50 'i'b7 tt:lc3 
(50...tt:lf6 51 tt:lb4) 51 tt:Jxc3 Sd3+ 52 'ite2 
.l:!.xc3 53 'id 7  Ji.c7 54 f4!, also with suffi­
cient counterplay against the king.
so 'i!Yc6! (6)
After 50 'itg2, admitting his mistake, in 
lnjormator I gave 50...tt:lc7, but the bold 51 
tt:lxc7 J.xc7 52 f4! exf4 53 'i'a 1 .tb 6 54 gxf4 
Wh7 55 f5 gives White drawing chances. In 
The Test of Time the more unpleasant
50...Ji.xh4! 51 gxh4? Sxd5 was suggested, 
but 51 # c 6! ..tf6 52 'ix d 6 h4 53 'i!Vc6 is far 
more resilient.
Here I sank into thought, staring at my 
rook - with revulsion! If it were not on the 
board, the fork ...tt:ld4+ would be decisive, 
and self-sacrificing attempts are simply 
ignored by White: 50 ...Sxh4 51 'VIVxd6 or
50 .. l:tf4+ 51 4e3. 
so... Sd 2! (27)
When he saw this move, for some reason 
Alburt became extremely nervous. Possibly 
he had mainly been expecting the dashing
50...e4+?!, but this would merely have
388

Challenger
reduced my chances: after 51 'it>g2 ..ixh4 52 
'tixd6 j,f6  53 'ic6  .te5 54 fLle3 the weak­
ness of the e4-pawn would have restricted 
Black. As we will now see, a similar position 
(but with the pawn on e5) could have 
arisen in the game if White had played 51 
'>t>g2.
51 'lt>e3?? (4)
Preparing 'iVxd6, White suddenly com­
mits hara-kiri. The immediate 51 Wxd6 
would have led after 51...tc7! 52 'iVd7 .i.b6! 
53 ltJxb6 Sxd7 54 ltJxd7 f6 55 &e4 f
 to a 
problematic knight endgame where Black is 
a pawn up but the outcome is not yet 
altogether clear.
In Informator and then also in The Test of 
Time I gave the variation 51 4g2! (some­
what stronger than 51 'Wic4 lLlc5 or 51 ^ 7  
e4+ 52 &e3 Sd3+ 53 &e2 ..txh4) 51...j,xh4!
52 Wxd6 (52 gxh4? l1xd5!) 52 . ...tf6, in 
which 'the threat of ...h5-h4 and the weak­
ness of the f2-point give Black real winning 
chances'. However, after the approximate
53 'i'c6 .td8 54 Wd6 ; c7 55 «c6 .tb8 56 
'#b6 Hxd5 57 Wxb8, even despite the ex­
change of the white knight, a draw is far 
more real.
51...l:e2+!
The fork nevertheless operated! The in­
stantaneous sobering up proved bitter for
Alburt - the road back is cut off. A brief 
agony ensues.
52 <;i;>d3 (of course, not 52 4xe2 ltJd4+ and 
...ltJxc6) 52...e4+ 53 ^c4 (53 &c3 Sc2+!) 
53. .l:c 2+ 54 ltJc3 ..tf6 55 'i'xe4 l:i.xc3+ 56 
'lt>d5 l:c5+ 57 <&xd6 .te5+ 0-1
After 58 'it>d7 l:tc7+ 59 4e8 i.d6(f6) mate 
is unavoidable. Times: 3.10-3.25.
I should remind you that the names of 
Korchnoi and Alburt were expunged from 
Soviet chess literature. But in the event of 
resounding wins over the 
‘renegades', 
exceptions were made. Thus this compli­
cated, fighting game, and my subsequent 
duels with Korchnoi were published with 
annotations in the Soviet chess press and 
then in the games collection The Test of 
Time.
By scoring 21/2 from the three adjourned 
games we defeated the American team 3-1. 
And in the 4th round we also overcame the 
Yugoslavs after a tough fight: 21/2-11/2 (I 
won against Gligoric). The fate of this 
match was also decided during the re­
sumption - thanks to our superior analysis 
of the adjourned games. During the two- 
hour break we were able to discover re­
sources which our opponents had not even 
contemplated. In this way several ‘extra' 
half-points were gained.
After four rounds the teams of the USSR 
and Czechoslovakia were leading on 13 out 
of 16. By defeating our main rivals 21/2-11/2 
in the 5th round (I drew with Smejkal), the 
Soviet team became the sole leader. The 6th 
round saw our only drawn match at this 
Olympiad, with the Dutch: 2-2 (I had to be 
satisfied with a draw against Sosonko). In 
the 7th round we defeated the West Ger­
man team 21/2-11/2. Playing for the first time 
on board 1, I drew with Black against a 
cautious Hubner.
389

Garry Kasparov on Garry Kasparov: Part One
Mid-way through the tournament, after 
winning two matches by a big margin, the 
Hungarian team finally moved up (USSR -
20 out of 28; Hungary, USA, Czechoslovakia
- 19). The 8th round USSR-Hungary clash 
was probably decisive in the fight for first 
place, and we won 21/ 2-11/ 2. Karpov confi­
dently defeated Portisch with White (cf. 
Game No.88 in Volume V of My Great 
Predecessors, note to White's 12th move), 
and with Black I found I was able without 
particular difficulty to neutralise Ribli's 
initiative.
After negotiating the main matches, we 
began playing easily and without restraint: 
31/ 2-1/2, 4-0, 4-0 and 31/ 2-1/2 - these were the 
results of the Soviet team's matches with 
some quite strong teams: England, Switzer­
land, Argentina and Romania.
In the gth round match against England I 
again played on board 1, and my opponent 
was the 27-year-old John Nunn, the only 
grandmaster in the world who was a Doc­
tor of Mathematics. The unexpected out­
come was an attractive miniature, which 
appealed to both the public and the jour­
nalists, who attentively followed my play as 
leader of the team.
Game 77 
G.Kasparov-J.Nunn
W orld Chess O lym piad, 
9 th  round, Lucerne 8.11.1982 
Modern Benoni A67
1 d4 t'Llf6 2 c4 e6 3 t'Llc3! (6)
The exclamation mark is for the underly­
ing psychology of this move. Nunn was a 
Modem Benoni devotee and had even 
written an extensive book about it. And, 
anticipating the reply ... c7-c5, I made the 
move which allows White the widest choice
of continuations.
3...c5 4 d5 exd5 5 cxd5 d6 6 e4 (7) 6...g6 7 f4
I wanted to choose this aggressive varia­
tion, which I had already tried against 
Kuijpers (Dortmund 1980).
7.....1g7 8 ..ibS+ t'Llfd7 (up until now the 
gambit line 8...t'Llbd7!? 9 e5 dxe5 10 fxe5 
t'Llh5 11 e6 1Vh4+ etc. has also not been 
refuted) 9 a4
Magerramov and I considered this move 
to be more dangerous for Black than 9 ..id3, 
which was popular at that time: now the 
bishop can retreat not only to d3, but all the 
same the a2-a4 advance comes into White's 
plans.
9...t'Lla6
An original idea: Black saves a tempo by 
not castling, in order to direct his knight 
immediately to the weakened b4-point and 
play ...a7-a6. 9 ...0-0 is more natural, but 
that is what Kuijpers played against me, 
and after 10 t'Llf3 a6 11 ..ie2 t'Llf6 12 0-0 
#c7? 13 e5! White gained a strong attack. 
Another fashionable idea is 9 ...Wh4+i? 10 
g3 #e7(d8), weakening the opponent's 
kingside at the cost of a tempo.
10 t'Llf3 t'Llb4 (3) 11 0-0 (10) 11 ...a6!? (3)
After 11...0-0 12 le l!  a6 13 f
 t'Llf6 14 
h3 it would not have been easy for Black to 
create counterplay.
390

Challenger
Nunn's idea looks attractive: both 12 
i.c 4 0-0 with the intention of ...tt:Jb6 and 
...i.g4, and 12 i.e 2 0-0 13 i.e3 iLlf6 give 
Black good counterplay. And so I devised 
something rather more energetic...
12 i.xd7+!? (16)
The justification for this 'illogical' ex­
change is the inability of the remaining 
knight at b4 to take part in the defence of 
the kingside. Some of the other black pieces 
are also seemingly out of it, whereas 
White's come into play without hindrance 
(although it is not at all easy to derive any 
direct benefit from this).
12...i.xd7 13 fS!
Another provocative move! However, it is 
not easy for Black to exploit the weakening 
of the e5-square, and White restricts the 
bishop on d7. The character of the play has 
changed sharply: Black is obliged to think 
about parrying the threats that have arisen, 
and Nunn lost his composure. True, his 
initial replies were the most natural...
13 ...0-0! (31)
The black king urgently moves away 
from the centre, as otherwise it could have 
been in serious trouble, for example:
a) 
13...c4 (an attempt to bring the knight 
at b4 into play) 14 i.g5 (Nunn thought that 
the simple 14 i.e 3 was also quite unpleas­
ant) 14. . . ^ 6+ 15 'lth1 iLld3 16 f6 i .f 8 17 a5! 
iLlf2+ (17...'ifxb2?! 18 i.d 2!) 18 S xf2 'ix f 2 19 
iLla4 (my previous recommendation) or 19 
e5!? with an obvious numerical superiority 
on the decisive part of the board;
b) 
13 ...gxf5 14 i.g5 f 6 (or 14...i.f6 15 
i .f 4! - I tried to parry this with 15. ..0-0 16 
iL.xd6 i.x a 4, but after 17 i}'el! with the idea 
of 'iVg3+ things are difficult for Black:
17...'iVxd6 18 e5 'fie7 19 d6 'f/ie8 20 tt:Jxa4 
etc.) 15 i.f4  'fic7, and in the event of 16 
tt:Jd2 0-0-0! (but not 16...iLld3? 17 i.xd6! and 
iLlc4) 17 iLlc4 i.f8  or 17 exf5 i.f8  both sides 
have chances, but 16 exf5! 0-0-0 17 Bc1 
i.xf5  18 iLld4! i.g6 (18...cxd4? 19 tt:Jb5 or
18 ...i.d7? 19 iLle4 is bad for Black) 19 tt:Je6 
gives White an advantage.
14 ..tg5 (7) 14...f6 (11)
After 14...i.f6? 15 #d2!, with the ex­
change of bishops, the king's defences are 
weakened too much: 15 ...c4 16 i.x f6  'iVxf6
17 tt:Jd1! (17 tt:Je1!?) and iLle3, or 15 ...i.xg5
16 tt:Jxg5 c4 17 f6 h6 18 e5! dxe5 19 tt:Je6!! 
with a strong attack. And the tactical trick
14...1.d4+?!, hoping for 15 'i¥xd4? cxd4 16
i.xd8 dxc3 17 bxc3 tLlxd5 with equality, did 
not work because of 15 'lth1 f6 16 i.h 6  
Bf7(e8) 17 .l:!.b1 i.e5 18 tt:Jxe5 etc. with a 
great positional superiority for White.
15 iL.f4
391

Garry Kasparov on Garry Kasparov: Part One
15...gxfS (1)
Earlier I attached a question mark to the 
pawn capture, thinking that ‘this attempt 
somehow to complicate the game leads to 
catastrophe', and recommended 15.. .'il'e7(?) 
as the lesser evil. Here Nunn suggested 16 
l:!.e1, but this is unclear in view of 16...c4! 17 
#d2 liJd3. On the other hand, after 16 fxg6! 
hxg6 17 ltJh4 (exploiting the position of the 
queen at e7) 17..it>h7 18 'il'f3! (my earlier 
move 18 ii.g3(?) is bad because of 18... c4! 19 
'il'f3 ..th6) it is hard to offer Black any good 
advice: 18. ..f5?! 19 'il'h3! or 18.....th6 19 
ltJxg6! 'it>xg6 20 #g3+ 'it>h5 21 ii.xh6! Hg8 
(21...'it>xh6? 22 
and wins) 22 ir'f4 with 
an extra pawn and an attack
15.. 
.g5? is even worse: 16 ii.xd6 ii.xa4 17 
.l:!.xa4 'Y&'xd6 18 e5! fxe5 19 ltJxg5 and wins 
(Gheorghiu-Kertesz, Romania 1982).
However, 15. ..'ic7!? 16 a5 .i:!.fe8 17 ltJd2
ii.b5 would have offered possibilities of a 
tenacious defence.
16 .i.xd 6 (6) 16...ii.xa4? (4)
Only this counter-stroke, on which Nunn 
was relying, proves to be a decisive mistake.
16...1:!.e8! was essential. Now little is prom­
ised by either 17 ltJd2 fxe4 18 ltJcxe4 f5! 
(18. ..b6?! 19 l:!.a3! is dangerous) 19 ltJxc5 
ltJxd5, or 17 .txc5 fxe4 18 ltJd4 f5! (but not
18...11Jd3(?) 19 ltJxe4!, given by me in Infor­
mator and The Test of Time) 19 ii.xb4 (19 
ltJxf5? ..txf5 20 l:!.xf5 'Y&'c8!) 19...'il'b6! 20 
itJce2 'Y&'xb4 21 liJxf5 .i.xf5 22 .l:txf5 l:!.ad8 23 
'it>h1 (in 2008 this is how one of the games 
went from the championship of Lower 
Saxony!) 23. ..e3!, and White's advantage 
evaporates, while after 18 'il'b3!? exf3 19 
'Y&'xb4 fxg2 20 .l:tf2 it is altogether slight.
Thus my plan with 12 = ■ xd7 proved to be 
good mainly for the reason that it set the 
opponent difficult practical problems.
17 l:!.xa4 (17 ltJxa4! 'Y&'xd6 18 ltJh4! was even 
stronger) 17...'il'xd6
18 liJh4! (1)
The knight triumphantly establishes it­
self at f5, where its value immediately 
increases several times over.
18 ... fxe4 (all the lines allowing 19 ltJxf5 
were hardly any more resilient) 19 lDfS 'il'd7
Black's resistance has been broken: if
19. 
..'il'e5, then 20 #g4 .l:tf7 21 liJh6+.
20 ltJxe4 'it>h8 (no better was 20. ..b6 21 l:!.a3! 
or 20....i:!.ae8 21 'il'g4 with the threats of 
ltJh6+ and ltJxc5, and in some cases d5-d6)
21 ltJxcS (2) 1-0
In view of 21...'ilVxd5 22 'YWxd5 ltJxd5 23 
ltJe6. Times: 1.06-1.14.
The centrepiece of the 10th round, and 
of the entire Olympiad, was my game with 
the recent participant in the world champi­
onship match, Viktor Korchnoi, the famous 
defector, who was leading the Swiss team. 
Karpov diplomatically avoided meeting him
- he would have had to play Black ‘on the 
opponent's home ground' and he obviously 
did not want to take the risk Besides, I 
could have come unstuck: this was my first 
encounter at the board with Korchnoi (not 
counting our meeting much earlier in a 
simul' - Game No.12), it was my eighth 
successive game without being substituted, 
and there was very limited time for prepar­
392

Challenger
ing to play Black against the great 'Viktor 
the Terrible'. However, in trying to expose 
me, Karpov miscalculated and, in effect, did 
me a service. This very difficult test for me 
turned into a grandiose battle!
Again the problem of the handshake 
arose. On this occasion I announced to the 
leaders that I was intending to shake 
Korchnoi's hand. And when I was told that I 
'did not understand the Party line', I re­
plied: 'Then let Polugayevsky play instead of 
me'. But Polugayevsky had no desire at all 
to play against Korchnoi. They tried to win 
me round literally right up to the start of 
the round, but I was unyielding. On arriving 
in the playing hall, I immediately sat down 
at the board and awaited my opponent, 
who was slightly late. He approached the 
board rapidly, and I stood up slightly, ready 
to respond to his 
greeting. 
However, 
Korchnoi did not even look at me, but 
immediately pushed forward his queen's 
pawn, and the game began (I should re­
mind you that this course of behaviour 
before a game with me was worked out 
beforehand by Korchnoi together with 
Alburt and Igor Ivanov). Our doleful leaders 
no doubt breathed a sigh of relief. ..
Now all my energy was focused on the 
game, which was of exceptional psychologi­
cal importance. Although the organisers 
demonstrated it on numerous television 
monitors, arranged around the enormous 
playing hall, from the very start of the game 
it was impossible to fight your way through 
to the board. Public interest was also roused 
by the fact that the pairings for the Candi­
dates matches had not yet been made, and 
this game was considered to be between 
two possible opponents in the semi-final or 
final. Korchnoi himself had also added fuel 
to the fire, by declaring to journalists that he 
would 'show this boy how to play chess'.
Game 78 
V.Korchnoi-G.Kasparov
W orld Chess O lym piad, 
lO th  round, Lucerne 9.11.1982 
Modern Benoni A64
1 d4 (my opponent advanced his pawn so 
resolutely that it became clear: he had only 
one aim - to win!) 1„.tt:lf6 2 c4 g6 (of 
course, my favourite King's Indian!) 3 g3 
jj_g7 (3)
The immediate 3 ...c5 is also possible 
(Game No.25 in Kasparov vs. Karpov 1986­
1987).
4 jj_g2 cs
Without hesitation changing tune: the 
set-up with the fianchetto of the light- 
square bishop, which is not very pleasant 
for Black in the classical King's Indian, is 
less effective against the Modern Benoni.
s ds (10)
The main reply. 5 lLlf3 cxd4 6 tt:lxd4 is 
more cautious, as Ribli played against me 
in the 8th round (later I also tried the more 
original 5 ...'ia5+!? - Game No.27 in Kas­
parov vs. Karpov 1986-1987). But in this 
game Korchnoi has no intention of avoid­
ing any crucial disputes! 
s... d6 (2) 6 tt:lc3
In the event of 6 lLlf3, in order after
6 ... 0-0 7 0-0 e6 to reply with the advanta­
geous 8 dxe6 j/_xe6 9 tt:lg5 .i.xc4 10 i.xb7 
tt:lbd7 11 lLla3! - earlier Korchnoi played 
this against Velimirovic (Sukhumi 1966) 
and Bouaziz (Sousse 
Interzonal 
1967), 
various lines of the Benko Gambit are 
possible: 6...b5 7 cxb5 a6 (7 ...'tWa5+!? 8 tt:lfd2 
#xb5, Korchnoi-Fischer, Curacao Candi­
dates 1962) 8 bxa6 0-0 9 lLlc3 ..ixa6 10 0-0 
tt:lbd7 
(Korchnoi-Quinteros, 
Leningrad 
Interzonal 1973) or 6...0-0 7 0-0 b5 8 cxb5 
a6 9 bxa6 ..if5!? (Nikolic-Kasparov, 2nd
393

Garry Kasparov on Garry Kasparov: Part One
match game (rapid), Paris 1994). 
6...0-0 7 tt:lf3 (4) 7...e6 (2)
8 0-0
Now the variation 8 dxe6 ..ixe6 9 tt:Jg5 
..ixc4 10 ..ixb7 tt:lbd7 11 ..ixa8 #xa8 12 0-0 
d5 gives Black excellent compensation for 
the exchange, as has been known since the 
time of the game Korchnoi-Scherbakov 
(Poltava 1956).
S...exd5 9 cxd5 (at last the game has en­
tered the normal lines of the Modern 
Benoni) 9...a6 (6) 10 a4 J:.e8 (2)
At that time I did not give any particular 
thought to the order in which to make the 
moves which are essential for this set-up.
11 
tt:ld2
Korchnoi confidently follows the main
line. If 11 i.f4  Black usually played 11...ctJe4
12 tt:lxe4 l:txe4 13 tt:ld2 Sb4, and if 14 tt:le4, 
then 14. ..h6 (Savon-Tal, Dnepropetrovsk 
1970), but now the sharp gambit 14 b3!? 
has been revived (Hausner-Sikora, Czecho­
slovakia 1982; Aronian-Carlsen, 7th match 
game, Elista 2007).
11...tt:Jbd7 12 h3 (3) 12...l:.b8 (2) 13 tt:lc4 
The critical position of the variation.
13...tt:Je5!? (16)
The plan with 13...ctJb6 14 tt:la3 i.d7, 
which Magerramov and I had studied 
before the Olympiad, is safer, for example:
15 a5 tt:lc8 16 ctJc4 i.b 5 17 Wb3 i.x c 4  18 
#xc4 tt:ld7 or 15 e4 tt:lc8 16 #d3 Wic7 17 
i.e3 tt:la7 18 Sfc1 b5 19 b4 c4 20 'l/Ve2 bxa4 
(Korchnoi-Franco, Lucerne Olympiad 1982, 
2nd round), in both cases with a compli­
cated battle. But after some thought I chose 
a more risky but also more ambitious 
continuation, demanding intensive calcu­
lating work by both players.
14 tt:la3 tt:lh5
Intending by ...f7-f5 to neutralise the op­
ponent's pawn majority in the centre. 
Therefore White cannot afford to delay.
15 e4 (8)
Very few players are willing to accept the 
piece sacrifice in the variations 15 f4 tt:lxg3!
16 fxe5 i.xe5 (Donner-Ree, Amsterdam
394

Challenger
1979) or 15 g4 'i'h4! 16 tt:Je4 h6! 17 gxh5 
.txh3 (Kakageldyev-Tseshkovsky, Ashkha­
bad 1978).
1S....:i.f8 (20)
A comparatively fresh idea of Timman's. 
From the early 1970s attention focused on 
the complications after 15 ...f5 16 exf5 .txf5
17 g4 ..!txg4 18 hxg4 'iVh4 19 gxh5 l:tf8! 20 
h6 .th8, for example: 21 ctJe4 tt:Jg4 22 #xg4 
'ifxg4 23 tt:Jc4 l:tbe8 (Marovic-Kapengut, 
Yerevan 1971) or 23 ...b5!? (Kivlan-Petkevich, 
Riga 1974). Then a problem-like idea on the 
theme of diversion brought White success -
21 ctJc4!? tLlg4 (there is nothing else) 22 
'i/Vxg4 #xg4 23 tt:lxd6 .te5 24 tt:Jde4 l:tf3 
(with the idea of ...l:th3-h2; 24...l:tbe8!?) 25 
tt:Jg5 (25 .te3 Hbf8!) 25...l:tbf8? 26 tt:lxf3 
l:txf3 27 l:te1 (Kovacevic-Nemet, Karlovac 
1979), but after 25 ...l:tf5 (Stohl) or 25 ...l:td3 
Black's queen is no weaker than the three 
minor pieces.
In Moscow, after the Olympiad, Nikitin 
and I also analysed the new, audacious 
move 15....td7!?, transforming the knight 
on e5 into a kamikaze (the source game: 
Hulak-Nunn, Toluca Interzonal 1982; a 
recent example: Aronian-Grischuk, Monte 
Carlo (rapid) 2011).
The return move 15...l:tf8 also looks au­
dacious: Black calmly prepares ...f7-f5, not 
paying any attention to his opponent's 
plans. But the attempt to refute this imme­
diately does not prevent the development 
of counterplay: 16 g4?! ifh 4 17 gxh5 .txh3
18 h6 .th8 19 'ie2 (19 tt:Je2? f5!, Scheeren- 
Timman, Leeuwarden 1980) 19...f5 20 tt:Jc2 
l:tbe8 with an attack compensating for the 
piece deficit (Timman), or 16 .te3?! f5 17 
exf5 .txf5 18 g4? .txg4! 19 hxg4 "ifh4! and 
wins.
16 'it>h2 (10)
White is all ready to play f2-f4, but what 
can Black do? There would already appear
to be no way back and only one remains - 
forward...
16...fs? (15)
Consistent - but premature! I had seen 
this move in the most recent Informator, 
Volume 33, but I did not have time to check 
it carefully. At the board I intuitively con­
sidered 16....td7 to be acceptable, and if 17 
f4, then 17...b5! with very sharp play. Later 
it transpired that all this had already been 
played in a little-known game from the 
West German Correspondence Champion­
ship (1980). True, after 18 fxe5 Black over­
looked his main trump - 18...tt:Jxg3! 19 
'it>xg3 .txe5+ 20 'it>f3 (20 f
 ^ 4 +  21 4g1 
.txh3 or 21 'it>e2 b4 is no better) 20...b4, 
regaining one piece and obtaining quite 
sufficient compensation for the second one.
Even so, after some hesitation I decided 
to make an 'unclear' move, which was 
suggested by Timman in Informator Vol­
ume 30 and had occurred in two recent 
games. Alas, after this life for Black be­
comes significantly more complicated.
17 f4
This way, since now the retreat of the 
knight loses - 17...ctJf7? 18 exf5!. But here 
common sense is forced to leave the stage, 
creating scope for flights of fantasy.
17... 
bs!
395

Garry Kasparov on Garry Kasparov: Part One
An instantaneous reply. In Informator 
Alburt recommended 17 .....td7, retaining 
the tension on the queenside, but after 18 
exf5 kxf5 19 fxe5 tt:Jxg3!? (19... i.xe5 20 
i.f4!) 20 Sf3! tt:Jh5 (20. ....txe5 21 lt:Jc4!) 21 
exd6 i.e5+ 22 Wg1 ^ 4  23 - e3 Black's 
attack peters out.
18 axb s!(12)
The acceptance of the piece sacrifice 
would have suited Black very well: 18 fxe5?! 
tt:lxg3! 19 Wxg3 
xe5+ 20 c;t>f2, and in the 
event of 20. ..'iYh4+?! 21 c;t>g1 #g3 22 Sf3! 
Wi2+ 23 'it>fl? ..td7! (Bimboim-Amason, 
Randers 1982) White is forced to seek 
salvation with the only move 24 ..th6!. But 
after 23 Wf2! the advantage is on his side: 
the ‘reckless' 23.....td7(?), recommended by 
Amason and me, is bad in view of 24 Wh1l, 
as is 23. ..i.d4+? 24 'ir'xd4! cxd4 25 ..tf4! fxe4
26 ..txh2 exf3 (Amason) 27 ..tfl! (but not 
the earlier move 27 ..txd6? because of
27 ...fxg2+! 28 ..txf8 dxc3 with drawing 
chances), and 23..b4, the most resilient, is 
also insufficient in view of 24 'l'i'h1!. How­
ever, the immediate 20...b4! is correct, 
regaining one of the knights and retaining 
excellent counterplay.
I 8...axbs 19 tt:laxbs (6)
For the moment Korchnoi is equal to the 
occasion: again he would have sold his
advantage much too cheaply by prema­
turely capturing the doomed knight - 19 
fxe5?! tt:lxg3! (van Wely-Timman, Wijk aan 
Zee 2002).
19...fxe4 (2)
Again White is at the cross-roads.
20 ..txe4! (31)
After a long think Korchnoi makes a new, 
simple and strong move. 20 fxe5?! would 
have been parried by the simple 20... i.xe5 
(here 20...'2lxg3? is bad because of 21 Sxf8+ 
#xf8 22 e6!) 21 11xf8+ (21 ..tf4? J:xf4!) 
21. ..#xf8 22 'iVfl ..txg3+ 23 'Ot>g1 ..tf5 with 
sufficient counterplay. However, White had 
two other tempting continuations:
a) 
20 tt:Jxd6!? (during the game I was 
afraid of this temporary knight sacrifice)
20...tt:Jxg3! (in The Test of Time I recom­
mended 20. ..'ifxd6 21 tt:Jxe4 1Yb6 22 fxe5 
l:txfl 23 # xf1 i.xe5, but after 24 'iVc4! Black 
has problems) 21 Wxg3 #xd6 22 lt:Jxe4 'ib6 
'with unclear play' - this, my Informator 
recommendation, is correct only after 23 d6 
(but not 23 fxe5? i.xe5+ 24 'it>h4 S x fl! 25 
# xf1 h6!! 26 i.xh 6  'iVd8+ 27 ..tg5 #c7! and 
wins) 23...lt:Jf7 24 d7 ..tb7, whereas after 23 
i.e3! lt:Jd7 24 J:f2 White seizes the initia­
tive, while keeping his extra pawn (al­
though the insecure position of his king 
leaves Black with some counter-chances);
396

Challenger
b) 
20 CDa7!?, aiming at the c6-square. The 
game Alburt-H.Olafsson (Reykjavik 1982), 
published 
in 
Informator 
Volume 
33, 
brought White success after 20...e3? 21 'li'e2 
tt:xg3?! 22 'it'xg3, but 21 tt:c6! tt:Jxc6 22 dxc6 
was even stronger, winning. Commenting 
on that game R.Byrne and Mednis also 
condemned the more resilient 20...tt:f3+ 21 
..ixf3 exf3 22 tt:c6 'i'd7 in view of 23 f5(?!) 
l:.b7 24 g4, but in this case after 24. ..tt:f6 25 
Wxf3 gxf5 26 gxf5 'ih 8  White's extra pawn 
is hardly felt. On the other hand, my later 
discovery 23 g4! Sb7 24 Sxf3 ttJf6 25 Se3 
gives him an obvious advantage.
20.....id7! (37)
Not onlyleaving the knight at e5 en prise, 
but also sacrificing the mainstay of the 
position - the d6-pawn!
21 We2?! (18)
Temporarily maintaining the knight on 
b5. Little was promised by either 21 t2Jxd6?! 
®f6! (my earlier recommendation 21. ..Sb6 
is less good on account of the far from 
obvious reply 22 ..ig2!) 22 ..ig2 (22 .Ua6 
tt:c4!) 22 ...CZJxg3! 23 \t>xg3 Wxd6 24 CDe4 
'^ 6  with double-edged play, or 21 tt:a3?! 
..ic8! (the modest 21...tt:f7 22 l2Jc4 1:b4?! 23 
..id3! favours White) 22 fxe5 ..ixe5 23 
Sxf8+ Wxf8 with sufficient compensation 
for the piece.
But 21 l2Ja7! was strong, although I con­
demned it because of 21. ..Sa8, when 'it is 
not easy for White to escape from the pin'. 
In fact he can escape from it by 22 J:.a2! 
(5tohl), when Black has problems: 22..l2Jc4? 
23 tt:c6! ^ 6  24 CDa4 'i'b7 (24...'ifc7 25 ' i 3 )
25 ..id3 tt:Ja5 26 tt:xc5 and wins, or 22...#e8 
23 Hel! (23 : g2!?) 23. -Wf7 24 .ig2! with 
the threat of fxe5, and if 24. ..tt:c4 25 Wb3!.
Korchnoi's solid but slow move allows 
Black something of a respite.
21...Wb6!? (13) 22 tt:a3l (now 22 l2Ja7? no 
longer hits the target: 22...Sa8! 23 'il'a6 
Wxa6 24 Sxa6 g5! etc.) 22...Sbe8! (2) 
Another critical position.
The intensity of the battle is approaching 
its height, and the quality of the next two 
or three moves will decide the fate of the 
game. The difficulty for White lies mainly in 
choosing from the mass of available possi­
bilities - it is not clear which of them is 
best. In addition, the lack of time for 
thought was beginning to be felt...
It is said that the English grandmaster 
Keene, on entering the playing hall and 
seeing this position on a monitor, decided 
that it was Black to move, and he declared 
that Kasparov faced a very difficult defence, 
since the white knight would inevitably go 
to c4. But on suddenly realising that it was
397

Garry Kasparov on Garry Kasparov: Part One
White to move, he began reassessing the 
position! Yes, White seems to have an 
obvious advantage, but everywhere Black 
has some counterplay, enabling him to 
confuse matters.
23 .td2?! (14)
By giving up the b2-pawn, Korchnoi loses 
the remainder of his advantage! After the 
game he was to say: 'Playing such compli­
cated positions against Kasparov is excep­
tionally difficult - all the time you have to 
findthe only moves'.
23 g4? was more than dubious in view of 
23 ...l\Vd8! 24 '>t>g2 (24 gxh5 "i:Vh4!; also 24 g5 
tt:f7! does not help) 24. ..tt:Jxg4! 25 hxg4 in14
26 lbab5 ..id4 and wins. And after 23 .te3?! 
l\Yb4! with the threat of . ..tt:f7 the insecure 
placing of the bishops on the e-file is felt. 
Again nothing is given by the capture of the 
knight: 23 fxe5?! ..ixe5 24 .:!.xf8+ (after 24 
.tf4? tt:Jxf4 25 gxf4 .txf4+ 26 'it>g2 #d8! and 
...l\Vg5+ White has no defence) 24..J:i.xf8 25 
lbc4 .txg3+ 26 'it>g1 #d8! 27 i.f3  i.xh3 
with approximate equality - say, 28 tt:e4 
tt:f4 29 i. xf4 i.x f4  30 We1 #e7 31 i.g 2 i.f5  
etc.
However, the queen should have been 
moved out of range of the rook - 23 'ig2!.
Analysis diagram
This move, shown to me immediately 
after the game by Vaganian, was for many 
years considered a confirmation of White's 
obvious advantage: 23 ...tt:f7 (an admission 
of failure) 24 g4 tt:f6 25 tt:c4 and id 3 , or
23 . ..'t1Vb4 (23...'id8?! 24 i.d2!) 24 tt:c2 l\Yb8
25 lLle3 lLlf7 26 g4 tt:f6 27 .id 3 and lbc4 
with a sound extra pawn.
But the modern computer claims that 
after 23...l\Yb3! all is not so simple: after 24 
fxe5 S x fl 25 l\Vxfl i.xe5 26 l\Vc4 'iYh4! or 24 
g4 tt:f6 25 ..ic2 (25 fxe5 tt:xe4 and ....txe5+)
25...'YWb4! 26 'it>h1 tt:exg4! 27 hxg4 tt:xg4 28 
i.d 3 (28 tbe4 g 5 !) 28. ..i.f5 29 tt:c2 l\Yb7 
Black retains compensation for the piece, 
and in the event of 24 i.c2  ^ 4  25 ..id2 (25 
tbe4!?) 25...tbc4 26 tt:Jxc4 l\Vxc4 (Sloth- 
Sterud, correspondence 1984) or 24 ..ib1!? 
l:tb8 (24. ..c4?! 25 .ta2!) 25 .ic2  ^ 4  26 tt:e4 
lLlf7 - some compensation for the pawn.
23 ...'ixb2! (7)
The long-awaited turning point!
The queen fearlessly rushes into the thick 
of the opponent's pieces, knowing that in 
the event of 24 fifb1? the doomed knight 
will land a decisive blow - 24...lLlf3+!. Ap­
parently 
this 
little 
variation, 
which 
Korchnoi had overlooked, exhausted his 
patience. ..
24 fxes?? (4)
398

At the most inappropriate moment! Now 
the energy stored in the black pieces breaks 
out, sowing death and destruction in the 
enemy camp. Meanwhile White had more 
than one safe continuation:
a) 24 l:!.a2 'iVb4! 25 l:!.b1 "id4, and it is saf­
est to go into an equal endgame: 26 tt:Jab5 
..ixb5 27 tt:Jxb5 "ic4 28 "ixc4 t2Jxc4 29 ..if3. 
Dreaming of victory, in The Test of Time I 
recommended 24..."ib8, since again 25 
fxe5?! is unproductive after 25..J:xf1 26 
"ixf1 (26 e6? Hef8!) 26. ..-txe5 27 "id3 
(Stohl's move, with the idea of 27 ...li:lxg3?! 28 
t2Jc4!) 27.....ixg3+! 28 'it>g1! "id8 (28 ....Jte5!?)
29 ..ixg6 " if6! with equality, while after 25 
"ig2 ti:Jf7 'Black has the advantage - the 
white pieces do not have any strong points'. 
But this is an over-optimistic assessment: 
after 26 l:!.b1 "ic8(d8) 27 tt:Jab5 White has at 
least equal chances;
b) 24 t2Jc2!? "ib7! (great resourcefulness 
is required) 25 l:!.ab1 'iVc8 26 fxe5! (at last!) 
26. ...:xf1 27 "ixf1 .txe5! (27..tt:Jxg3!? 28 
'it>xg3 ..ixe5+ 29 ; f4 l:!.f8 30 t2Je2 g5 is also 
interesting) 28 tt:Je2 "ia6 29 "if3 ..if5! 30 
.txf5 (30 l:!.f1 .tf6!) 30..."ixe2+ 31 'iWxe2 
.txg3+ 32 'it>h1 l:!.xe2 33 .Jte6+ 'it>g7 34 l:!.b7+ 
'it>f6 35 ..ic3+ 'it>g5 36 ti:Je3 l:!.xe3 37 .t d 2 i.f4
38 ..ixe3 .txe3 with a drawn endgame;
c) 24 "ig2!, practically forcing 24. ..t2Jf3+
25 ..ixf3 .txc3 26 tt:Jc4 "i!Vb4 27 ..ixc3 "ixc4, 
when after 28 l:!.ac1 White has two active 
bishops and a comfortable position.
24....;;.xe5 (the g3-point is under more 
pressure than ever!) 25 tt:Jc4 (17) 2S ... tt:Jxg3
A good move, but there was also a more 
elegant win, not noticed by the commenta­
tors - 25 ...l:!.xf1!? 26 tt:Jxb2 tt:Jxg3!, for ex­
ample: 27 l:!.xf1 tt:Jxe2+ 28 'it>g2 tt:Jxc3 29 * f3 
t2Ja2 etc.
26 l:!.xf8+ l:!.xf8 27 1Vel!?
A desperate chance in a time scramble:
27 t2Jxb2 tt:Jxe2+ 28 'it>g2 ;  xc3 was too
elementary.
2 7 ...t2Jxe4+ (3) 28 'it>g2
Challenger
28..."ic2 (2)
It suddenly seemed to me that the win­
ning path had become more complicated, 
and I made a simple, obvious move, over­
looking the spectacular stroke 28...Sf2+!, 
which would have quickly decided the 
outcome: 29 'ih 1  l:!.h2+ 30 'it>g1 tt:Jxd2! with 
the threat of 31...ti:Jf3+ 32 Wf1 ..ixh3 mate, 
or 
29 
"ixf2 
..ixh3+! 
30 'if3  
.tg4+!
(30...t2Jxd2+ 31 'iWxd2 "ixa1, given in The 
Test of Time, is also sufficient) 31 'ig2 
"ixa1, and if 32 tt:Jxe4, then 32....lth3+! 33 
'it>f3 "id1+, mating (Stohl).
29 tt:Jxe5 (again avoiding the obvious 29 
"ixe4 'iWxe4+ 30 t2Jxe4 .tx a 1)
399

Garry Kasparov on Garry Kasparov: Part One
29...5.2+?l
The blinding proximity of victory... That 
which was good on the previous move now 
turns out to be inaccurate. Black would 
have won easily by both 29 .....txh3+! 30 
'it>xh 3 tt:Jxd2 (White has to lose one of his 
knights), and 29...tZ:lxd2! (I saw this, but I 
thought that the rook check was even 
better) 30 B cl tZ:lf3+ 31 Bxc2 tt:Jxe1+ and 
... dxe5, or 30 tt:Jxd7 tZ:lf3+ 31 # e 2 CZJh4+! 32 
Wgl (32 Wh2 .l:.f2+) 32...'iVxc3 etc.
30 'iNxf2?! (5)
Previously an exclamation mark was at­
tached to this move, but this was wrong. 30 
Wgl! was more resilient. The variation which 
I hastily calculated at the board looked con­
vincing - 30. ..Sxd2! 31 'iNxe4 (31 tt:Jxe4? flg2+ 
leads to mate) 31...'iVxc3(?!) 32 Ba8+ 'lt>g7. 
5tohl confirmed the win for Black after 33 
tZ:lf3! Bd1+! (33. .. ®c1+ 34 tt:Je1 Bxd5 35 'iYe7+ 
with perpetual check) 34 <;i;>g2(?!) 'iNf6 35 Ba7 
#f7 (threatening ... .i.xh3+), although even 
here things are not completely clear after 36 
'it>g3!. But 34 Wh2! is better, in order after
34...'if6 
35 .l:a7 'if7  to force a draw by 36 
^ 4 !  h6 37 'id8. And if 34. ..^ 2+ ! 35 Wg3 
'iVf6 36 Ba7 'iWf7 there is the splendid re­
source 37 #c2(e2) Sxd5 38 h4!!, when it is 
very difficult for Black to destroy the domina­
tion of the white pieces and convert his 
material advantage.
However, the cool-headed 31...dxe5! (in­
stead of 31..'iVxc3) 32 #xe5 'iff5 33 'iNxf5 
.i.xf5 would nevertheless have given Black a 
technically won endgame.
The game enters its concluding, most 
gripping stage. Each player had roughly five 
minutes left on the clock.
30...tt:Jxf2!
Hurrah for intuition! 5ome kind of sixth 
sense forced me to reject the plausible
30....1.xh3+? 31 'lt>g1! tt:Jxf2 because of 32 
Ba2!, and later analysis confirmed my
fears: 32...®b3 (the only chance of playing 
for a win) 33 Ba8+ <;i;>g7 34 Ba7+ Wf6!? 
(avoiding the draw after 34. . .<4’g8 and not 
blundering into 34...'1t>f8?? 35 ..th6+ 'lt>e8 36 
fia8+ <;i;>e7 37 ..tg 5 mate).
Analysis diagram
35 
tZ:lf3!, and the seemingly helpless 
white pieces unexpectedly create mating 
threats (36 ..tg5+ 'it>f5 37 .l:f7+ 'ig 4  38 Sf4+ 
Wh5 39 Hh4 mate, or 38...'ig3 39 tZ:le2 
mate). In addition the knight on f2 is en 
prise, and in the event of 3 5..ti:Jd3? disaster 
strikes from the other side - 36 tZ:le4+! 'lt>f5
37 tt:Jxd6+ \t>g4 38 tZ:lh2+ 'it>h4 39 fixh7+ 
<;i;>g3 40 tZ:le4 mate! In The Test of Time I gave 
this resume: 'In the time scramble the 
game could have ended this way, but then 
it is unlikely that this commentary would 
have been written . .. ’
Of course, Black was not obliged to lose, 
but after the approximate 35. ..g5 36 <;i;>xf2 
'iNc2 37 '1t>g3 or 37 tt:Je2 he would also not 
have had any serious winning chances.
31 Sa2!
I had overlooked this defence and so I 
became extremely agitated. But even so, 
sensing that 31.....txh3+? 32 Wg1! was weak 
(as on the 30th move), I made the only 
winning move.
400

Challenger
31...'t!Vf5!
Petrosian: 'I would also not have moved 
my bishop off the 7th rank, where it was 
performing the role of a block in the path of 
the white rook. In a time scramble the 
safety of the king is more precious than 
gain of material'.
32 'Dxd7 'Dd3?
None of the commentators noticed that 
this was a time-trouble blunder! The only 
way to win was 32...'Dxh3! 33 Sa8+ 'it>g7 34 
Sa7 g5! (the computer is not afraid of 
discovered checks) 35 'Dxc5+ 'it>g6, when 
White would not succeed in coordinating 
his pieces: 36 CD5e4 'ig4+! 37 'Dg3 (37 'it>h2 
'Wig1+ 38 'it>xh3 g4+ 39 'it>h4 'Wig2! etc.)
37...CDf4+ 38 'it>f2 'Dd3+ 39 'it>g2 'Wid4! or 36 
'De6 g4! 37 ..ie l 'Wif3+ 38 'it>h2 h6! 39 Sg7+ 
'it>h5 40 Sg8 'Df2 and wins.
33 .th6?
Time, time... 33 fla8+! 'it>g7 34 Sa7! was 
essential, setting up an ambush and pret­
tily forcing a draw: 34...1f2+ 35 'it>hl 'Wixd2 
(35 ... c4 36 'Dc5+!) 36 'De5+! 'it>f8 (36...<4^6?
37 'Dg4+ 'it>g5 38 CDe4+) 37 Sa8+ 'it>e7 38 
Sa7+ 'it>d8 39 Sa8+! (but not 39 Cbf7+? 'it>c8! 
40 'Dxd6+ 'it>b8 41 Sb7+ 'it>a8 42 'Dcb5 
'Df2+! 43 'it>gl 'Dxh3+ 44 'it>hl 'Wixd5+ 45 
'it>h2 'ixb7, destroying the mating con­
struction and winning), and since 39 ...'it>c7?
40 CDb5+ 'it>b7 41 Sa7+ 'it>b6 42 CDc4+ is bad 
for Black, he is forced to return with his 
king - 39...'it>e7 and allow 40 l:ta7+ with 
perpetual check.
Yes, in such games it is rarely possible to 
avoid mutual mistakes. Immediately after 
the game I admitted: 'The tension was so 
great that by the fifth hour of play my eyes 
were dazzled, and at times it seemed that 
the pieces were shaking, although I love 
sharp chess of this sort. I can imagine how 
tired my opponent must have been .. .'
33 ...#xd7 34 Sa8+ Wf7
35 Sh8?!
35 
CDe4, restricting the black king's mo­
bility, was more resilient. At the board I 
imagined all sorts of horrors, and so I was 
intending to open an escape square for my 
king with 35 ...g5!. This position proved so 
interesting, that while still at the Olympiad 
Igor Zaitsev and I made a thorough analysis 
of it: 36 .Mf8+ (36 .txg5 h6 or 36. ..'Db4!)
36...We7 37 l:th8 (37 l:te8+ 'it>xe8!) 37...CDf4+! 
(37...'if5?? 38 
i xg5+ 'it>d7 39 Sxh7+!, 
winning the queen) 38 if 2  'Dxh3+ 39 Wg3 
Wf5 (39...Wa4 40 Sxh7+ 'it>d8! is also good)
40 ; ■
 f8+! Wd8! (not 40...Wd7? 41 Sxh7+! 
Wd8 42 .te7+ Wc7 43 .txd6+ 'it>c8 44 l:tc7+! 
Wd8 45 'Dxc5, forcing 45...'if2+ with a 
draw) 41 .txd6+ Wd7 42 .Mxh7+! 'ixh7! 43
401

Garry Kasparov on Garry Kasparov: Part One
l'tJf6+ Wxd6 44 ltJxh7 c4 or 44...'lt>xd5 with a 
won knight endgame.
The analysis contained a number of 
other branches, but the simple move
35 ...'i'e7, pointed out in Moscow by Nikitin, 
made all these subtleties unnecessary: 36 
ltJg5+ f
 37 fif8+ 'it>e5 38 If7  'ie 8  is 
hopeless for White, as is the knight ending 
after 36 fif8+ 'i'xf8 37 ttJg5+ 'lt>e8 38 i.xf8  
'lt>xf8 39 ttJxh7+ 'lt>g7 40 ttJg 5 'lt>f6 or 3 7 
.txf8 Wxf8 38 ttJxd6 ltJf4+ 39 'it>f3 ttJxd5 40 
'lt>e4 ltJb6.
Initially the unexpected rook thrust to h8 
put me into a slight panic: for an instant it 
appeared that Black had no good reply. But 
by the method of elimination I quickly 
found a move which not only did not lose, 
but also won!
3S. ..\t>f6!
The king breaks free, and now White has 
nothing to hope for. For the first time in the 
game I could breath freely - all the fears 
and dangers (apart from time-trouble!) 
were now behind me. ..
36 'it>f3? (a blunder with the flag about to 
fall: it would appear that Korchnoi could no 
longer see the board) 36...iWxh3+
And White lost on time, without manag­
ing to resign (0-1). Times: 2.30-2.28.
At that moment the spectators and play­
ers tightly surrounding our board gave us a 
genuine ovation. It need hardly be said that 
this ultra-tense game appeared in chess 
publications around the world. Nikitin: 'The 
Korchnoi-Kasparov duel went down in the 
history of the Olympiads as one of the most 
dramatic battles, alongside such unforget­
table clashes as Fischer-Tal (i960) and 
Spassky-Fischer (1970). In the end it was this 
stunning win by the Baku player that de­
prived Karpov of another chess “Oscar" - the 
prestigious annual journalists' prize, which
he had already become accustomed to 
receiving.'
The well-known photographer Dmitry 
Donskoy, who was present at this match, 
informed me a few days later that he had 
spoken to many journalists from various 
countries and he already realised to whom 
the ‘Oscar' for 1982 would be awarded. Of 
course, it was not only my win against 
Korchnoi that was taken into account, but 
also my results in Bugojno, the Interzonal in 
Moscow and the Olympiad in Lucerne, 
where towards the end I won against Suba 
and drew with Andersson (an overall score 
of +19 =18, without any losses). And if I had 
also managed to defeat the third defector - 
the leader of the Canadian team Igor 
Ivanov, then, as my colleagues joked, 'Mos­
cow would also have awarded Dzerzhinsky's 
personal revolver.'
As for the outcome of the Olympiad, the 
USSR team achieved its best result in recent 
years, finishing 6/2 points ahead of the 
second prize-winners! Karpov performed 
confidently on board 1, while on board 2 I 
brought the team the greatest number of 
points. Nikitin: 'The names of Karpov and 
Kasparov were always adjacent both in the 
rating list, and in the Soviet team list. At the 
Olympiad both endeavoured not to fall 
behind the other, and this competition of 
the leaders was to the benefit ofthe team. As 
it was wittily remarked at the time, the chess 
ship “USSR" had acquired a powerful Kar- 
Kas.'2
There was a very tough battle for second 
place between the teams from USA, Yugo­
slavia and Czechoslovakia. More confident 
play in the last few matches enabled the 
Czech players to repeat a success of half a
2 K arkas -  fro m  R ussian  th is w o u ld  be tr a n s la te d  as 
'h u ll' (tran sla to r's n o te).
402

Challenger
century (!) earlier, by winning the silver 
medals. This was as much a surprise as the 
failure of the Hungarian team, who on this 
occasion played a secondary role.
Towards the end of the Olympiad the 
FIDE Congress was held, and there an event 
occurred which was to have far-reaching 
consequences for the chess world. With the 
support of the USSR, the Soviet bloc and 
countries of the Third World, the person 
elected as FIDE President was the Filipino 
Florencio Campomanes - a man with 
dictatorial ways, who looked down on chess 
players. It became possible for small coun­
tries to dictate matters, without being 
restrained by the right of veto, or by the 
Security Council, as in the United Nations. 
During the times of representatives of the 
democratic world, such as the Dutchman 
Max Euwe or the Icelander Fridrik Olafsson, 
things were better in FIDE, since these 
presidents did not endeavour to rise above 
chess: they played the role of intermediary 
between opposing sides and always took 
into account the interests of chess players. 
In difficult, sometimes deadlocked situa­
tions, both presidents displayed, in the 
name of chess, both firmness and flexibil­
ity, and above all - objectivity. But the new 
FIDE leadership began to disregard grand­
masters - after all, they didn't (and still 
don't) even have the right to vote!
I remember one episode, which struck 
me as being highly symbolic. After the 
counting of the votes, but before the decla­
ration of the results, the chairman was 
handed a note, and he read out in a sombre 
voice: 'It is with great regret that I announce 
the death of President Brezhnev. I would ask 
you all to stand and observe a minute's 
silence in his memory.' After this, in deathly 
silence, Campomanes's victory was an­
nounced. It appeared that the chess world
was mourning not Brezhnev’s death, but its 
own future... In this strange way Campo­
manes's election and Brezhnev’s death 
became linked in my memory. The former 
promised me problems in the chess world, 
while the latter promised hopes of favour­
able changes in my country.
The pairings for the Candidates matches, 
held at the end of the Olympiad, did not 
turn out very well for me. I sat with Be­
liavsky and with baited breath awaited the 
results. However, the way that the draw 
was made was strange. Here is a list of the 
pairings and the ratings of the players:
Hubner (2630) - Smyslov (2565)
Ribli (2580)-Torre (2535)
Kasparov (2675) - Beliavsky (2620)
Korchnoi (2635) - Portisch (2625)
I considered my most dangerous rivals to 
be Beliavsky and Korchnoi, and here I was 
faced with playing both of them in succes­
sion! Why? Because after the pairings had 
been decided, it was simply announced 
that the winner ofthe first pair would meet 
the winner of the second, and the winner of 
the third would play the winner of the 
fourth (although it was quite obvious that 
the first two pairs were in general weaker 
than the other two). Had lots been drawn, 
and if so, why was this done without our 
participation? My immediate thought was 
that someone wanted to make it as difficult 
as possible for me to qualify for a match 
with Karpov: after all, at the start I could 
have lacked match experience. Beliavsky 
also looked distressed - we were on good 
terms, and we were both hoping to avoid 
meeting in the quarter-final, realising that 
this would be a severe test. And the indig­
nant Portisch left the hall, accusing those 
who had organised the pairings of cheat­
403

Garry Kasparov on Garry Kasparov: Part One
ing: it was not just that he had been paired 
with Korchnoi - if he won, he would have to 
play me or Beliavsky...
This was how the 1982 ‘Oscar' year 
ended, a very important one for my devel­
opment. Ahead lay the Candidates matches.
Match with Beliavsky
Quarter-final Candidates match Kasparov- 
Beliavsky (Moscow, 
26th 
February-20th 
March 1983) - 6-3.
This Moscow encounter with Alexander 
Beliavsky was the first official match in my 
career. At that time the quarter-finals were 
played to the best of 10 games, the semi­
finals - 12 games, and the final - 16 games, 
and all with separate days for adjourn­
ments, so that they lasted somewhat longer 
than present-day matches for the world 
championship! I had to adapt urgently to 
the unfamiliar logic of match play, and the 
pre-match preparation had to be especially 
thorough: for the first time I had to con­
sider my opening repertoire as applied to a 
single 
opponent. 
True, 
my 
opponent 
probably experienced similar difficulties.
I 
think that the most important role in 
my ultimate success was in fact played by 
preparation, or, more specifically, a more 
flexible approach to match strategy, mainly 
to the solving of opening problems. In 
addition, I and my group of trainers (it 
included Nikitin, Shakarov, Timoshchenko, 
Vladimirov, and in Moscow also Chekhov) 
studied Beliavsky’s games, and noted his 
strong and weak points. The strong in­
cluded his enormous capacity for work at 
the board, his brilliant handling of familiar 
positions, and his exceptional tenacity. 
However, our deficiencies are a continua­
tion of our virtues: Beliavsky's adherence to 
his own views often transformed into
inflexibility, and his excellent knowledge of 
certain set-ups gave rise to the desire to get 
by with the minimum of means in the 
opening. On the basis of this, an attempt 
was made to plan, if only roughly, the 
course of the match struggle.
We played in the conference hall of the 
22-storey Sport Hotel, situated on the part 
of Lenin Prospect far from the centre. It was 
there, eighteen months earlier, that the 
Interzonal Tournament was held, and that 
two years later the 48th game of my first 
match with Karpov would be played, and 
Campomanes’s notorious press conference 
would be held (in 2004, ‘in view of its 
dangerous condition', this historic chess 
building was demolished).
The pairings gave me the white pieces in 
the first game. My trainers and I decided 
that I would play only 1 d4 and after l...lt:Jf6
2 c4 e6 allow the Nimzo-lndian Defence 
with 3 lt:Jc3. Against 3....ib4 we had pre­
pared the extremely risky Samisch Varia­
tion - 4 a3!?. After playing this against 
Beliavsky in the 1983 USSR Spartakiad, I 
soon gained a promising position: my 
opponent was clearly not prepared for such 
a turn of events. But in the match, on 
encountering the unexpected 3 lt:Jc3 (I used 
to play 3 lt:Jf3 far more often), to simplify his 
preparation Beliavsky concentrated on the 
Queen's Gambit - 3...d5, and all the odd- 
numbered games (apart from the last, the 
9th) led to a ‘Karlsbad’ structure: 4 cxds 
exds 5 .igS .ie7 6 e3. This line came as a 
surprise to both of us - the exchange on the 
4th move had not previously occurred in 
my games, while Beliavsky replied with the 
rare set-up 6...h6 7 
h4 b6.
The battle in the 1st game went in my 
favour, but I did not find the correct way of 
increasing the advantage gained from the 
opening (cf. Game No.BO, note to Black's
404

Challenger
11th move), and by the adjournment Be­
liavsky had succeeded in fully neutralising 
White's initiative. On the resumption a 
draw was agreed on the 65th move.
My opponent arrived for the 2nd game 
with big hopes. It has to be said that, be­
cause of our lack of match experience, we 
both overestimated the importance of the 
white pieces, seriously reckoning that with 
White it was necessary to play exclusively 
for a win. And this maximalism did Be- 
liavsky a bad service.
Game 79 
A.Beliavsky-G.Kasparov
Quarter-Final Candidates Match, 
2nd game, Moscow 1.03.1983 
Queen’s Gambit D34
1 d4
Beliavsky had also decided to use only 
this move in the match. Against 1 e4 I had 
prepared the 5cheveningen - 1...c5 2 l£Jf3 e6
3 d4 cxd4 4 l£Jxd4 l£Jf6 5 l£Jc3 d6 or the 
5icilian 'hedgehog' - 4...l£Jc6 5 l£Jb5 d6 6 c4 
4Jf6 etc. But the main problem was the 
move 1 d4, which my opponent frequently 
made. It was time to find something rather 
more solid than my usual Modern Benoni 
and King's Indian (which, however, I suc­
cessfully employed at a decisive moment of 
the match - in the 8th game).
I...d5 2 c4 e6 3 l£Jc3 c5
Here is a surprise - the Tarrasch Defence! 
The idea of adopting it came under the 
influence of Nikitin and my childhood 
memories of the book on the 1969 Petro- 
sian-5passky match. 5ince then the defence 
had gone out of fashion and by 1983 it was 
in the backwoods of theory and practice: of 
the leading grandmasters, the only one to 
employ it regularly was Gligoric. But it
turned out that here no clear way for White 
to gain an opening advantage was appar­
ent! The weakness of the isolated d5-pawn 
did not concern me, since it was compen­
sated by dynamic piece play. And, begin­
ning with this game and right up to the 
match with Karpov, the Tarrasch Defence 
brought 
me 
truly fairy-tale 
dividends 
(+5=6).
My choice clearly stunned my opponent
- on the first 14 well-known moves he 
spent one and a half (!) hours. This was not 
surprising: Beliavsky had not yet encoun­
tered the ‘Tarrasch' in practice, and he had 
to play 'by sight'. But as a result he gave me 
an 
enormous 
time 
advantage, 
which 
largely decided the outcome of the game.
4 cxd5 exd5 5 4Jf3 4Jc6 6 g3 4Jf6 7 .i.g2 il.e7
8 0-0 (20) 8...0-0 9 -gS (13)
The main line. Less is promised by 9 dxc5 
.txc5 10 il.g5 d4 (Game No.63), 9 b3 ct:Je4 10 
.tb2 .i.f6 (Larsen-Kasparov, Niksic 1983). or
9 il.e3 c4 10 ct:Je5 h6!, as I played against 
Larsen (Brussels 1987) and Hart (3rd match 
game, Cologne 1988).
9...cxd4
The alternative is 9 ... c4 10 t£Je5 :  e6 11 f4 
ct:Jg4! (but not 11...l£Jxe5? 12 fxe5! ctJe4 13 
Jl.xe7 ct:Jxc3 14 bxc3 Wkxe7 15 e4! 'Wid7 16 a4, 
Kasparov-Hjorth, Dortmund 1980).
405

Garry Kasparov on Garry Kasparov: Part One
10 tt:Jxd4 h6 11 ..te3 (6) 11. .Jite8 (5)
Since 1969 this move has supplanted
1 1... ; g4 12 'ia 4  lt:la5 (12 ...'id7 13 ..t(lt:l)xd5 
is not to everyone's taste) 13 l:tad1 lt:Jc4 14 
..tc1 '*'c8 15 ^ 5 !?  (more accurate than 15 
'ic2 l!d8, Petrosian-5passky, 12th match 
game, Moscow 1969) 15 ...tt:Jb6 16 ..tf4 with 
a small advantage to White (Kasparov- 
Palatnik, Moscow 1981).
12 #a4 (23)
One of the most popular continuations 
at that time, along with 12 l:tc1 ..tf8 (here
13 lt:Ja4!? is of current interest). In his 
match with me, Korchnoi was to employ 
the novelty 12 a3, Smyslov was to follow 
suit (Game No.91), while Karpov, after 
extensive preparation, was to play 12 Wb3 
(Game Nos. 11, 13 in Kasparov vs. Karpov 
1975-1985).
But in the 6th game Beliavsky revealed a 
new plan with 12 'ic2 ..tg4 13 .l:tfd1, and I 
failed to find an effective antidote. Even so, 
after 13.....tf8 (13...'id7! 14 lt:Jb3 l:tad8 is 
more useful) 14 l:tac1 Sc8 (14...'i+Vd7 15 ctJb3!)
15 tt:Jxc6?! (a premature exchange - 15 'iVa4! 
is stronger) 15...bxc6 16 ..td4 (16 ..txa7?! c5!)
16.....tb4?! (16...a5!) 17 Sd2 (and here 17 
..txa7!? deserved consideration) 17...'i/e7 18 
a3 ..ta5 19 b4?! (19 e3! ..tb6 20 lt:la4 ..txd4 21 
.Mxd4 was more cunning, with some advan­
tage) 19. . ...tb6 20 e3 'iVe6 21 'ikb2 (now if 21 
ctJa4 there is the acceptable reply 21. .lt:Je4!)
21.....txd4 22 l:txd4 (22 exd4 ctJd7!) 22...c5! 
the chances became equal and on the 32nd 
move peace was concluded.
12 ....ltd7 131:tad1 (24)
The most natural move. 5oon the stock of
13 l1fd1 also went up in the world - here in 
the event of 13...ctJb4 14 'ib3 a5 not only 15 
a4 is attractive, but also 15 lt:lxd5. Therefore 
Black tries both 13...tt:Ja5 14 'ifc2 .l:tc8 15 
tt:Jf5! or 14. . tt:Jc4 15 tt:Jxd5!, and 13. ....tc5.
13. ..ttJb4 (3) 14 'il'b3 as
Black holds on by tactical means, threat­
ening by ...a5-a4 to drive the queen from its 
active position.
15 Sd2!? (11)
A novelty, devised at the board. White 
loses the exchange after 15 lt:lxd5? tt:Jbxd5
16 .ltxd5 tt:Jxd5 17 ifxd5 ..th3 (Vaganian- 
Ivkov, Odessa 1975). After this 15 a4 be­
came the main move, when the most 
interesting reply is 15. .. Sc8 16 tt:Jc2 b5! 17 
lt:lxb4 bxa4 18 lt:lxa4 ..txb4 19 lt:Jc3 (19 lt:lb6? 
l!xe3!, 
Korchnoi-Kasparov, 
Herzeg 
Novi 
(blitz) 1983) 19- ....txc3 20 bxc3 a4 with good 
counterplay.
But Beliavsky, convinced of the need to 
make maximum use of the white pieces, 
decided to avoid the known paths, in order
406

Challenger
to get me away from my home preparation. 
Previously 15 .l:i.d2 seemed to me to be 
dubious, but now I consider it to be the best 
continuation.
1S...a4 (15) 16 'i'd l a3 (3)
Ensuring the safety of the knight on b4, 
which is defending the isolated d5-pawn.
'f!Ve8(b6) etc.) 19...'i'a8 (5)
Black has deployed his pieces well, neu­
tralising the weakness of the d5-pawn, and 
he is ready for further simplification.
17 'f!Vbl?! (7)
Excessively modest, as was the later 17 
bxa3?! flxa3 with equality. The return of 
the queen to its abandoned post would 
have been far more unpleasant for Black -
17 ^ 3 !, for example: 17..axb2 18 a3! (a 
move which is impossible in the variation 
with 13 l:!.fd1) 18...lL:lc6 19 ttlxd5 ltJa5 (or
19.....1xa3 20 liJc2! ttlxd5 21 J.xd5 Wile7 22 
:Jxa3 .Uxa3 23 ..ixf7+ Wi/xf7 24 'Wxa3 ltJe5, 
regaining the exchange, but remaining a 
pawn down) 20 Wa2, followed by picking 
up the b2-pawn, or 17 . ..'i!Va5 18 bxa3 'iVxa3
19 ltJxd5 liJbxd5 20 ..ixd5 ltJxd5 21 Wxd5, 
also winning a pawn and forcing the oppo­
nent to fight only for a draw.
In the resulting unfamiliar situation it 
was now my time to have a proper think... 
17. .. f
 (42) 18 bxa3
18 
liJb3 was no better: 18...Wi/c8 19 J:!.c1 
^f5 20 Wi/a1 axb2 21 'i!Vxb2 fixe3! (Kunin- 
Veinzettl, Oberwart 2006).
18..J:txa3 19 ‘Wb2 (19 t'Lldb5 Sxe3! 20 fxe3
20 t'Llb3
This and the next move indicate that Be- 
liavsky was unable to readjust in good time 
and that he was continuing to try and 
squeeze some plus from the white pieces. 
The most sensible would have been to 
exchange the knight on b4 by 20 lLlc2!? 
ttJxc2 21 flxc2, which would most probably 
have led to a quick draw.
20... c6 (5) 21 .id4?! (8)
White does not yet sense the impending 
danger and he imperceptibly crosses the 
boundary between an imaginary better 
position and a realistically slightly worse 
one. It would have been safer to play 21 
Ha1, and if 21...t'ZJe4 to exchange the inac­
tive bishop - 22 ..ixe4! dxe4 23 t'Lld4, main­
taining equality without problems.
21. ..ttJe4 22 t'Llxe4 (here too 22 ..txe4!? dxe4
23 
e3 was more solid, even with the loss 
of a tempo) 22...dxe4
Little by little Black has seized the initia­
tive: his 'isolani' has been transformed into 
a strong pawn, while White is beginning to 
be concerned by the weakness of his a2- 
pawn.
407

Garry Kasparov on Garry Kasparov: Part One
23 S a l
If 23 t2Jc1, then 23. ..iLd5 or 23...b5 is 
good. And in the event of 23 tLlc5 some 
advantage is given by 23. ..e3 24 i.xc6 exf2+ 
25 il.xf2 t2Jxc6, but 23 ...t2Jxa2!? 24 1:tc2 l:ta5!
25 l:ta1 tt:lb4 26 l:tcc1 e3! is more energetic, 
for the moment retaining both the extra 
pawn, and pressure.
23...1.d5 (17) 24 'ib l (13)
Here too after 24 tt:lc5?! White has to 
reckon with 24. ..e3! 25 i.xd 5 (25 'ixb4? 
.txg 2 26 fxe3 b5!) 25 ...t2Jxd5.
24. ..b6 (23)
Perhaps the immediate 24. ..b5!? was 
even better, also opening the long diagonal 
for the queen and strengthening the threat 
of ... e4-e3.
25 e3 (8)
White is condemned to passive defence. 
Beliavsky radically prevents ...e4-e3, but 
now the black pieces acquire an excellent 
base on d3, for which the knight promptly 
aims.
25...12Jd3 (slightly hasty; 25...i.c4!?) 26 
Sd l?! (5)
26 t2Jc1! tt:le1! looks dangerous for White
- say, 27 'Wixb6? Sb8 28 'Wic7 l:!.c8 29 Wf4 
'Wia5! 30 l:td1 t2Jxg2 31 'it>xg2 .te6! 32 g4 
^ 5 !  or 29 'Wie5 l:ta5! 30 'Wif4 tt:lxg2 31 'it>xg2 
il.e6! 32 t2Je2 .te7 33 t2Jc3 f5 34 g4 'Wic6!.
But he could have tried to hold out after
27 t2Je2 tLlf3+ 28 i.xf3  exf3 29 tt:lf4 i.e 4  30 
'Wixb6 l:tb8 (30. ..l:ta6 31 'Wib3) 31 'W/c7 l:tc8 32 
^ 6  (32 'Wid7 l:ta5!) 32. ...l:!.xa2 33 Sdxa2 
'Wixa2 34 'Wib2.
26. ..b5! (6) 27 i . f l  (8)
In an unpleasant position Beliavsky no 
longer begrudges giving up his bishop, in 
order to get rid of the second annoying 
knight. The other way - 27 tt:lc1 was little 
better in view of 27 ...tt:lxc1 28 Sxc1 b4 29 
l:tc2 'ia 5  and ...l:ta8.
27...b4
This pawn, securely defended by the 
bishop, will soon become passed, since the 
a2-pawn is bound to fall.
28 i.xd3?! (this hastens the end, as does 28 
i.b2?! t2Jxb2 29 'Wixb2 iLe7 and ...il.f6)
28...exd3 29 'ixd3 l:!.xa2 30 l:!.xa2 (2)
30...#xa2
Black has a technically won position, al­
though a certain accuracy is still demanded 
of him.
31 tt:lc5 iLf3 (2)
31...b3! was more resolute: 32 l:td2 'ia 5  
33 .tb2 .tc4! 34 'id 7  .l:tc8! and wins. In the 
opponent's desperate time-trouble I de­
layed slightly, but did not throw away the 
win.
32 S a l (32 S c 1 vxc5! and...b4-b3) 32. .S d 5
408

Challenger
33 'iVb3 'ih s  34 tt:Jd3 i.d 6
34...i-e4(c6, b7) 35 lbe1 Sa8 was simpler, 
combining an attack on the king along the 
long diagonal with the threat of advancing 
the passed pawn.
35 tt:Je1 ..tb7 (3) 36 2c1 'W!VfS (5)
Again not the highest quality move 
(36 ...Sa8! was better), but we both realised 
that the game was about to end.
37 l:td1 f
And White lost on time (0-1), without 
managing to play 38 'ib l (after which 
there could have followed 38...it'd5 39 f3 
i.a 6  etc.). Times: 2.30-2.18.
After this unexpected win with Black in 
the very first game played with a new 
opening, I became full of optimism and it 
could have been thought that subsequently 
things would go easily and that success 
would follow of its own accord. However, 
such matches always harbour unforeseen 
turns, especially for debutants. ..
In the 3rd game Beliavsky somewhat im­
proved Black's play compared with the 1st, 
and I made a poor response, which led to 
rapid simplification and a draw (cf. Game 
No.80, note to White's 12th move). Before 
the 4th game I was seized by fears and 
doubts: should I again play the Tarrasch
Defence? Analytically I was ready, but I did 
not yet have a deep belief in it, and I was 
afraid that Beliavsky would devise 'some­
thing terrible'. On the way to the game I 
nervously discussed this problem with 
Valery Chekhov and just before going on to 
the stage I decided to employ another 
opening - the Nimzo-lndian Defence, which 
we had not seriously prepared. Such a 
‘tuning up' for the game quite predictably 
had dismal consequences.
Beliavsky, who the day before had been 
given a drawing respite, played with enor­
mous will-to-win, and the position reached 
was more familiar to him than to me. He 
boldly sacrificed two pawns and developed 
a dangerous attack. True, on the 19th move 
he delayed, and Black could have success­
fully defended, but I missed this chance. 
The final part of the game took place in a 
fierce time scramble, and my blunder on 
the 35th move led to an immediate deci­
sion. Strangely enough, failures in the 
Nimzo-lndian Defence with 4 e3 pursued 
me throughout my career: I also suffered 
memorable defeats in games with Psakhis 
(49th USSR Championship, Frunze 1981),
I.Sokolov (Wijk aan Zee 1999), and Kramnik 
(lOth match game, London 2000).
The match score became equal - 2-2, and 
the situation more complicated. Asriyan: 
'After losing the 4th game, Garik became 
nervous, and those around him had to make 
considerable efforts to calm him down. 
Incidentally, he was phoned by Aliev, who at 
that time was already working in Moscow 
and who also said a few  approving words, 
emphasising that he had no doubts that his 
compatriot would win. And Botvinnik, as 
usual, was firm  and laconic: “You are a 
man; don't be a wimp, take yourself in 
hand!" Garik heeded this advice.'
In order to regain my composure and
409

Garry Kasparov on Garry Kasparov: Part One
prepare properly for the 5th game, I took a 
time-out - not an easy decision, since the 
players were each allotted only one time­
out for the entire match. Knowing Be- 
liavsky's convictions, I was in no doubt that 
he would repeat the specific variation of 
the 'Karlsbad' from the 1st and 3rd games 
(especially since in it he had gained a draw 
quite easily), and I prepared a strong nov­
elty.
Game BO 
G.Kasparov-A.Beliavsky
Quarter-Final Candidates Match, 
5th game, Moscow 9.03.1983 
Queen’s Gambit D58
I d4 d5 2 c4 e6 3 ct:Jc3 ct:Jf6 4 cxd5 (before 
the match I had played 4 .ig 5 or 4 ti:Jf3 - 
Game Nos. 41, 54) 4 ...exd5 5 .tg5 fi.e7 6 e3 
h6 7 .th4 0-0 8 .td3 b6 9 ctJf3 .tb7 10 0-0 
c5?!
After 10...ct:Jbd7 11 'ic2 c5 12 l:ad1 White 
has merely a minimal advantage (an ex­
ample: 
Kasparov-Georgadze, 46th USSR 
Championship, Tbilisi 1978), but Beliavsky 
believed that he would be able to equalise, 
even after allowing the white knight to go 
to e5. In the 7th game he did this by
10...tt:e4 11 .ixe 7 'Wixe7 12 ct:Je5!? ti:Jd7 13 f4 
tt:xe5! 14 fxe5 c5 15 'ie 1 !tad8 16 !td1 'iYg5 
etc.
I I tt:e5!
The most surprising thing is that at that 
time this position was not yet considered in 
the popular Yugoslav Encyclopaedia of 
Chess Openings.
11...ctJbd7
In the first game after 11...ti:Jc6?! 12 .ia6! 
'ic8  13 L xb7 'iYxb7 14 .txf6 .txf6 15 tt:g4 
.td8 16 ti:Jxd5 ct:Jxd4 17 ti:Jdf6+! .ixf6  18 
ti:Jxf6+ gxf6 19 exd4 Black suffered because
of his hopelessly spoiled pawn structure 
and the open position of his king.
12 i fS!
This was the novelty we had found - the 
fruit of three days of preparatory work. The 
third game went 12 'if3?! cxd4! 13 exd4 
tt:Jxe5 14 dxe5 ti:Jd7 15 .txe7 'Wixe7 16 ti:Jxd5 
'Wixe5 17 ct:Je7+ ^h8! 18 'Wixb7 tt:Jc5 with a 
quick draw.
I remember how on the eve of the game 
Botvinnik arrived at the Azerbaijan perma­
nent representative's residence in Moscow, 
where our team was living during the 
match, and I showed him the main varia­
tions that were possible after 12 .;. f5. 
Botvinnik studied the position carefully and 
approvingly murmured: ‘Hmm... A good 
idea!'
12...ti:Jxe5 (25)
At just the right time (after 12. ..l:e8?! 13 
f4 the white knight would have been trans­
formed into an impregnable fortress). 
Beliavsky made this natural move after a 
long think, although the bishop move to f5 
is fairly obvious and it could have been 
anticipated in careful preparatory analysis. 
It was no better to play 12...g6 13 i.xd7 
ti:Jxd7 14 ti:Jxd7 'ixd7 15 .txe7 'ifxe7 16 
dxc5 (Stohl), or 12 ...cxd4 13 ti:Jxd7! (13 
exd4!?) 13 ...ti:Jxd7 14 .ixe7 'ixe7 15 'ifxd4,
410

Challenger
when Black is condemned to a cheerless 
defence, which is especially unpleasant in a 
nervy match situation.
13 dxes tt:Je8 (4)
After the typical 13...li:Je4(?) the spectacu­
lar 14 tt:Jxd5! would have been decisive.
13...li:Jd7?! 14 ..txe7 Wxe7 15 f4 was also not 
good for Black. Previously I gave preference 
to 13...li:Jh7, but here too after 14 ..txe7! 
(Stohl gives only 14 ..tg3 li:Jg5) 14. ..Wxe7 15 
f4 Bfd8 16 Wg4 the initiative is with White 
(if 16...tt:Jf8, then 17 l:!.f3 ).
14 ..tg3
Now there is no longer any point in ex­
changing the bishops: Black is cramped and 
he has little space for manoeuvring.
14. ..lt:Jc7? (21)
Allowing an aggressive sortie by the 
white queen, after which all the same the 
knight cannot go to e6 and, forced to vege­
tate on c7, it will be a source of constant 
concern for Black. He should first have 
forced the white bishop to declare its 
intentions - 14...g6!, for example:
a) 
15 Jf.g4, provoking Black into the win 
of a piece - 15 ...h5?! 16 Jf.f3 h4 (16 ...li:Jc7 17 
h3 Wd7 18 'ilc2) 17 i.f4  g5? (17...li:Jc7 18 
h3), in order after 18 ..txd5! i.xd 5 19 li:Jxd5 
gxf4 20 Wg4+ lt:Jg7 21 Bad1 f5 22 l'x f4  to 
obtain an overwhelming advantage. And
after 15. ..lt:Jc7 16 ..if3 White would have 
retained a slight plus;
b) 15 ..tc2!? 'ild7 (15 ...li:Jc7(g7) 16 'ilf3! - 
Stohl) 16 We2 lt:Jc7 17 Sfd1 h5 18 h3, and 
the bishop on c2 may support the attack on 
the king (after f2-f4-f5) or the pressure on 
the d5-pawn (by ..tb3). Even so, 14. . .g6 was 
the lesser evil.
15 'ilg4! (3)
15...We8?! (17)
It is already hard to offer Black any good 
advice. 15 ...g6? did not work in view of 16 
X xg6! fxg6 17 Wxg6+ 'ih 8  18 Wxh6+ 'ig8
19 'i!Ug6+ 'ih 8  20 f4! and f4-f5 with crush­
ing threats. But in The Test of Time I rec­
ommended 
15 . ....tc8 
16 
Bad1 
.ixf5
(16...i.e 6? 17 li:Jxd5! .txd5 18 e4) 17 Wxf5 
d4 'in the hope of saving some kind of 
ending a pawn down', for example: 18 
li:Je2(?!) li:Je6 19 We4 Wd7 20 exd4 cxd4 21 
li:Jxd4 Bad8 (Stohl), or 18 Wg4 'i!lc8 (not
18...11:Je6?! 19 f4! with a powerful attack) 19 
'i!lxc8 Baxc8 20 exd4 cxd4 21 Bxd4 Bfd8. 
Possibly 18 We4!? is more energetic, with 
the idea of 18. ..li:Je6 19 f4.
16 i.d7! 'ild8 (4)
Our home analysis concluded with the 
variation 16... ,  c8? 17 e6! and wins. But in 
fact it all turned out to be not so simple!
17 Bad! (12)
411

Garry Kasparov on Garry Kasparov: Part One
Naturally, White brings his rook to the 
decisive part of the battlefield.
17... h5 (12)
In a desperate situation Beliavsky tries to 
ease the defence by exchanging the dark- 
square bishops, even at the cost of a weak­
ening of his king's defences.
18 #h3 (2) 18...h4 19 .tf4  .tg5 (weak is
19....tc8? 20 t2Jxd5! or 19...g5? 20 'i"g4! ^g7
21 .txg 5! .txg5 22 f4 and wins) 20 .tfS! (3)
Playing White here is easy and pleasant: 
clearly visible is the aim of the attack, in 
which all his pieces are ready to take part.
20...g6 
(22)
After this Black will hardly be able to save 
the game, but what instead? The immedi­
ate 20....txf4 21 exf4 d4 (21...'ie7 22 tZ'le4!) 
would have prevented the switching of the 
white knight to the kingside, but after 22 
tZ'le4 i xe4 (22...g6 23 'Wig4!) 23 .txe4 l!b8
24 f5 'i'g5 25 f4 'i'Vh5 26 Sd3! or 24. ..Se8 25 
f4 White’s powerful pawn group quickly 
decides the outcome (25...f6 26 \'i'xh4 fxe5?! 
27 f6!).
20. ..''i'e7 21 tZ'le4! t2Je6! (21. ...: xf4? 22 
tZ'lf6+!; 21. ..dxe4? 22 Hd7) 22 t2Jxg5 t2Jxg5 
was somewhat more tenacious, although in 
this case too after 23 'ig4! (23 ..txg5 'i:Vxg5
24 f4 too is not bad) 23... t2Je6 24 .th6 White 
would also retain a fearfully strong attack
(24...Wh8? 25 'iYh5!). But now there follows 
a decisive combination.
21tZ'le4! (3) 21. . ...txf4 (7)
After 21....te7 my suggestion in The Test 
o f Time - 22 tZ'ld6(?!) jl_xd6 (after Stohl's 
move 22....ta6(?) there is the decisive 23 
'ig4!) 23 exd6 is unclear in view of 
23 ...t2Je8!, but 22 'Wig4! .tc8 23 .tg5! .txg5 
(23....txf5 24 'i:Vxh4) 24 t2Jxg5 wins outright, 
for example: 24. ..f6 25 t2Je6! 'it'e8 26 tZ'lxc7 
..txf5 27 "it'xh4 or 24. ..^g7 25 e4! d4 26 f4 
..ta6 27 l:tf2 l:th8 28 .txg6! fxg6 29 f5.
22 exf4
22. .. gxf5? (2)
Equivalent to capitulation: Black was 
overwhelmed by the threat of tZ'ld6 or tZ'lf6+ 
and 'ifxh4. The only way to prolong the
412

Challenger
resistance was by declining the sacrifice. 
True, after 22...'ig7 23 tLld6 ..ta6 24 .l:fe1 
'ie7 25 'ig 4  I:tad8 26 ..tbl Sxd6 (there is 
nothing else) 27 exd6 ifxd6 28 'ixh 4  White 
would most probably have been able to 
convert his exchange advantage, while in 
the event of 22 . ..d4 Black would have had to 
reckon not only with the simple 23 tLlf6+ 
Wg7 24 'ixh4, but also the more aggressive 
23 'ig4! 'it>g7 24 tLld6 ..td5 25 i.c2! and f4- 
f5.
23 'ix fs ! (this leads to the inevitable de­
mise of the black king) 23 ... dxe4 (11)
Black would have lost immediately after 
both 23 ...'it>g7? 24 'ig4+ 'it'h8 25 tLlg5 
(Stohl), and 23...tLle8? 24 tLlf6+l, as well as
23 .. .f6? 24 'ir'g4+ 'it>h7 (24. ..'it'f7 25 tLld6+) 25 
'ixh4+ 'ig7 26 'ig4+ 'it'h7 27 l:td3, with 
mate.
24 'il'g4+! Wh7 (2) 25 £Ixd8 £Ifxd8 26 'ir'xh4+ 
Wg8
Despite the approximate material equal­
ity, Black is lost because of the poor placing 
of his pieces.
27 'il'e7 (5)
Previously I attached an exclamation 
mark to this move, condemning the ‘over- 
hasty' 27 f5(!) - when after 27...I:td7 Black 
would supposedly have been able to ‘coor­
dinate his pieces', but this was a mirage: 28
'ilYg5+ 'it>h7 (28...'it>f8 29 h4) 29 'iVg4! Sad8 
(29-..flg8? 30 "ih3+! Wg7 31 f6+) 30 e6, and 
the curtain comes down.
27...e3!
A clever resource, forcing White to dis­
play a certain accuracy (28 'ixc7?? e2! 29 
'ixb7? fid l! 30 'ixa8+ Wg7).
28l:te1(9)
The spurt by the black pawn shocked me 
slightly, and I did not immediately find the 
correct reply. 28 f3 (there is no sense in 
getting involved in 28 fxe3?! I:td2!) 28. ....ta6
29 .l:.e1 was also good, followed by f4-f5 and 
e5-e6.
28...exf2+ (10)
In severe time-trouble Beliavsky missed 
chances to go fishing in troubled waters:
a) 28...e2 29 f3 2d1 30 Wf2 i.a6 
(30...flad8 31 f5) 31 'ixc7 (31 f5!? - 5tohl)
31...M.ad8 32 'ixa7! (32 f5? .i:!.8d2!) 32...Sxe1
33 'ixa6  .l:.ed1 (after 33 ...Sdd1 34 'i&'xb6 the 
e2-pawn becomes a burden and Black is 
absolutely helpless) 34 Wxe2 l:t8d2+. Ac­
cording to 5tohl, Black has some drawing 
chances, but after 35 We3 I:txb(g)2 36 f5 the 
win for White is fairly simple;
b) 28....l:!.d2!? 29 f3! .i:!.ad8 30 f5! (avoiding 
a trap: 30 l:.xe3? I:t8d7! 31 'ig5+ Wf8 - 
5tohl) 30... S8d7 31 'ig5+ '1t>h7 32 h4 .l:!.xb2 
(32 ... Sd1 33 'ir'xe3) 33 e6 fldd2 34 'iVh5+
413

Garry Kasparov on Garry Kasparov: Part One
'it>g8 35 'ixf7+ 'it>h8 36 'ih5+ 'it>g8 37 'i¥g5+ 
'it>h8 38 Sxe3 l:!.xg2+ 39 'ixg 2 Sxg2+ 40 
'it>xg2 - the triumph of the white infantry!
29 'Et>xf2 l:ld2+ 30 Se2 Sxe2+ 31 'it>xe2 .ia6+
32 'iti2 l2Je6 (3) 33 fS
33...Ct:ld4 (or 33...l2lg7 34 e6! lf 8  35 Wxa7)
34 e6 Sf8 35 % S +  'it>h7 36 e7 .U.e8 37 f6 
ltJe6 38 WhS+ 'it>gB 1-0
In view of 39 'iYg4+ Wh7 40 Wa4i (40 
Wxe6!?) 40...GtJc7 41 'ie4+(d7). Times: 0.50­
2.29.
This win, gained on the day of Fischer's 
40th birthday, was very important in the 
competitive sense: in the shortest possible 
time I regained my lost lead in the match, 
and with it also my composure. The game 
very much appealed to Botvinnik, remind­
ing him of his own youth: he always espe­
cially valued thorough opening preparation 
and energetic play in the middlegame.
Probably the key game in the match was 
the 6th, before which I was again gripped 
by a certain anxiety. On this occasion I took 
the risk of repeating the Tarrasch Defence - 
and Beliavsky was fully ready for it! Even so,
I managed to gain a draw (cf. Game No.79, 
note to White's 12th move) and retain the 
lead with four games to go. This draw 
inspired me more than the preceding win.
But in the 7th game Beliavsky improved 
the defence in the same line of the 'Karls­
bad' (cf. Game No.80, note to Black's lOth 
move), played with great concentration 
and, by displaying resourcefulness, suc­
ceeded in holding a position that was not 
without its dangers. The score became 4-3 
in my favour, and the match entered the 
finishing straight.
Now, in view of his 'retreating' play with 
Black, Beliavsky could hope for success only 
in the 8th and lOth games. And for the 8th 
he arrived extremely eager for a fight, with 
grounds for optimism, remembering my 
failure in the Nimzo-lndian (4th game) and 
my opening problems in the Tarrasch (6th 
game). But I sprang another surprise on my 
opponent, by employing 
my favourite 
King's Indian Defence.
Game 81
A.Beliavsky-G.Kasparov
Quarter-Final Candidates Match, 
8th game, Moscow 15031983 
King's Indian Defence E81
1 d4 ltJf6 2 c4 g6 3 tt:Jc3 .ig7
Although before the match Beliavsky had 
of course prepared for the King's Indian, 
that day he least of all expected it to occur. 
It was far more logical to assume that in 
the three remaining games I would en­
deavour to play as solidly as possible, not 
objecting to a draw. But instead of this 
Beliavsky was unexpectedly offered a fierce 
battle on ground that I had studied before 
the game, but he had not. It was I (and not 
he!) who decided to engage the opponent 
in a complicated struggle, at a moment 
when he had nothing to lose. And apart 
from this purely psychological move, I also 
had up my sleeve an interesting idea in the
414

Challenger
variation usually employed by my oppo­
nent.
4 e4 d6 S f3 0-0 (5 ...l'Llc6 - Came Nos. 12,15)
6 Ae3 a6
Instead of the usual move at that time,
6...l'Llc6 (Came No.51), I chose a cunning 
continuation: for the moment Black does 
not disclose his plans, inviting the oppo­
nent to reveal his intentions first.
7 il.d3 (5)
If 7 'i'd2 Black can reply not only 7...Ci:Jc6, 
but also 7...c6, expressing his readiness for 
the double-edged 8 o-o-o b5. However, I 
suspected that Beliavsky would play 7 ..td3, 
since this move was considered to be the 
best reply to 6...a6 (but incorrectly. 7 'i¥d2! 
is nevertheless better).
7... cs!
A comparatively rare variation with a 
pawn sacrifice, developed by Timman. This 
move, which had not previously occurred in 
my games, caught Beliavsky unawares! 
Again, as in the 2nd game, he felt that he 
was being 'led', and when you are playing 
for a win this is a very unpleasant condi­
tion.
Black gives up a pawn, in order to 
weaken and undermine the enemy centre, 
and this must be done precisely now, with 
the bishop on d3: a move earlier, after 7
dxc5 White could have advantageously 
exchanged queens.
8 dxes (5)
Black would be quite happy to transpose 
into a good version of the Modern Benoni 
by 8 d5 e6 (5hamkovich-Timman, Netanya 
1975) or 8 l'Llge2 ttlc6 9 d5 ttle5 10 a4 e6 
(Romanishin-A.Rodriguez, 
Cienfuegos 
1977).
8...dxes 9 ; xes ?! (2)
Again Beliavsky fell short when faced 
with a surprise: his nerve faltered and, as a 
consequence, his thinking discipline went 
awry. It was better to seize space - 9 e5 
ttlfd7 10 f4 ttlc6 11 il.e4, but in the well- 
known game Hubner-Timman, (Bad Lau- 
terberg 1977) Black was successful after
11 ...f6 12 exf6 l'Llxf6, and to improve 
White's play (say, by 12 e6!? ttlb6 13 ..txc5 
l'Llxc4 14 'ie2), serious analytical work 
would have been required.
9...1'Lle6
10 l'Llge2?! (15)
A second inaccuracy, allowing my pieces 
to occupy key positions in the centre. The 
immediate 10 ..te3 was correct, after which 
Black has played 10...l'Lld7 (the source game: 
Bobotsov-Timman, 
Amsterdam 
1971), 
although 10.....te6 is also not bad, with the 
idea of 11 ttld5?! b5! 12 b3 ..txd5 13 cxd5
415

Carry Kasparov on Carry Kasparov: Part One
ctJb4. In any event, he has a comfortable 
'King's Indian' game.
10...ctJd7!
With gain of tempo! This move seemed 
obvious to me, but later I discovered to my 
surprise that it was a novelty. A little earlier
10...ct:Je5 11 ct:Jd5 occurred, and here instead 
of 11...e6? 12 i.e7! (Anikaev-Yermolinsky, 
Telavi 
1982), 
it was 
correct to play
11...ct:Jxd5 12 cxd5 ct:Jxd3+ 13 'it'xd3 .txb2 14 
Sb1 'i\Ya5+ 15 'id 2 'i!Vxc5 (Anikaev) 16 
'Wi(S)xb2 fS! with counterplay.
11 i.f2  (41)
After a long think Beliavsky moves the 
bishop close to his king. The other retreats 
also had their drawbacks:
a) 11 i.a 3  tt:Jde5 - here it is even more 
difficult for White to defend: 12 ctJf4?! 
'i\Ya5!, 12 tt:Jc1 i.e6 13 tt:Jd5 b5! or 12 tt:Jd5 e6 
(or 12...Be8!? 13 f4 'Wia5+! with excellent 
play for the pawn) 13 i.xf8  i.xf8  14 o-o 
exd5 15 cxd5 ^ 6 +  (15 ...ctJb4!?) 16 ^hn 
'Wie3, and Black's activity is threatening;
b) 11 .te3 (seemingly the most natural, 
but at e3 the bishop is liable to come under 
attack) 11...ctJde5 12 tt:Jc1 i.e 6  (12 ...tt:Ja5!?; 
my earlier move 12. ..ctJb4 is rather worse 
because of 13 .te2!) 13 ct:Jd5 b5!, forcing 14 
cxb5 axb5 15 o-o 
xd5 16 exd5 'Wixd5 17 
i.e 4  'ix d ! 18 Bxd1 ctJc4! with a favourable
ending for Black.
At f2 the bishop does not have to fear 
any attacks by the black cavalry, but on the 
other hand it does not control the h6-c1 
diagonal, which Black immediately exploits. 
U...ct:JdeS (5) 12 ct:Jcl i.h 6! (24)
I very much liked making such non­
routine and therefore unexpected moves. 
Worthy alternatives were provided by the 
typical 12 ... j_e6 13 tt:Jd5 b5 or 12 ... lt:Jb4 13 
tt:Jd5 tt:Jbxd3+ 14 tt:Jxd3 e6 15 ctJ5b4 ct:Jxc4 16 
'Wic2 b5, also with advantage to Black. But 
my 'sideways' bishop move came as an­
other unpleasant psychological blow to the 
opponent.
13 ct:JdS? (26)
A sign that White is rattled: this over- 
frisky knight leap leads to dismal conse­
quences. He should have preferred the 
modest 13 i.e 2, reconciling himself to an 
inferior 
multi-piece 
endgame 
after
13 ... 'ixd1+ 14 lt:Jxd1 .te6. The strength of 
Black's initiative is demonstrated by the 
variation 15 b3? lt:Jb4 16 o-o tt:Jc2 17 fib1 
ctJa3! 18 Sa1 i.g 7  19 .tc5 ct:Jc6!, winning 
the exchange. However, after 15 lt:Je3 the 
defensive resources are far from exhausted:
15...ct:Jd4 16 i.d 1 Sac8 17 b3 b5 18 tt:Jd5 
i.xd 5 19 .txd4 ct:Jc6 20 i.f2  i.e 6  21 c5 fifd8, 
or 15. ..ctJb4 16 a3 (16 .Mb1 f5!?) 16....txe3 17
416

Challenger
axb4 tt:lxc4 18 ..txc4 ..txf2+ 19 Wxf2 ..txc4
20 b3 ..lib5 21 tt:le2 .l:fc8, and in both cases, 
with accurate play, White will apparently 
escape with a draw.
13...e6 (2) 14 ..lib6 (9) 14. .."igS!
It rarely happens that the surprise factor 
works so effectively - by the 15th move 
Beliavsky had already used 1 hour 45 min­
utes! However, as often happens, lengthy 
reflection did not improve the quality of the 
moves made, and the result is that the loss 
of material for White is already inevitable.
15 0-0 (2)
The only move that retains any practical 
chances. White would have lost immedi­
ately after 15 tt:le3? tt:ld7!.
1S...exds! (14)
Depriving the opponent of counterplay, 
which was possible after 15 ...tZ'lxd3 16 f4! 
ct:Jxf4 17 ct:Jxf4 'iNe5 18 'iNf3 'ixb2 19 tt:lb3 or
18 tZ'lcd3 'iNxe4 19 'i'b3 tt:ld4 20 'iNc3 ct:Jf5 21 
l:tae1 'ic6  22 c5, in both cases with some 
compensation for the pawn.
16 f4 (3)
Earlier I thought that 'White should per­
haps have tried his luck playing a piece 
down’ - 16 cxd5 tt:lxd3 17 ct:Jxd3, but after
17 ...ct:Je5 the fine-looking pawn pair in the 
centre would not have compensated for the 
material deficit, for example: 18 f4 'if6  19
..tc5 (19 ..td4? tZ'lf3+) 19-..tt:Jxd3 20 'ixd3 
Se8 21 ..td4 'id 6  etc.
16. .. 'i'h4 (3)
Trying to provoke the weakening ad­
vance g2-g3. I was terribly proud of this 
move too, but now I think that the immedi­
ate 16...'i'e7!?, with the strong threat of 
....'ilYb4, would have been at least as good, 
for example: 17 fxe5 'ib4! 18 Wb3 (18 J f2? 
dxc4) 18 .. ,iVxb3 19 axb3 tZ'lxe5, winning a 
pawn an d retaining the initiative, or 17 
cxd5 'Wb4! (17...tiJd7!? 18 f
 tZ'lb4 19 ..tbl 
..txf4 20 a3 ct:Jf6! 21 axb4 tZ'lg4 22 g3 ct:Jxf2 
23 'it>xf2 'ixb 4  is also tempting) 18 ' i 3  (18 
..tf2? ..txf4 19 dxc6 ct:Jg4! with an attack)
18...#xb3 19 axb3 tZ'lxd3 20 tt:Jxd3 tZ'lb8, and 
again White does not have sufficient com­
pensation for the piece.
17 fxes (2)
In the event of 17 g 3 "VJe7 18 cxd5 I was 
intending to return the piece - 18...ct:Jxd3
19 ct:Jxd3 'ixe4! 20 dxc6 'ixc6, hoping to 
exploit the yawning weakness of the long 
diagonal, but after 21 ^ 3  .ie 6  22 tt:Je5! 
'ie 4  23 Wf3 or 21. ...ih3 22 Sf2 Sfe8 23 
ct:Je5! it would not be easy for Black to 
convert his advantage. 18.....tg4! is more 
energetic: 19 .ie 2 (19 'ib 3 ctJd7!) 19 ...'iVb4
20 ^ 3  'ixb3 21 axb3 ..lixe2 22 ct:Jxe2 ctJd7! 
23 ..tc7 tZ'lb4 or 20 f
 i.xe2 (both 20.....th3
417

Garry Kasparov on Garry Kasparov: Part One
and 20. ..'ixb2 are also interesting) 21 #xe2 
tt:ld4 22 i.xd 4  'ixd4+ and ... tt:ld7 with quite 
good chances of demonstrating that the 
piece is worth more than the two pawns.
17...d4!
Splitting White's position in two and 
creating an excellent post for the h6-bishop 
on e3. In the event of 17...dxe4? or
17...dxe4? White would have been saved by
the intermediate move 18 
; f2!. Now,
however, Black has a stable advantage, 
although on the winning path there are still 
numerous technical difficulties.
18 tt:le2 (7)
If 18 'it>h1 there is the unpleasant
18.....1.4 19 h3 '*'g3, forcing 20 l:txf4, but 
more is promised by 19 ...tt:lxes!? 20 i.xd 4  
..ixh3! (exposing the king) 21 lixf4 j_xg2+
22 'it>xg2 'iVxf4 and ...liad8 with an attack.
18...1.e3+ (5) 19 'ih 1 tt:lxes (4) 20 i.c7 (4) 
White hurries to get rid of the powerful
black knight, which after 20 tt:lxd4?! tt:lg4 21 
CZ'lf3 tt:lf2+ 22 lixf2 'ixf2  could have caused 
him irreparable damage.
20.. 
.We7 21 .ix e s Wxes 22 We1 .id 7 l (8) 
Black completes his development and
begins preparing a siege of the central e4- 
pawn. Although this involves the exchange 
of queens, Black's strong passed d-pawn 
and powerful bishop on e3 guarantee him
an excellent endgame.
23 % 3  (5) 23...Sae8 (23 ...ixg3!? 24 tt:lxg3 
..ic6 or 24...Sae8 was somewhat simpler) 24 
ctJf4 (4)
After 24 W xe5lixe5 25 Iad 1 (25 CZ'lf4? f5!
26 exf5 )  xf5 and wins) 25. ..j_c6 26 C2Jg3 h5 
or 26 ..ib1 ; xe4 27 tt:lxd4 ..ixb l 28 tt:lf3 
l:te4(c5) 29 :.xb1 lixc4 White's saving 
chances are pretty slight.
24. ...ic6?! (25)
I spent a long time wondering whether I 
should play 24...f5! 25 exf5 ..ixf5, but I 
decided that here after 26 :lad1 White has 
more opportunities for resistance: he has 
got rid of his weak e4-pawn and main­
tained material equality. However, the 
accurate 26...Sf7!, with the idea of 27 b3 
' e4! 28 .ixe4? i.xf4 , when White does not 
have the check .id5, or 27 c5! 'it>g7! 28 j_c4 
.M.ff8 29 tt:ld5 (29 b4 a5!) 29 ...Wxg3 30 hxg3 
i.e 6  would have left Black with an obvious 
advantage.
25 ctJdS 'i'xg3 26 hxg3
Things would not have been improved by
26 tt:lf6+ 'ith8 (an exchange sacrifice is also 
interesting - 26...'ig7 27 C2Jxe8+ .:xe8 28 
hxg3 J:te5) 27 hxg3 lie 5 followed by ...'>t>g7, 
.....ig5, ...b7-b5 and clear play against the 
weak white pawns.
26...l:tes (3) 27 g4 (3)
418

Challenger
White would like to eliminate the dan­
gerous bishop on e3, but the immediate 27 
tt:lxe3? dxe3 28 Bae1 is bad because of the 
simple 28 ....txe4 (29 fixe3? .txg2+!).
27...h5i? (7) 28 tt:lf6+ (2)
And again it was dangerous to play 28 
tt:lxe3 dxe3, for example: 29 gxh5?! fixh5+
30 'it'g1 f5!, retaining the lethal e3-pawn, or
29 Bae1 .i.xe4 (this is probably simpler 
than 
my 
lnformator 
recommendation
29...hxg4 30 Sxe3 f5) 30 .txe4 Sxe4 31 
gxh5 gxh5 32 fif3 Sfe8, and White cannot 
hold out.
28...'it'g7 29 gxh5 .l:th8i 
The last turning-point.
30 g3? (4)
A fatal weakening of the long diagonal. 
White would also have lost after 30 g4? 
gxh5! (my earlier recommendation 30...:te6
31 tt:ld5 gxh5 is less good because of 32 g5!)
31 g5 Bxg5 or 31 tt:lxh5+ .l:thxh5+! 32 gxh5 
f5 and ...fxe4. But 30 'it'h2! was far more 
resilient, and although after the approxi­
mate 30. ...tg5 31 tt:Jd5 
; d8 32 Bad1 
.l:!.exh5+ 33 'it'g3 (33 'it'g1?! fih 2!) 33 ...Sg5+ 
Black has a dominating position, he is still a 
long way from a win.
30...l:.exh5+?! (11)
Instead of this 'creative' exchange sacri­
fice, 30. ...tg5! 31 tt:ld5 f5! would have led
immediately to the goal, creating a pair of 
connected passed pawns, since 32 exf5 (32 
Sae1 She8!) fails to 32. ..Sxd5! 33 cxd5 (33 
f6+ 'it>g8) 33....txd5+ 34 '>t>g1 .te3+ 35 S f2 
Bxh5 with crushing threats.
31 tt:lxh5+ .l:txh5+ 32 'it'g2 (2) 32...f5 33 .l:!.ael 
(7)
Alas, the appearance of a pair of con­
nected passed pawns cannot be avoided: 33 
'it'f3? fxe4+ 34 .txe4 fif5+ and ....txe4.
'Here White had just one minute left, 
and the spectators were interested in only 
one thing: would Beliavsky manage to 
make seven moves before his flag fell.' 
(Nikitin)
33...fxe4 34 .t b l .l:tc5i
Black's task has become somewhat more 
complicated, but the powerful pawn pair in 
the centre, supported by the two bishops, 
should nevertheless decide the outcome in 
his favour.
35 b3 b5
36 lxe 3
In desperate time-trouble Beliavsky re­
turns the exchange, realising that passive 
defence after 36 cxb5 (otherwise 36 ...bxc4 
is decisive) 36...axb5 is hopeless: the block­
ading ...b5-b4 is threatened, 37 b4 fic3(c4) 
does not help, and in the event of 37 a4 b4! 
the weakness of the b3-pawn causes
419

Garry Kasparov on Garry Kasparov: Part One
White's downfall.
36...dxe3 37 .Mel bxc4 38 bxc4
There could have been a spectacular fin­
ish after 38 b4 Sf5! 39 Bxe3 l:If3! 40 Sxf3 
(40 l:Ie1 e3) 40 ... exf3+ 41 f
 i.a4! 42 &xf3 
c3, when the bishop would have to be given 
up for this pawn.
38 ...B xc4 39 .l:i.xe3 .l:i.b4i?
39 
. ..4f6 or 39...a5 followed by ...4f6-e5 
was also good. In any event, Black is a pawn 
up and still has a dominating position. 
White's hopes, based on the limited 
amount of material remaining, are illusory. 
40.l:i.b3
Agreeing to go into a lost bishop end­
game, since 40 .l:!.e1 'lt>f6 (41 Wh3 'lt>g5!) was 
also unattractive.
40... 
e3+ (2) 41 
i.b5+i (3) 42 & el
Or 42 'lt>g2 e2 43 Wf2 l:Id4! and wins.
42...a5i? (6)
A piquant touch: to be on the safe side I 
prevent the white king from going to c3 (43 
'it>d1? .ta4), although, of course, 42....Mxb3 
43 axb3 g5 44 '!t>d1 'lt>f6 etc. would also 
have won easily.
But now too the black king proceeds via a 
red carpet into the opponent's position.
43 .te4 (8) 43...Sxb3 44 axb3 'it'f6 45 & dl 
g5 46 <;t>c2 (2) 46...<;t>e5 0-1
All the defensive resources are exhausted
(47 .td3 e2 or 47 A g6 4d4). Times: 2.41­
2.10.
A heavy psychological defeat: White did 
not in fact manage to begin active play in a 
game in which he was prepared to play for 
a win. The score became 5-3, and the fate of 
the match was largely decided.
In the 9th game after 1 d4 Beliavsky 
threw caution to the winds - 1...li:Jf6 2 CtJf3i 
(instead of the automatic 2 c4 - a little 
ruse, to disrupt the opponent's plans) 2 ...c5
3 d5 d6 4 CtJc3 g6 5 e4 Ji.g7 6 .- b5+ .td7?i 7 
a4 0-0 8 0-0 Ci:Ja6. This set-up resembles the 
32nd game of the match in Baguio (1978). 
After 9 B e l lt:Jb4?i (an inaccuracy in an 
unfamiliar situation) 10 h3i e6 11 i.f4  
White gained an enduring advantage and 
won on the 32nd move. At the end of the 
game, 
hardly betraying 
his 
emotions, 
Beliavsky stood up and congratulated me 
on my victory.
This was how my first Candidates match 
concluded, a match which, in the words of 
the chief arbiter Vladas Mikenas, took place 
in an exceptionally correct and friendly 
competitive atmosphere. Do not be deluded 
by the 6-3 final score: in almost every game 
there was a very tense and interesting 
battle.
Now, years later, it seems to me that on 
the whole I acted quite maturely in this 
match. The only failure in my preparation, 
before the 4th game, when I hastily 
changed opening, was a quite admissible 
error for a 20-year-old debutant. And my 
opening moves in the 8th and 9th games 
show that I had already begun to grasp the 
psychology of match play. Far more than 
me, Beliavsky was hindered by his lack of 
match experience, which deprived him of 
the required flexibility. Although he was 
the strongest of the possible quarter-final
420

Challenger
opponents, for me the most difficult could 
have been the highly-experienced Portisch. l 
thought about this for the first time during 
my semi-final match with Korchnoi...
Riga Novelty
USSR Spartakiad (Moscow, 14-28 July 1983), 
semi-final tournament: 1. Ukraine - 27 out 
of 40; 2. Latvia - 26/2; 3. Azerbaijan - 19V2 
(Kasparov - 1 out of 2); 4. Moldova - 19; 5. 
Kirghizia - 18V2; 6. Turkmenistan - 9Vj.
The game given below took place largely 
by accident, since I had not been planning 
to play in the USSR Spartakiad in July. My 
Candidates semi-final match with Korchnoi
- the most important match of the entire 
cycle - was due to begin on 1st August 
1983. But where? The choice of venue for 
the match provoked a crisis - the first of 
many accompanying the rule of Campo- 
manes. This unprecedented intrigue is 
described in detail in Kasparov vs. Karpov 
1975-1985, and here I will merely remind 
you of the main facts.
Korchnoi and I were offered three cities: 
Las Palmas, Rotterdam and Pasadena, a 
suburb of Los Angeles. According to the 
FIDE rules, each player had to put them 
down in order of preference. Korchnoi 
chose Rotterdam alone. In my list, sent in 
the middle of May to the Sports Committee,
I also put Rotterdam in first place, and Las 
Palmas second. However, the head of the 
Sports Committee suggested that I change 
the cities round. Why? It was explained to 
me that all the same Las Palmas would not 
be chosen (it had the smallest prize fund), 
but it was politically important to support 
it. I did not attach any significance to this - 
Rotterdam was in both lists - and I agreed. 
But this proved to be a mistake: at that 
time I did not know (but it must have been
known by our sports leaders!), that if the 
opinions of the participants even slightly 
disagreed, the FIDE President had the 
personal right to choose any city. And 
Campomanes chose Pasadena!
A fortnight later Korchnoi expressed his 
agreement with this decision, whereas the 
Soviet leadership categorically rejected it. 
Many did not in fact understand why. The 
official version was that the safety of Kas­
parov and the members of his delegation 
could not be guaranteed, since Pasadena 
was closed to Soviet diplomats. Although at 
precisely that time the Soviet swimmer 
Vladimir Salnikov was setting new records 
in the swimming pools of Los Angeles...
My personal acquaintance with the off- 
board politics began on 12th July 1983. I 
was summoned from Baku to Moscow for 
discussions with Campomanes. But first I 
had a conversation in the Propaganda 
Department of the USSR Communist Party 
Central Committee with Boris Stukalin, the 
head of the department, in the presence of 
a KGB general. I was told that we were a 
great country and would not allow condi­
tions to be dictated to us: ‘The match will 
not take place in America!’ As a result, I was 
forced to refuse to play in Pasadena, not 
doubting that soon everything would be 
sorted out.
The meeting with Campomanes took 
place at 9 p.m. that same day in the Sports 
Committee. It was attended by the chair­
man of the USSR Sports Committee Marat 
Gramov, 
Ivonin, 
Krogius, 
Sevastyanov, 
Karpov, Smyslov and myself. After ninety 
minutes of discussions (Gramov pressed, 
but Campomanes defended himself, and 
did not give ground) nearly everyone began 
raising their voices. I remember saying to 
Campomanes: ‘Mr President, with your 
decision you have encroached on the right
421

Garry Kasparov on Garry Kasparov: Part One
of the Candidates to choose the match 
venue.’ He replied: 'That’s true, but why 
didn’t you put Rotterdam in first place?' 
Here I felt I was beginning to understand a 
few things. ..
My match with Korchnoi was left in the 
air, pending the fulfilment of unrealisable 
conditions. I returned home at about one in 
the morning, tired and depressed. I said to 
my mother: 'I don’t understand anything, 
but it would appear that I've been be­
trayed.' Two days later, at a press confer­
ence in Tunis, Campomanes stated: 'If 
Kasparov does not turn upfor the match on 
the appointed day, 1st August, he will be 
forfeited.’ I phoned the Propaganda De­
partment, where just a few days earlier 
they had guaranteed me support. To the 
question, what would happen with me 
next, Stukalin replied. 'As a citizen, you 
must realise that it is in the interests of the 
country.’ But when I asked why I was the 
only one to miss out, he said (this time 
addressing me form ally):'You are still 
young; you can afford to wait fo r three 
years.'
It was during those days of crisis that I 
spoke with Karpov for the first time. The 
private meeting, which took place at his 
home on 15th July, was psychologically very 
difficult for me. Not knowing all the com­
plexities of the behind-the-scenes struggle 
being conducted around the match, I 
instinctively sensed the danger. After all, I 
already knew that in the Central Commit­
tee and the KGB they considered the match 
in Pasadena to be a politically incorrect 
step. It is probable that already then it had 
been decided to boycott the 1984 Olympiad 
in Los Angeles. And Karpov knew about this. 
His promise to find in the future some 
other way of including me in the Candi­
dates cycle, if the match with Korchnoi
nevertheless did not take place, merely 
strengthened my suspicions.
Gramov advised me to return to Baku, 
but I remained in Moscow, awaiting some 
decision. Soon Campomanes announced 
that the match was being postponed by five 
days.
It was at just that time that the USSR 
Spartakiad was taking place in the Druzhba 
Sports Complex in Moscow. Since I was in a 
state of suspension and was in danger of 
losing my form, by a special degree the 
Sports Committee allowed me to appear for 
the Azerbaijan team without previously 
registering. And I played two games with 
White on board 1 in the semi-final tourna­
ment - on 16th July with Mikhail Tal (Lat­
via) and on 21st July with Alexander Be­
liavsky (Ukraine). Both ended in a draw, but 
whereas against Beliavsky I had a com­
pletely winning position, Tal solved all his 
problems with the help of an excellent 
novelty in the topical Botvinnik Variation.
When I went along to this game, I least of 
all expected that within a few minutes the 
fierce opening dispute from my double 
clash with Timoshchenko and Dorfman in 
the 49th USSR Championship (1981) would 
again flare up.
Game 82 
G.Kasparov-M.Tal
USSR Spartakiad, 
2nd round, Moscow 16.07.1983 
Semi-Slav Defence D44
1 d4 Lbf6 2 c4 e6 3 Lbf3 ds (2) 4 Lbc3 c6 (5) 5 
i.g S dxc4
Naturally, I had prepared for a repetition 
of our duel in the Interzonal Tournament 
(1982): 5...h6 6 
h4!? (not the insipid 6
..txf6) 6...dxc4 7 e4 g5 8 i.g3 b5 9 .te 2 i.b7
422

Challenger
10 e5!? (a novelty; later both 10 tt:Je5 and 10 
h4 g4 11 tt:Je5 were introduced) lO...ti:Jd5 11 
h4 'ia 5  (11...g4!?) 12 Sc1 g4 13 tt:Jd2 c5! 14 
tt:Jce4?! cxd4 15 0-0 h5?! (15. ..etJc6!) 16 a4! 
a6? (16 . ..d3!), and here instead of the sense­
less 17 b4? 'Wid8 18 .txc4 bxc4 19 tt:Jxc4 etJc3
20 tt:Jxc3 dxc3 21 tt:Jd6+ ..ixd6 22 exd6 'i'f6
23 'Wid3 0-0 24 I1xc3 -l d5! (when Tal agreed 
to a draw!), White had the very strong 17 
.txc4! bxc4 18 tt:Jxc4 ^ 4  19 f3!! - pointed 
out in analysis after the game by Petrosian 
(cf. Revolution in the 70s pp.313-316).
But on this occasion Tal unexpectedly 
chose the most critical line, by immediately 
capturing the c4-pawn.
6 e4 (2) 6 ... b5 7 e5 h6 8 Ah4 g5 9 tt:Jxg5 
hxg5 10 .txg5 tt:Jbd7 11 exf6 (2) 11....tb7 12 
g3 c5 (3) 13 d5 'ib 6
Black is following the main line of the 
Botvinnik 
Variation, 
avoiding 
13 .....ih6 
which was fashionable at that time. Where 
does the surprise await me?
14 .tg 2 0-0-0 15 0-0 b4 16 tt:Ja4 Wib5 (2) 17 
a3 tt:Jb8
It was this continuation that led Ti­
moshchenko and Dorfman to disaster! Over 
the next eighteen months Black's unsuc­
cessful attempts to rehabilitate the varia­
tion were associated with 17 ...exd5 (which 
has, nevertheless, become the main move!).
18 axb4 (4) 18...cxb4 19 .te3 (16)
I had to spend some time completely re­
storing in my memory the course of events 
in the previously played games. Everything 
seemed fine, and the next three moves 
were made quickly and confidently. It was 
only after this game that White began 
playing 19 'Wid4!? or 19 Wig4! (cf. Game 
No.65, note to White's 19th move).
19....txd5 20 .txd5 l:!.xd5 21 'i'e2 tt:c6 22 
fifc1 'Lle5i
This is Tal's novelty! Both Timoshchenko 
and Dorfman played 22 ...'Lla5, keeping the 
knight for the defence ofthe queensi de and 
threatening a possible ...'Llb3 (Game Nos. 
65, 66). But on a5 the knight proved subse­
quently to be out of play and it became a 
convenient target for the white pieces, 
whereas at e5 it is actively placed, fulfilling 
both defensive and attacking functions.
It is surprising that for nearly two years 
such a natural move to the centre as
22 ...tt:Je5 escaped the attention of the 
leading players and only occurred not long 
before the 5partakiad in the little-known 
game 5alov-5habalov (Leningrad 1983). 'It 
can be assumed that Tal learned about this 
idea from his talented young compatriot 
from Riga.' (5tohl)
23 b3i? (29)
423

Garry Kasparov on Garry Kasparov: Part One
This reply did not come easily to me. Af­
ter weighing 
up everything 
'for' 
and 
'against', I followed the familiar path (with 
the knight sacrifice on a4!), although I 
sensed the danger associated with the 
active knight on e5.
The direct 23 f4 was rejected in view of 
the variation 23. ..ctJd3 24 l:txc4+ 'ixc4  25 
l:tc1 'ixc1+ 26 il.xc1 tt:Jxc1 27 1c4+ 'it>b8! 28 
'ixc1 : d6! and ...l:tc8, in which, in view of 
the poor position of the white knight, Black 
has at least equal chances.
It was more difficult to reject the capture
23 !§.xa7, helping the activation of the 
knight on a4. However, after 23. ..'it>b7! (but 
not 23. ....ih6? 24 tt:Jb6+!, as in the 5alov- 
5habalov game), it is too early for 24 tt:Jb6?! 
c3! 25 'ixb5 l:txb5, when, since 26 bxc3? 
!§.c5 or 26. ..b3 27 .l:\.cb1 !§.c5 is bad for 
White, there only remains the inglorious 
retreat 2 6 ctJa4.
It appeared that White should first bring 
his bishop home - 24 .te3(?!) with the idea 
of 24...il.h6?! 25 f4! or 24. ..ctJd3?! 25 l:tc2! 
and the threat of tt:Jb6. But to lose a tempo 
in such a sharp position seemed rather 
frightening... I rejected this variation purely 
intuitively, and subsequent home analysis 
confirmed that I was right:
Analysis diagram
a) 24. ..'ic6?! (with the deadly threat of 
moving the rook from d5 followed by 
... ctJf3+) 25 tt:Jb6! fic5! (the only move:
25 ...l:td4? 26 il.xd4 ctJf3+ 27 'ixf3! and 
tt:Jxc4; 25 ...l:td2? 26 tt:Jxc4!; 25 ...Sd3(b5)? 26 
l:ta7+! or 25 ... .i:td6? 26 l:ta7+! 'it>b8 27 l:ta8+ 
'it>b7 28 tt:Jxc4 ctJf3+ 29 'Wixf3! 1xf3 30 
tt:Ja5+! 'it>xa8 31 M.c8!! - a unique pure 
mate!) 26 .txc5 ctJf3+! 27 'Wixf3! 'Wixf3 28 
i.e 3 i.h 6  29 tt:Jxc4 !§.xe3 30 tt:Jxe3 'ixf6  31 
ctJc4 'ih 6 , and White has only a draw;
b) 24...l:td3! - the threat of ...'V.Vc6 and 
...ctJf3+ sets White very difficult problems.
Analysis diagram
White cannot play 25 tt:Jb6? .l:\.xe3! 26 
'Wixe3 il.c5 or 25 f4? Sxh2!! 26 c;t>xh2 M.xe3! 
27 'il'd1 Id 3 ! (27. ..M.e1!? - 5tohl) 28 ^ 1 +  
ctJf3+ 29 &g2 'iWc6 30 .i:td1 .i:te3! with an 
irresistible attack (31 'it>h3 e5!). Also, noth­
ing is promised by 25 .i:tf1 'ic6  26 f3 ..td6 27 
'it>g2 l:tb3! or 26 f4 1^4! (26...ctJg4!?) 27 
l:tae1 ctJd7 with an obvious advantage for 
Black. It was good that I made this sombre 
discovery in analysis: to encounter 24...11d3! 
during the game would have been far more 
unpleasant.
The attempt to neutralise this idea by 24 
'ie4?! (instead of 24 .i.e3) is not very suc­
cessful: 24. ..'iWc6 25 i.d 4  l:txd4! 26 'ixe5
424

Challenger
Wd5! etc. And even after the comparatively 
better 24 h4 .i1.d6! (the sharp endgame after
24 ...l:td3 25 l'e4+ l'd 5  26 Wxd5+ exd5! 27 
ct:Jc5+ ..ixc5 28 ..ixc5 Bb3 gives drawing 
counter-chances) 25 ..ie3 (25 l:td1 Sa8!)
25. .l:td3 White would have had to find the 
only way of maintaining a shaky equality.
23...c3 (2) 24 ct:Jxc3! bxc3 25 Sxc3+
25...'ib8! (5)
Black begins playing for an advantage 
(although at the time we did not yet realise 
this). 25. ..'ib7? 26 Wc2! would have been 
fatal (Stohl), while 25. ..'id8 would have led 
to approximate equality - 26 Wxb5 fixb5 
27 l:txa7 jLd6, or to a draw - 26 l:txa7 ..id6! 
27 Bc2! jLb8 (there is nothing better) 28 
Se7 ..id6 or 26 Wc2 ctJf3+! 27 'ig 2 #b7! 28 
i:txa7! fixh2+ (28...ctJe1+ is also not bad) 29 
'it>xf3 l:!.f5++ 30 'ie2 Wf3+ 31 'id 2 l:!.xf2+ 32 
..ixf2 ..ih6+! 33 'ie 1 Be5+ 34 f
 'ilVh1 + 35 
..ig1 Be1+! with perpetual check.
26 Wc2 (42)
This looks risky, but for the moment the 
weakening of the f3-point is not yet fatal. 
Again much time was spent studying the 
variation 26 ..ixa7+ 'ib7. Of course, White 
did not sacrifice the knight in order to 
continue 27 W'xb5 i:txb5 28 ..ie3 ..ib4 29 
Sa7+ 'ib8 30 l:!.c1 l:!.h7 with a depressing 
endgame. 27 We4 (Schneider-Andrianov,
Kiev 1983) is also unfavourable in view of
27...Wb4! 28 Wc2 (28 Bc4? Wxb3 29 .l:!.b1 
Cbf3+!) 28...jLd6 29 h4 (29 l:ta4? ctJf3+!! 30 
l:!.xf3 We1+ 31 'ig 2 l:!.xh2+! 32 'ixh2 Bh5+ 
and mate) 29...l:ta5 30 l:txa5 Wxa5 - White 
does not have his main tactical resource 
(b3-b4) and Black's extra piece is worth 
more than the pawns. There would only 
have remained 27 Wc2 jLd6! 28 b4!, as in 
the game.
26.....1d6 (6)
26...ctJf3+? is weak: 27 'ig 2 ctJe1+ (after 
27 ...fixh2+? 28 'ixf3 Sf5+ 29 'ig 4  the 
position of the king on b8 deprives Black of 
the spectacular 29..l:tf4+) 28 l:!.xe1 
b4 29 
i:tc1 ..ixc3 30 Wxc3 with excellent compen­
sation for the exchange.
27 ; xa7+ 'ib7
28 b4!
There is nothing else. As in my games 
with Timoshchenko and Dorfman, this 
pawn is assigned an important role in the 
attack (the threat of l:ta5 has suddenly 
arisen). From the press: 'An excellent re­
source! Up to this point it seemed to many, 
both in the auditorium and in the press 
centre, that things were difficult for Kas­
parov: there appeared to be no concrete 
play compensating for his material deficit, 
and White had spent a great deal of time
425

Garry Kasparov on Garry Kasparov: Part One
looking for the best moves. But now it was 
Black's turn to think.'
28...1t:Jc6?! (27)
This reply suggests itself, but it is not the 
strongest. Black had some more promising 
possibilities:
a) 28. ..l:.d3!? (the threat of ...lt:lf3+ forces 
White to agree to simplification) 29 l:.xd3 
'ixd3 30 'ixd3 lt:Jxd3 31 Sd1! cJi;xa7 32 
Bxd3 fid8!, and to gain a draw White still 
has to display some accuracy, to avoid 
losing the f6-pawn: 33 cJi;g2 (33 g4? ..txh2+)
33.....tc7 34 Sf3 cJi;b6 35 h4 with the inten­
tion of g3-g4-g5;
b) 28....l:a8! 29 Sa5! (the only chance)
29...1!Vd7 30 ..tb6! Sa6! (30.....tb8 31 1We4!? is 
not so clear - 5tohl) 31 Sxa6 cJ;xa6 32 ..tc5 
'it>b7, and exceptional resourcefulness is 
required of White to demonstrate that he 
has serious compensation for the piece he 
has given up (true, optimism is inspired by 
the presence of the three pawns and the 
fact that the enemy king will always be 
exposed).
29 ..te3 (10)
Now I am able to coordinate my forces, 
and it is Black who has to play accurately. 
Tal again thought for a long time...
29... ..tes (32)
In the end the ex-world champion chose
a continuation which was not the most 
ambitious, after which White was guaran­
teed a draw, although initially he was 
inclined towards 29 ..J:c8!? and he even 
wrote down this move on his scoresheet.
Analysis diagram
And indeed, .....te5 is threatened - say, 30 
l:tb1 ..te5! (to my earlier move 30. .J:tO there 
is the good reply 31 h4) 31 Sc5 'id 3. While 
if 30 l:tc1?!, then simply 30. ..4Jxb4.
According to Tal, he did not like the 
paradoxical reply 30 f4!?, depriving the 
black pieces of the e5-square and in the 
event of 30....lixb4 31 Yb1 ..txc3(?) 32 
l:txb5+ l:txb5 33 'it'xc3 giving White every 
chance of success. But first, Black can hold 
on after 31...lt:la7! 32 Sxc8 tZJxc8 33 .l:Ic1 
'id 7 34 Bb1 "in>5, and second, he can 
decide on 30. ..e5!? without any particular 
fear.
But in a joint analysis after the game I 
enthusiastically examined both 30 .Ub1, 
and 30 ^ 17! - the queen move would have 
been the surest and most pretty way of 
maintaining equality: 30 .....te5 31 "iVxf7+ 
(but not 31 Sxc6? 'ixc6! 32 'ixf7+ l:.c7 33 
l:ta7+ 'it>b8, when the mate threat on the 
back rank causes White's downfall) 31...fic7 
32 'i¥e8 Sd8 (32...Sc8 with equality is also
426

Challenger
possible) 33 f7 ..txc3 34 'ix d 8 tt:lxd8 35 
Ba7+ 'it>c8 36 .J:a8+ Wb7! 37 Sa7+ or 
34. ....txa1 35 "i'Vg8! Sd7! 36 fBW .l:d1+ 37 
'it'g2 ®f1+ 38 ^ 3  tt:Je5+ 39 'i¥if4 'i'c4+ 40 
'it>g5 'ig4+ 41 'ih 6 'i'h3+ 42 'it>g5 "i'Vg4+, in 
both cases with perpetual check.
All this remained off-stage, but that 
which occurred in the game was no less 
interesting.
30 l:txc6 i.x a l 31 Sc7+ 'ib8
32 ..ta7+ (2)
The capture of the pawn 32 l:ixf7? would 
have allowed Black to offer an advanta­
geous exchange of rooks by 32 ...l:id7! and to 
set about converting his material advan­
tage (33 l:i.e7!? ..txf6 34 Sxe6 
d4! etc.).
32...'1t>a8 33 ..te3
White both demonstrates the strength of 
his position (all the same Black is forced to 
return with his king to b8) and saves time 
on the clock, of which there was not much 
remaining.
33...'1t>b8 (2) 34 ..ta7+ (3) 34..:it>a8 35 k cS! 
(2) 35. ..'ib 8! (2) 36 fixf7! (5)
The battle for a win continues! Black’s 
extra rook is opposed by the enormous 
activity of the white pieces and the far- 
advanced f-pawn.
36... 
i. eS! (14)
Black would have lost immediately after
36...'Y/Vd3? 37 ..ta7+ or 36...l:ihd8? 37 ..td6+!, 
while in the event of 36...Sd7?! 37 ..td6+! 
\t>b7 38 'i&'e4+ 'ib 6 (38. ..'ia 6? 39 'iVxe6 Sxf7
40 ..tc5+! - Stohl) 39 i.c5+ 'ic7  40 "t!Vxe6 
.l:f.xf7 41 'ixf7+ ifd7 42 'i'c4! he would have 
had to fight for a draw: 42 ...'ib 7! 43 f7 i.g 7
44 'Y/Ve4+ 'ic 6 45 'ie7+ 'it>c8 46 "i'Ve2 Sd8 47 
' e7 Hd4 etc.
37 i.a7+ (15)
At the board I was no longer able to as­
sess the variation 37 Se7! (37 'it>g2? .l:d3!)
37...1:i.hd8! (37. ....txf6? 38 ..td6+!) 38 f7 2dl+ 
39 'it>g2 'Y/Vc6+! (39...'if1+? 40 f
 ^ 1 +  41 
'it>g4) 40 Wh3 "i'Vf3! 41 ^ 7 !  - the only 
satisfactory defence against mate, also 
creating the strong counter-threat of Se8 
and f7-f8'YIV. Home analysis enabled a very 
pretty draw to be discovered - 41...i.xg3!
42 fxg3, and here Black can either give 
perpetual check himself - 42 . ..i¥f1+ (Stohl), 
or force it by 42 ...1ld5 43 Sb7+! 'ic8 44 
fic7+! (fantastic!) 44...'ib8 45 Sb7+.
This would have been the most worthy 
conclusion to the game, but instead of this I 
decided to maintain the tension.
37...'1t>a8 38 i.e3 Sd7! (4)
Tal also continues the fight, fearing that 
after 38 ...'ib8 39 .Ue7 .Uhd8 the switching 
of the bishop from c5 to e3 would change 
the assessment of the position to White's
427

Garry Kasparov on Garry Kasparov: Part One
advantage. But this is not so: 40 f7 fid 1+ 41 
'it>g2 .l:t1d7! (not my early cooperative varia­
tion 41...Wd5+? 42 f3 Sd3 because of 43 
'ilic5! 'i:!Yxc5 44 bxc5 Ji.g7 45 ..if4+ with 
crushing threats) 42 Sxd7 Wxd7 43 'i:!Yc5 
..ig7 44 f 3 Wxf7 45 'ilib6+ 'it>c8 46 Wa6+, 
gaining only a draw. Of course, 40 ..ia7+ 
Wa8 41 ..ie3 with a draw is more solid.
39 Wa2+?!
A time-trouble error. 39 We4+? would 
have been even worse: 39 ...'i¥b7! (Stohl) 40 
i¥xb7+ .l:txb7 41 Sxb7 \t>xb7 42 f7 'it>c6, and 
the rook is obviously stronger than the 
pawns. However, 39 .l:txd7 'iVxd7 40 f7! 
would have given real chances of maintain­
ing the dynamic balance.
39...'it>b8 40 ; a7+
This last (the fifth!) check on a7 proved 
merely to be the prelude to peace negotia­
tions. It might seem that 40 'ifxe6(?) .l:tdl+ 
41 'it>g2 is to White's advantage, but after
41...1.!.d6! (Stohl) 42 'ilib3 l:!.d3 43 'ilie6 Sxe3! 
the mirage is dispelled.
40...'it>c8l
In the event of 40...'it>b7 41 Wxe6 l:!.xf7 42 
'ilixf7+ Ji.c7 43 i c5 l:ta8! Black also has 
some advantage, but after 44 Wd5+ Wc6 45 
Wd4 i¥f3 46 f7! i¥xf7 47 'iVe4+ 'it>b8 48 'iVc6 
White is close to equality.
41 'ilixe6 (4) 41...'ilids! 42 'ifa6+! (2)
42...Wb7?!
A sure sign of fatigue - an unwillingness 
to get involved in the ‘wild complications' 
after 42...'it>d8!, although this would have left 
Black with some winning chances: 43 ..ib6+ 
'it>e8 44 l:txd7 'it>xd7 45 'ilia7+ 'it>e6 46 i¥e7+ 
'it>f5 47 f7 ..ig7 48 h4 'it>g6 49 b5 Wxf7 etc.
43 'ifc4+ (2) 43...'iVc7 Vi-Vz
It was also safe to play 43 ...'it>d8 44 
Sxd7+ ifxd7 (44...'it>xd7? 45 ..ic5!) 45 ..ib 6+ 
Ji.c7 (45 ...'it>e8? 46 i¥e2!) 46 ..ic5 Ji.d6, but 
43 ...'iVc7 is more accurate, since it forces 44 
'ilia6+ with a repetition. Times: 2.35-1.50.
Thus the variation 19 Ji..e3 Ji..xd5 20 
..ixd 5 Sxd 5 21 We2 tt:c6 22 l:tfcl, which 
White had temporarily buried, was revived
- it turned out that after 22 ...tt:e5! it is not 
White who is playing for a win, but Black! 
And this practically closed the entire line 
with 19 Ji.e3.
Meanwhile, the Moscow days flew by one 
after another, and the situation with my 
Candidates 
semi-final 
match 
was 
not 
clarified at all. What could be done? On 
21st July I phoned Geidar Aliev, at that time 
already a member of the Politburo, and 
explained the problem. He reassured me 
that the match would take place. Only after 
this did I return to Baku.
428

Fairy-tale in Niksic
Challenger
International tournament in Niksic (23rd August - 13th September 1983)
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
0
1
2
3
4
5
1
Kasparov
*
1
0
1
X
X
X
1
1
1
1
1
1
X
1
11
2
Larsen
0
*
X
X
O
1
X
1
1
X
1
X
X
1
1
9
3 Spassky
1
X
*
X
X
X
X
X
O
X
X
X
1
X
1
8
4
Portisch
0
X
X
*
X
X
X
X
O
X
X
1
1
1
1
8
5 Miles
X
1
X
X
*
o
o
X
X
1
X
X
X
1
X
71/2
6 Andersson
X
o
X
X
1
*
X
X
X
X
o
1
1
X
X
71/2
7 Tal
X
X
X
X
1
X
*
X
O
X
X
X
X
X
X
7
8 Timman
o
o
X
X
X
X
X
*
X
1
1
X
X
X
X
7
9
Seirawan
o
o
1
1
X
X
1
X
*
o
X
X
o
o
1
61/2
10
Ljubojevic
0
X
X
X
o
X
X
0
1
*
X
o
X
1
1
61/2
11
icri
oigGl
0
0
X
X
X
1
X
O
X
X
*
X
X
X
X
6
12
Petrosian
0
X
X
O
X
O
X
X
X
1
X
♦
X
X
X
6
13
Nikolic
0
X
o
o
X
o
X
X
1
X
X
X
*
X
X
51/2
14
Sax
x
o
x
o
o
x
x
x
1
o
x
x
x
*
o
5
15
lvanovic
0
0
0
0
Y,
X
X
Y,
0
0
X
Y,
X
1
*
41/2
You can imagine my state of mind dur­
ing the early hours of 7 th August 1983. At 
that time in Pasadena, where it was still 6th 
August, the match had 'started’. Korchnoi 
arrived at the hall of the City College, shook 
hands with the arbiter, sat down at the 
chess board and made the move 1 d4. Then 
he pressed his clock. According to the Los 
Angeles Times, for the next hour he paced 
around the stage, with his hands clasped 
behind his back and a deadpan expression 
on his face. He was awarded a win and a 
quarter of the sum he would have received 
if the match had taken place. Furthermore, 
he was told that he was already through to 
the final.
That appeared to be the end of it. Three 
days later Smyslov was also defaulted in his 
match with Ribli - for his refusal to play in 
Abu Dhabi. The world championship series 
was on the brink of collapse at the semi­
final stage... Sympathisers advised us to
appeal in writing to the FIDE Congress, 
which was due to be held in early October 
in Manila. Many were of the opinion that 
the aim of the intrigue begun in May 1983 
was 'to do everything possible' to prevent 
Kasparov from qualifying to play Karpov. 
But the invisible script-writers took the 
organisation of the second match too 
lightly (evidently considering neither Smys­
lov nor Ribli to be rivals to Karpov). Yes, one 
disqualified Candidate might somehow be 
justified, but two - that was going too far!
But in that hot month of August fate 
again sent me a saving opportunity in the 
form of a telephone call from the promi­
nent Yugoslav player Milunka Lazarevic, an 
active chess organiser. She told me that I 
was 
invited 
to 
Niksic 
for 
a 
super­
tournament in honour of Svetozar Gli- 
goric's 6oth birthday, in which all the top 
players of that time (apart from Karpov and 
Korchnoi) were due to take part. Later it
429

Garry Kasparov on Garry Kasparov: Part One
was explained to me that in this way the 
organisers wanted to demonstrate their 
attitude to the crisis.
Of course, I was happy to be invited to 
such a tournament, and without hesitation 
I agreed to play: this was a way out of my 
state of 'chess weightlessness'! In terms of 
distinguished names, Niksic 1983 could 
compete with any event of recent years. It 
was clear to me that things would not be 
easy. The fact that I had the highest rating 
obliged me to play for first place, but al­
most half of the participants were thinking 
of the same result. In addition, I was con­
cerned about my four-month break from 
play (not counting the games in July with 
Tal and Beliavsky). Also, the events sur­
rounding the semi-final matches were 
hardly conducive to improving my frame of 
mind. True, on the other hand I very much 
wanted to gain revenge for the 'defeat' in 
Pasadena and to convince the world that 
my claims for continuing the battle for the 
chess crown were justified.
At a short training session, held in Mos­
cow with Nikitin, a general course of play in 
the tournament was planned. I had to 
quickly readjust - a tournament has its 
specific nature, very different from match 
play. I decided to put everything into my 
play, without any short draws, and in each 
game to try to squeeze everything possible 
from the position (but without overstep­
ping the mark!), seeking the slightest 
chances even in objectively drawn posi­
tions. This persistence, which previously 
was not characteristic of me, soon bore 
fruit. Thanks also to the enormous store of 
ideas, accumulated during the comprehen­
sive preparations for the match with 
Korchnoi, I was in 'super-human' form and 
from the start I crushed one opponent after 
another.
These preparations made themselves felt 
in the very first round. Playing Black against 
the 1979 world junior champion, the 23- 
year-old American 
grandmaster Yasser 
Seirawan, I again chose my new opening - 
the Tarrasch Defence. In this first meeting 
with me Yasser played cautiously, failed to 
gain the slightest advantage, and even gave 
up a pawn, in order to regain it a dozen 
moves later in an endgame, which was 
slightly better for Black thanks to his active 
bishop and queenside pawn majority.
Game 83 
Y.Seirawan-G.Kasparov
Niksic, 1st round, 24.08.1983
27 lt:Jb3 (2)
Simplification always seems the most 
reliable way to draw, but the knight on d4 
stood well, and therefore Petrosian's rec­
ommendation 27 ^e1 and e2-e3 was 
sensible.
27Jbxd2 28 l:!.xd2 Sc7 (3) 29 =td8+ (14) 
Driving the black king away from the 
centre, although the immediate 29 'it>e1 
was simpler, followed by 'it>d1, lt:Jd4 and e2- 
e3.
29...'it>h7 30 & el ..ic4 (4)
430

Challenger
Now the rapid switching of the knight to 
d4 is not possible, and White begins to 
experience certain difficulties.
31 &d2 (3) 31...g6 (6)
The ‘routine' 3l...'it'g6 32 e4 <it'f6 33 f4 
cj;e7 24 Sg8 g6, condemned by me because 
of 35 g4(?!) 'with counterplay on the king­
side', is in fact no worse. After 35...td7+! 36 
cj;c3 .te2 this is to the benefit of the black 
bishop: 37 f5 gxf5 38 gxf5 Sd3+ 39 ^b2 
.tf3 40 e5 i- e4 etc.
32 CDC1 (16)
The first mini-achievement by Black - the 
knight has temporarily taken up a poor 
position. 32 e4 'it>g7 33 f4 was also possible, 
only if 33...h5 White must not play 34 h3?! 
because of the reply 34. . ..ie6!, preventing 
the creation ofa mobile pawn chain.
32. ./Ji'g7 (3) 33 a3 (2) 33...<\t>f6 (2)
34 e3?! (4)
An unforced weakening of the d3- 
square, making it harder for the knight to 
come out. 34 ctJd3 We7 35 Sd4 was defi­
nitely better, when Black's position is the 
more pleasant, but he is unable to under­
take anything concrete.
34...cj;e7 (2) 35 Sd4
Of course, White did not want to concede 
the d-file, but on the threshold of time- 
trouble it was hardly correct to allow the
exchange of rooks, making the superiority 
of the bishop over the knight more percep­
tible.
35..J:td7 (7)
A purely practical chance: I sensed that it 
might not tum  up again. Apparently,
35 ...b5 was objectively somewhat stronger, 
keeping the rooks on, but then White 
would not have had any particular prob­
lems in achieving a draw! In changing the 
type of endgame, I took account of the fact 
that now, towards the end of the fifth hour 
of play, my opponent would have to reject 
play on general grounds, calculate specific 
variations 
and take 
some 
responsible 
decisions. And Seirawan became anxious...
36 cj;c3 Sxd4 37 <*xd4 b5 38 ctJd3 (15)
After spending nearly all his remaining
time, White took the risk of allowing a 
pawn endgame, which at the board was 
impossible to calculate to the end. But 
playing with a knight cut off on c1 was 
even more unpleasant: after 38 &c5 apart 
from 38...'it>e6 there is even 38 . ..a6, since 39 
cj;b6? cj;d6 40 Wxa6 is not possible on 
account of 40... b4+, while after 38 a4 a6 39 
axb5 axb5 Black would have gained an 
outside passed pawn and a pawn endgame. 
Then 40 CDd3 .txd3 41 <;ir>xd3 would have 
led to 
a depressing 
queen 
endgame:
431

Garry Kasparov on Garry Kasparov: Part One
41...'id 6 42 'it>d4 f5 43 f3 'ic6  44 e4 fxe4 45 
'ixe 4  'it>c5 46 'it>d3 b4 47 h4 (47 f4? h5! and 
wins) 47...\t>d5 48 h5 gxh5 49 'itc2 'id 4  50 
Wb3 'ite3 51 f4 h4 52 f5 hxg3 53 f6 g2 54 f7 
gl'ft' 55 f8'if ^
1+ 56 Wc4 'iNe4+ 57 Wb3 - 
according to the Tablebase, this is a draw, 
but after 57 ...iVf4 or 57 ...Wd5+ 58 'itxb4 h5 
a human player still has some work to do.
38....1xd3 39 Wxd3 'itd6 (10)
Here 5eirawan glanced at the clock (his 
flag was threatening to fall) and grabbed 
hold of his e-pawn.
40 e4??
The last move before the time control 
proves to be a decisive mistake! 40 Wd4! 
was essential, when the pawn endgame is 
drawn, despite the possibility of Black 
creating an outside passed pawn on the 
queenside: 40...f5 (it was this move that my 
opponent was afraid of: if 40... g5, then 41 
f3 or 41 f4 and e3-e4 is sufficient) 41 f4 a5
42 e4! fxe4 43 Wxe4 'itc5 44 g4 or 41...h5 42 
e4 fxe4 43 Wxe4 'ic5  44 h3 a5 45 g4 with a 
draw (45...h4 46 f5 gxf5+ 47 gxf5 Wd6 48 
'it>d4!).
It seemed to Yasser that with his pawn 
on e4 White had nothing to fear, but he did 
not take into account that this was true 
only with the black pawn on g6, where it 
assists the creation of a white passed pawn.
40...gs! (6)
The threat of ...g5-g4 practically forces 
the next move, which White sealed: here 
the game was adjourned. In a brief analysis 
(the resumption began two hours after the 
end of the round) I quickly established a 
winning plan, typical of pawn endings with 
an outside passed pawn.
41 f4 (22) 41 ...gxf4 (6) 42 gxf4 WcS
The winning plan is quite simple - to 
divert the white king with the passed pawn, 
after which White's pawns in the centre 
will become indefensible. But with a clever 
defence 5eirawan succeeds in making 
things difficult for Black 
43 'ic3 as 44 Wd3 (2)
44...hs! (4)
It is useful to advance the h-pawn as far 
as possible.
45 h4! (13)
Marking time with 45 'ic3 is altogether 
hopeless in view of 45...b4+ 46 axb4+ axb4+
47 'id 3 (47 Wb3 'id4) 47...h4!, when it is 
time to resign: 48 e5 'itd5, while if 48 f5 or
48 h3, then 48...f6!.
45...b4 (8) 46 a4
White reconciles himself to the creation 
of a protected passed pawn, since 46 axb4+ 
axb4 is completely bad for him.
46...f6! (8)
432

Challenger
Of course, not 46...b3? 47 'ic3 b2 48 
'ix b 2 'id 4  49 'ib3! 'ixe 4  50 'itc4 'itxf4 51 
'it>b5 and 'ixa5 (5eirawan).
47 fS!
White has completed the construction of 
an unusual 'fortress'.
Again, as on the previous move, little is 
promised by 47 ...b3? - 48 'itc3 b2 49 'itxb2 
'id 4  50 Wb3! 'ixe 4  51 'it'c4 'ixf5  52 'it>b5 
'i£i>g4 53 'ixa5 f5 54 'it>b4(b6) f4 55 a5 f3 56 
a5 f3 57 a7 fl'iW' 58 a81W leads to a queen 
endgame with an h-pawn, which theory 
assesses as drawn.
But Black has available a plan involving 
the creation of a zugzwang position. For 
this he needs to give his opponent the 
move, which is achieved with the help of 
the distant opposition. I had already used 
this method in an earlier game with Alburt 
(Game No.28).
47...'it>c6! 48 Wc4 'ic7! 49 'it>d3 (49 'itd4 is 
bad because of 49..'itd6) 49...'id7!
The black king has described a triangle, 
and it is now ready for the victorious march 
to c5. White is in zugzwang (50 'itc4 'itc6).
SO We3 (11) 50...'ic6 51 'id3 'icS (that's it: 
the white king is forced to make way) 52 
'it>e3 b3! (52. ..'i£i>c4? 53 e5! with a draw) 53 
'id3 Wb4 54 eS 'it>a3! 0-1
The b-pawn queens. Times: 3.22-2.52.
My 2nd round game with Tigran Petro­
sian had an uneven rhythm. On this occa­
sion against 1 d4 the ex-world champion 
chose an unusual opening for him, about 
which he himself once said: 'Ifyou see that 
your opponent wants to play the Dutch 
Defence, fo r God's sake, don't stop him!’ 
Petrosian's enormous practical strength 
and experience enabled him to solve his 
opening problems and almost seize the 
initiative. But in a tense struggle my formi­
dable opponent felt uncomfortable, and as 
a result the initiative ended up on my side. 
Petrosian cleverly sacrificed a pawn, but I 
returned the favour, initiating a lively 
tactical skirmish.
The main events took place in a time 
scramble. On the 32nd move Black could 
have given up queen for rook and knight 
with good chances of setting up a fortress. 
Instead of this he forced the exchange of 
queens, relying on the limited remaining 
material in a slightly inferior endgame.
Game 84 
G.Kasparov-T.Petrosian
Niksic, 2nd round, 25.08.1983
5trictly speaking, this is a draw, but
433

Garry Kasparov on Garry Kasparov: Part One
White can still fight for a win. Such a devel­
opment of events would not have been 
surprising, had we exchanged places. But, 
young and proud as I was, and accustomed 
to looking for mating attacks, in Niksic I 
played on to the end in simple positions, 
and so here too I tried to exploit the mini­
mal winning chances against the great 
master of defence.
37 .ia3! h6 38 S b l
Continuing to play for the restriction of 
the black pieces and preparing to invade 
with the rook.
38...5e6!
In order to release the knight on c8 - a 
similar sufferer to the knight at c1 from the 
previous endgame with Seirawan.
39 tt:ld4 .l':ta6 40 i.c s  tt:ld6
Earlier I condemned this last move be­
fore the time control, parrying the threat of 
Sb8, and suggested trying to dislodge the 
bishop from c5 by 40.. .Sa5!?. And indeed,
41 Sc1 allows the activation 41...etJa7 and 
...tt:lb5!, while after 41 J'J.b5 Sxb5 42 tt:lxb5 
..ie8 43 tt:lc7 ..ic6 44 We3 Wf7 White's slight 
advantage is hardly enough for a win. But
40...tt:ld6 is a natural and quite good choice. 
Its only drawback is that White retains a 
more complicated position, and with it 
certain practical chances of playing for a 
win.
41 Sb8+ (2)
Here the game was adjourned and Petro­
s ian sealed his next move. The resumption 
was due to take place immediately after 
dinner. Feeling sceptical about my winning 
chances, I did not bother to spend much 
time on analysis and I went down to the 
restaurant. 
Nearly 
all the tournament 
contestants were there and, as usual, they 
were discussing the games that had been 
pl ayed. Spassky asked me about the ad­
journed position: 'Well, how does it look?' I
replied with disappointment: 'It would 
appear that I've lost my advantage.' And I 
began giving vent to my grief about the 
forthcoming 'annoying' draw. But suddenly 
he said: ‘Come on, things are not so simple! 
The bishops are of opposite colour, and that 
is in White's favour: he can create an attack. 
And look! Petrosian hasn't come down fo r 
dinner - that means he doesn't like his 
position.' And I began looking at the ad­
journed position with new eyes! Thus one 
sentence by an experienced fighter re­
placed a whole lecture on psychology. Yes, 
Spassky probably knew better than anyone 
the habits of his historic opponent...
I promptly went up to my room, began 
analysing the adjourned position, and 
quickly ascertained that it was not so 
unpromising for me and that Black faced 
an unpleasant defence - he would have to 
play extremely accurately.
41...'it>h7 (10)
42 g4!
White takes control of the f5-square and 
at the same time prepares a shelter for his 
king. There is an obvious difference in the 
strength of the opposite-colour bishops: 
White's 
is 
successfully restricting 
the 
mobility of the black knight and is ready 
(together with the rook and knight) to take
434

Challenger
part in an attack on the g7-point, whereas 
it is hard for Black's to find employment. 
Also important is White's firm control of d4, 
which has become a transit point for his 
minor pieces. All this did not appeal to 
Petrosian...
42 ...l:!.a4 (4)
Black begins threatening White's forces in 
the centre, preventing him from carrying 
out a favourable regrouping. He could also 
have considered 42 ...h5 43 g5 ctJc4 or the 
immediate 42...ctJc4 43 ltb7 tt:Je5 (but not
43... ^ 8 ? ! 44 tt:Jf5 with the threat of 1i.d4) 44 
^g3 ctJd3! with the possible idea of giving 
up the d5-pawn, but arranging the pieces 
better. However, it is unclear whether this is 
sufficient for a draw, and so Petrosian looks 
for other, simpler ways to reach the haven of 
a draw. The difficulty of the defence is that 
for the moment White has no direct threats, 
and it is not altogether clear what to defend 
against (although Black's fears are most 
probably exaggerated).
43 4e3! (5) 43...ctJc4+ (5) 44 Wf4
A critical moment. Here I realised for 
sure that Petrosian was extremely unhappy 
with his position, and on seeing this I began 
playing far more confidently. Petrosian 
noticed this change in me - and almost 
immediately he made a mistake.
44...gS+? (4)
An irreparable strategic mistake. It is not 
possible to create real threats against the 
white king, and the weakening of the 
squares on the kingside proves fatal. Black 
should have tried to exploit the insecure 
placing of the white minor pieces, in order 
to fight for the d4-point:
a) 44...ctJa3 45 Wg3 (45 Sb7 ctJc2!), and 
now not 45...l!c4 46 l!b7! Wg8 (46...Sxc5?
47 Sxf7 ^g6 48 .l:!.xg7+!) 47 ii.a7 ctJc2 48 
ctJf5 with a dangerous initiative, but
45 ...ctJc2!? 46 tt:Jxc2 Sc4 47 ctJd4 Sxc5 48 
.l:i.b7 'it>g8 49 tt:Jf5 h5, exchanging another 
pair of pawns;
b) 44 ...ctJd6 45 .Ub6! ctJc4!? (after 45 . ..Sc4
46 Sxd6 fixc5 47 .l:!.d7 Wg8 48 h4 Black's 
defence is more difficult) 46 Sb7 'it>g8 47 
l:!.b8+ ^h7 48 'it>g3 h5 with drawing chances 
(49 g5?! tt:Je5);
c) 44....U.a5 45 Sb7 'it>g8 46 iJ.b4 Sa2 47 
h4 Sb2 48 tt:Jf5 Sb3, and the pin on the 
bishop hinders White's plans;
d) 44. ..h5 with the idea after 45 h3 hxg4 
46 hxg4 of choosing one of the three lines 
given above.
But, in any event, Black's position is 
much more unpleasant than it appeared at 
first sight. And, not wishing to conduct a 
prolonged and passive defence, Petrosian 
decided to force matters.
45 ^g3 (of course, not 45 Wf5?? .Ua6! 46 
Sb7 'it>g7! with the murderous threat of 
...Sf6 mate) 4S....Ua2 (2)
It may seem that Black is alright - the 
threat of ...ctJe3(d2) looks dangerous. But 
White, exploiting his numerical superiority 
in fighting units, launches an attack.
46 Sb7 (7) 46...'it>g6?!
There is no longer any way of saving the 
game, although White's task would have 
been made more difficult by the clever
46...ctJe3! 
47 
Ad6! 
(defending h2; 
47
435

Garry Kasparov on Garry Kasparov: Part One
Bxf7+?? 'it>g6) 47...'1t>g8 (or 47. ..Wg6? 48 h4!) 
48 h4! gxh4+ (48...tt:c4 49 ..tc5!) 49 'ixh 4  
tt:c4 (49 . ..Ba8 50 tt:Jc6!) 50 ..tf4, winning the 
h6-pawn and the game.
47 tt:JfS (12) 47....l:!.a6 (7)
It is hard to talk about the best practical 
chance in a hopeless position (except 
perhaps the opponent's presumption?!). If
47...Bb2 48 fia7 etJd2 (threatening ...tt:Jf1+ 
and ...Bxh2 mate), then simply 49 ..ltf2 d4
50 .l:!.a6+ Wh7 51 fixh6+ 4>g8 52 Bh8+! 
'ixh8 53 ..ltxd4+ and ..ltxb2. And the imme­
diate 47. ..tt:d2 would have been refuted 
after 48 .l:!.b6+ Wh7 49 .l:!.xh6+ 'it>g8 by the 
aforementioned manoeuvre 50 ..td6!, for 
example: 50 ...tt:f1+ 51 'it>h3 .l:Ie2 52 etJd4 
Be8 53 ;  a3 etc.
Now, however, White's main objective is 
not to be confused by the mass of tempting 
continuations.
48 h4 (9)
Not the only way (48 ..td4 or even 48 
etJe7+ is also good), but the clearest one to 
the goal.
48 ... gxh4+ 49 tt:Jxh4+ 'it>g7 (or 49..'itf6 50 
..td4+ 'it>e6 51 tt:f5, and the black king is in a 
mating net) SO tt:JfS+ 'ig 6  (4) 51 -ltd4 (2) 1-0 
The threat is tt:h4+, and the bishop is in­
evitably lost after 51...etJd6 52 tt:Jxd6 Bxd6
53 f4. Times: 3.07-3.08.
This equalised the score in my individual 
games with ‘Iron Tigran' (2-2), but at that, 
alas, our duels came to an end.
In the 3rd round I had Black against 5ax 
and I gained a draw in a sharp line of the 
5cheveningen Variation with castling on 
opposite sides. Then in the 4th round I was 
fortunate enough to test successfully a 
strong piece of home preparation against 
Lajos Portisch, and carry out one of the 
most brilliant combinations in my career.
Game 85 
G.Kasparov-L.Portisch
Niksic, 4th round, 27.08.1983 
Queen's Indian Defence E12
1 d4 tt:Jf6 2 c4 e6 3 etJf3 b6 4 tt:c3 ..tb7 (4. .c5
- Game Nos. 32, 68) 5 a3 dS (5 ...tt:e4 - Game 
No.61) 6 cxdS tt:xdS 7 e3 (3)
On this occasion I gave the expected 7 
'il¥c2 a respite (Game Nos. 73, 75, 98).
7...tt:Jxc3 (5)
Black chooses the usual course, just in 
case avoiding the line which had been tried 
at the recent European Team Champion­
ship: 7 .....te7 8 ..ltb5+ c6 9 tt:Jxd5!? 'iHxd5 10 
i.d3 0-0 11 'iHc2 (Miles-Portisch, Plovdiv
1983).
436

Challenger
8 bxc3 il.e7 9 il.bS+ c6 10 il.d3 cs (10...tZ:ld7
- Game No.43) 11 0-0 tt:c6! (11...0-0 12 'i'c2!
- Game No.52) 12 .ib 2 (4)
The most popular plan: first White com­
fortably deploys his pieces and only then 
does he begin action in the centre, retain­
ing a choice between e3-e4 and c3-c4.
Earlier they played 12 e4 o-o 13 il.e3 cxd4
14 cxd4 .Mc8 15 'i'e2 (15 fla2?! ..if6, Kas- 
parov-Karolyi, Dortmund 1980) 15...4Ja5 16 
J:i.fe1 (16 Bfd1 flc3!), and here it is not easy 
for White to achieve any real gains even 
after 16...'ih8 (Kasparov-Groszpeter, Graz
1981) or 16...'i'd6 (Kasparov-Najdorf, Bugo­
jno 1982), but the most convincing is
16....Mc3! (cf. Revolution in the 70s p.285).
12....1:.c8 (11)
Opening trickery: Black first develops his 
rook, again avoiding the variation 12. ..0-o
13 'lic2.
13 'i'e2 (6)
The immediate 13 e4 is effective only in 
the event of 13...0-0?! 14 d5! or 13...il.f6?! 14 
d5! exd5 15 exd5 'i'xd5 16 Be1+ with a 
strong initiative (Kasparov-lvkov, Bugojno 
1982), but after 13...cxd4 14 cxd4 ..if6! 
Black is alright (15 'i'e2 ..ixd4!).
13 ... 0-0 14 Sad1 (3)
One of the tabiyas of the Queen’s Indian 
Defence with 4 a3, which at that time was
subjected to a thorough analysis. In my 
youth I was convinced that White had a 
clear advantage here, but subsequent 
practice did not confirm this.
14...'i'c7
Incautiously repeating the recent game 
Polugayevsky-Portisch 
(Plovdiv 
1983), 
where after 15 e4?! tZ:la5 16 h3 the players 
agreed a draw, leaving an interesting 
possibility off-stage.
14. 
..cxd4! is correct: 15 cxd4! (15 exd4 is 
weaker in view of 15. ...if6! 16 C4 tt:a5 17 
tt:e5 
il.xe5! 
18 
dxe5 
'i'c7, 
Kasparov- 
Tukmakov, Kislovodsk 1982) 15 ...il.f6 16 
e4!? (this problematic position can also 
arise in the variation with 7 'i'c2) 16...4Ja5 
(16...g6?! 
17 
h4!, 
Portisch-Christiansen,
London 1982), and here White has played 
both the solid 17 Bfe1, and the pawn sacri­
fice 17 h4!?, with interesting play and some 
initiative.
15 c4! (5)
Here is my novelty! The position has 
taken on new colours: d4-d5 is threatened, 
and the powerful white bishops begin 
raking the opponent's practically unde­
fended kingside. Here Portisch stopped to 
think. It is strange that he did not antici­
pate this: after all, I had already tried to do 
something similar in my game with Tuk-
437

Garry Kasparov on Garry Kasparov: Part One
makov, but, alas, unsuccessfully (cf. the 
previous note).
15...cxd4? (12)
This seemingly natural exchange - an 
attempt to fight against White's 'hanging' 
pawn centre - is already virtually the 
decisive mistake! 15....tf6? was also unsuit­
able: 16 d5! lZ:le5 (16....txb2? 17 dxc6) 17 
tt:Jxe5 .txe5 18 .txh7+! etc.
In The Test of Time I recommended
15. ..lZ:la5!, but I assumed that after 16 d5! 
all the same White had promising play, 
having in mind the line given earlier in 
/form ator: 
16. ..exd5 
17 
cxd5 
c4!
(17....txd5? is worse in view of 18 .txh7+ 
..t>xh7 19 Sxd5) 18 f
 Scd8(?!) 19 e4 with 
advantage, but here Black has better saving 
chances than with the game continuation. 
However, a key defensive idea went unno­
ticed - 18...c3! 19 .txc8 (19 Sc1?! 'tWc4!)
19..."i:Vxc8 20 .ta1 (20 d6 .tf6! is completely 
unclear) 20....ta6 (immediately regaining 
the exchange) 21 'Wic2 .txf1 22 Sxf1 .txa3 
with double-edged, roughly equal play.
Now, however, it will be very difficult for 
Black to curb the rampant bishop on b2.
16 exd4 lZ:la5 (3)
17 dS! (3)
The white pieces are ready to attack, and 
after the breakthrough in the centre Black's
plan suffers a fiasco.
17...exd5?! (18)
This loses practically by force. 17. ..'Wif4 18 
tt:Je5! was also dangerous, but there was the 
more resilient 17...tt:Jxc4 18 'ir'e4! g6 19 
.txc4 'ir'xc4 20 'Wie5 f6 21 'ir'xe6+ S f7  22 Sc1 
'Wia6 23 d6!, and here not my earlier sugges­
tion 23. ..Sxc1? (23...i.d8? 24 tt:Jg5!) 24 .l:!.xc1 
.td8 25 tt:Jg5! fxg5 26 S o ! .txc7 27 'Wie5 
with unavoidable mate, but 23. ..b5! 24 
Sfd1 i.f8 , after which real winning chances 
are retained only by the unexpected sup­
porting of the passed d6-pawn - 25 i.e5! 
(Stohl).
1 8 cxds.txd5
After 18...g6 19 Sfe1 the weakness of the 
a1-h8 diagonal causes Black's downfall.
19 i.xh7+!
Disregarding a 'tedious' way to win - 19 
tt:Jd4 g6 20 tt:Jf5! Sfe8 21 i.e5! f
 
(21.. ."ifd8? 22 .te4) 22 .txc7 .l:!.xe2 23 .txe2 
j_e6 24 lZ:ld4 Sxc7 25 tt:Jxe6 fxe6 26 i.g 4  
'it>f7 27 Sfe1 .txa3 28 .txe6+ 'it>f6 29 Sd7 
with a technically won endgame.
19...'it>xh7 20 lxd 5  'it>g8 (4)
The only way of prolonging the resis­
tance. 20...'i:Vc2? was completely bad: 21 
'Wie5 i.f6  (21...f6 22 'Wixe7 'Wixb2 23 Sd7, 
mating) 22 'iVh5+ 'it>g8 23 .txf6 gxf6 24 .l:!.f5 
and wins.
438

Challenger
At this point I thought for a long time. 
White’s pieces are ideally placed, but noth­
ing concrete is immediately apparent. One 
senses that he should play actively, but 
how? Knight moves suggest themselves, 
but at g5 the knight is not doing anything -
21 tt:Jg5? 'ic4! (but not 5tohl's move
21...i.xg5(?) because of 22 ..txg7!) 22 ^ 5  
'iVc2 23 h4 fic6 24 Sc1 'ig 6, while after 21 
tt:Je5? the fine-looking bishop on b2 re­
mains out of play (21...'ic2!). But what if it 
is given up? Yes, yes, sacrifice it, so that the 
knight on e5 should not worry that it is 
blocking the bishop's path! A unique situa­
tion: I suddenly realised that the bishop on 
b2 was of equal value to the g7-pawn, and 
its sacrifice would carry out the set strate­
gic objective without loss of time.
21 ..txg7!? (27)
Previously this move - sacrificing the 
second bishop! - was invariably accompa­
nied by two exclamation marks. White's 
entire combinative attack was considered 
exemplary, and I was very proud of it. But 
when modern computers joined the chess 
analysis, it turned out that White had two 
other worthy candidate moves:
a) 
21 tt:d2!? (the start of a melancholic 
dance by the knight) 21...'iVb7 (21...'i¥c2? 22
i.xg7! or 21...'ic6 22 Sxa5 and 'ixe7 is
worse for Black) 22 .l:Ih5 'i'd7 23 tt:e4 tt:c4
24 i.f6!! gxf6 25 Sh3l 'i'f5 26 l:.f3! 'ig6 27 
Sg3 and wins, or 21. ..Scd8 (the most resil­
ient) 22 Sh5! 'i'd6 (after 22...'id7? 23 tt:f3 
tt:c6 24 'ic2  f5 25 tt:h4! ..txh4 26 'ic4+ 
Black succumbs to the attack) 23 'ig 4  'ig6
24 "ih3 f5 25 tt:f3! et:Jc6 26 .l:Ie1 'ig 4  27 l:th7 
i.f6  28 i.xf6  'ixh 3 29 .l:Ixg7+ 'lt>h8 30 Sg3+ 
l:txf6 31 flxh3+ 'it>g7 32 tt:Jg5 with an extra 
pawn in the ending and excellent winning 
chances;
b) 
21 Sh5! "ic2 (if 21...Sfe8?, then 22 
..txg7! 'i.t>xg7 23 tt:Je5 is now immediately 
conclusive) 22 'i¥xe7 'i¥xb2 23 tt:e5! - a 
computer move, sharply improving the 
earlier 'thorough' analysis. Black has a 
difficult choice:
Analysis diagram
b1) 23...'i¥d4 24 g3! (after the showy 24 
tbg6?! there is the stupendous counter
24...'ix f2+!! 25 'ix f 2 fxg6+! 26 'it>g3 gxh5 27 
Bxf8+ Sxf8 28 'ixa7  :tf6 29 'it>h4 Sh6, when 
Black 
most 
probably 
has 
a fortress!)
24... 
'i\Vd8 (24...Sce8 25 'i'd7!) 25 'ifh4 Sc7 26 
'iVg4! g6 27 tt:xg6! fxg6 28 'ixg6+ Sg7 29 
'iVe6+ Sgf7 (29....l:Iff7 30 l:ic1!) 30 'ig4+ l:.g7
31 'irh3! with a winning attack;
b2) 23 ...l:c1 24 g4! (a far from obvious 
pawn advance) 24...l:ixf1+ 25 'it>xf1 'i¥h1+ 26
439

Garry Kasparov on Garry Kasparov: Part One
'ig 2 iVe4+ 27 'ih3! (hiding from the checks)
2 7 . . . 2 8  Bf5! (this removal of the rook 
from its aggressive position is also unlikely 
to occur to everyone) 28...^3+ (28...Wfl+ is 
hopeless in view of 29 'ih4! Wg2 30 h3!) 29 
f3 We6 30 Bxf7 Wxe7 31 .l:txe7, and White 
has a won endgame.
But, it will be agreed, the human 21 
.ixg7!? is far more spectacular - and, as we 
will see, effective enough. The positional 
bishop sacrifice completely exposes the 
black king, and the remaining white pieces 
become furiously active.
21...'ixg7 22 ct:JeS!
White has just one pawn for the piece 
and no direct threats, but he is excellently 
placed - largely thanks to the 'bad' knight 
on a5.
22. ...Mfd8 (16)
The only chance. Black would have lost 
quickly after both 22. ..f5? 23 Sd7 Wc5 24 
ct:Jd3 and 22. ...l:th8? 23 Wg4+ f
 24 Wf5 f6
25 He1! ct:Jc6 (25 ...Sh6 26 We6!) 26 ctJd7+ 
'if7  27 .Mxe7+!, as well as 22 ...Wc2? 23 
Wg4+ 'ih 7  24 Sd3 or 22. . .Scd8? 23 ct:Jd7! 
Wc6 24 We5+ f6 (24. ..'ih6 25 .Md3!) 25 
Wxe7+ .l:tf7 26.l:!.g5+! fxg5 27 Wxg5+ Wg6 28 
Wxd8 f
 29 ct:Jb8.
23 % 4 +  (14) 23...'if8 24 WfS! (6)
This visibly distressed Portisch: he had
reckoned only on 24 ctJd7+(?) fixd7 25 fixd7 
Wc4! with unclear play.
24...f6 (36)
Again the only move. Black is forced to 
weaken his king's defences still further, as 
otherwise disaster awaits him: 24. ...id6? 25 
Wf6! ct:Jc4 (25...'it>g8 26 ctJd7!) 26 ct:Jg6+ 'ie8 
27 Be1+ 'id 7 28 Se7+ (28 fih5!?) or 
24. ..ii.xa3? 25 ctJd7+ .l:!.xd7 26 .l:\.xd7 Wc4 27 
Hfd1 ct:Jc6 (or 27. ..fie8) 28 Wf6! and wins.
25ctJd7+ (2)
Earlier I condemned 25 ct:Jg6+(!?) 'ig7 (of 
course, not 25 ...'it>e8? 26 Wh5 or 26 Be1) 26 
CDf4! Hxd5 27 ct:Jxd5 (27 Wg6+? 'ih 8  28 ct:Je6 
is bad in view of 28. ...l:!.g5!) 27. ..We5! (if
27 ...Wc5?, then 28 Wg4+! 'ot>f7 29 ct:Jxe7 
'ixe7 30 Wg7+ 'id 6 31 Hd1+ is decisive) 28 
ct:Jxe7 Wxf5 29 ct:Jxf5+ 'ih8 , thinking that 
White has 'nothing special', but in fact it 
would also have given good winning 
chances: 30 g4! .l:!.c4 31 h3 .l:!.a4 32 Se1! 
Bxa3 (32. ..CDc4 33 .l:!.e6) 33 fle8+ 'ih 7 34 
.Me7+ 'ig 8 35 .l:tg7+ 'ih 8  36 Bxa7 l:':xh3 37 
Sf7 etc.
2S....Mxd7 (2) 26 .Mxd7
26.JtcS?!
In the end Portisch was worn out by the 
difficult defence. 26 ...We5! was more resil­
ient, although here too after 27 'iYh3! White 
has a strong attack with equal material
440

Challenger
(rook and pawn against bishop and knight):
27. ..f5 28 #h6+ 'it>g8 29 .Md3! f4 (29...S c3 
leads to the loss of the f5-pawn) 30 'ig6+ 
'it>f8 31 l:!.g3!! ; f6 32 'iYg8+ &e7 33 'Wih7+ 
'it>e6 34 .Md1! .Md8 35 .Mgd3 l:txd3 36 'iYxd3, 
or 27...l:tc7 28 1:!.d3 f5 29 ^ 6 +  'Wig7 30 'Wih5! 
f4 (30. .'i&'f7 31 '¥ih8+ and 'iYe5) 31 l:te1 tt:lb7
32 g3!, and Black is most probably unable 
to hold out.
27 'ih7! (19) 27...l:!.c7 (4) 28 # h 8+! (2)
Avoiding the trap for which Portisch was 
hoping: 28 l:!.d3? 'Wixf2+!! 29 'it>xf2 (29 Hxf2? 
l:!.cl+) 29 ... hc5+ 30 'it>g3 l:txh7 31 .Mxf6+ 
'it>e7, when the endgame is now rather 
more pleasant for Black.
28...'it'f7 29 l:!.d3 tt:lc4 (9)
A belated return of the knight. 29. ..tt:lc6 
30 .Mg 3 'it>e6 31 'iYg8+ 'it>d7 32 .Mdl+ .td6 33 
.Mgd3 (Stohl) was even worse, while if 
29. ...: f8 White would decide matters with
30 ^ 7 +  .tg7 31 h4 or 31 l:!.fd1.
30 l:!.fd1! (10)
An important move, connecting the 
rooks for combined actions.
30...tt:le5
A final error, but Black would also not 
have saved the game by 30. ...td6 31 l:!.f3! 
(rather more forceful than my earlier 31 
I!d5 and Nunn's move 31 l:!.h3) 31...'ig5 32 
l:th3! with crushing threats, or 30. ..tt:ld6 31
.Mg3 'it>e6 32 .Me3+ 'it>d7 33 'iYg7 'it>d8 34 
'Wig8+ 'it>d7 35 l:!.e6 'iYc1 (35...'iYxa3 36 
.Mdxd6+!) 36 .Meel 'i&'c5 37 h4 and wins.
31 'iYh7+ We6
Avoiding the immediate mate (31...'1t>f8
32 l:td8+), the black king sets off on its 
farewell journey.
32 'iYgS+ 'it>f5 (32 ... t2lf7 33 .Mel+)
33 g4+! 'it>f4 (or 33 ...tt:lxg4 34 Sf3+) 34 l:!.d4+ 
'it>f3 35 #b3+ 1-0
In view of 35 ...'ic3 36 'i&'d5+ 4e2 37 
'iYe4+. Times: 1.52-2.11.
This fairytale game became the highlight 
of the tournament; it appeared in chess 
publications around the world and later it 
was judged to be the best in lnformator 
Volume 36.
Inspired by this win, in the 5th round I 
crushed Ljubojevic with Black and in the 
6th round - Ivanovic (both resigned as early 
as the 26th move).
More difficult was my 7th round game 
with Bent Larsen, in which numerous 
interesting events occurred. After again 
playing the Tarrasch Defence and employ­
ing a novelty on the 12th move, I obtained 
good play and soon, after an unfortunate 
manoeuvre by a white knight, I gained an 
advantage 
(incidentally, 
in 
Niksic 
the
441

Garry Kasparov on Garry Kasparov: Part One
Tarrasch brought me 31/2 out of 4!). After a 
mistake by my opponent on the 22nd move 
I could have landed a decisive blow, but I 
took the wrong course and by clever de­
fence Larsen equalised. Although subse­
quently he committed a couple of inaccu­
racies and I again obtained some winning 
chances, the adjourned position did not 
give any particular grounds for optimism. 
Nevertheless I decided to play on to the 
logical end.
Came 86
B.Larsen-G.Kasparov
Niksic, 7th round, 1.09.1983
The drawbacks of White's position are 
obvious: the king cut off on the back rank 
and pawn weaknesses at e5 and g3. But 
Black is seriously short of fighting units to 
be able to exploit these factors effectively.
41 hS (6)
With this sealed move, which suggests 
itself after five hours of intense play, Larsen 
provokes another exchange, but again 
makes things more difficult for himself. A 
draw, especially after home analysis, would 
have resulted from 41 e6! (41 Sb6?! t'Lle3!)
41...fxe6 42 t'Lld4 2c1+ 43 'it>g2 e5 44 t'Lle6+
'it>f6 (44...'it>h6 45 2a7!) 45 t'Llg5+ 'it>f5 - 1 
condemned this continuation 
in 
both 
lnformator and The Test of Time, thinking 
that 'the activity of the black pieces is 
dangerous'. However, after 46 :f.a3! with 
the threat of :C.f3 mate White is alright:
46..1.!.c2+ 47 'it>g1 t'Llh2 (47 ...e4 48 Sa5+) 48 
t'Llxh7 'it>g4 49 tt:Jg5 with a draw.
41. ..'it>h6!? (16)
Without the help of his king Black cannot 
hope to achieve anything, but for Larsen 
this reply came as a surprise. Perhaps he 
was 
expecting 
41...gxh5 
42 
Cbd4! 
or
41...ctJe3 42 hxg6 hxg6 43 e6! fxe6 44 Cbd4 
l:!.g2+ 45 'it>h1 e5 46 t'Llf3 e4 47 Hxg6+! with 
an easy draw.
42 hxg6 (2) 42 ... hxg6 43 Sa4 (12)
Again White would have been saved by
43 e6! fxe6 44 t'Lld4 2c1+ 45 'it>g2 e5 46 
lZ:Jf5+ 'it>g5 47 lZ:Jh4!, when Black cannot win:
47...fic2+ 48 Wf3 Cbf6 49 We3 Ec3+ 50 'it>e2! 
e4 (50. ..l:!.xg3 51 lZ:lf3+) 51 Sa5+ 'it>g4 
(51...'it>h6 52 2a6) 52 Cbxg6 :txg3 53 lie5 etc.
Instead of this, by luring the king to g5 
(43...lZ:le3 44 lZ:Jd8! with a draw), White 
prepares further simplification.
43 ...'1t>gS! (15) 44lZ:Jd4 (2) 44. . .2c3
In the event of 44...l1c1+ 45 '>t>g2 lZ:Jxe5 46 
lZ:lf3+ lZ:Jxf3 47 Wxf3 a drawn rook endgame 
is reached. Therefore Black tries to win the 
e5-pawn by more cunning means.
45 e6! (9)
After 45 Wg2?! ct:Jxe5 the presence of 
knights on the board would have allowed 
Black, without the slightest risk, to try and 
'starve' the opponent into surrender (say,
46 l:Ia5 'it>f6 47 Sa6+ 'it>g7 48 2a5 f6 49 :C.a2 
g5 etc.). Defending such a position is highly 
unpleasant, and so Larsen decided to 
complicate the play by sacrificing his g3- 
pawn, hoping for a more certain draw with 
an advanced e-pawn against a pair of 
connected passed pawns.
442

Challenger
45 ...fixg3+ (3)
46 'it>hl?!
An inaccuracy, after which White is not 
yet losing, but he again makes it harder for 
himself to gain a draw. The natural 46 'it>fl! 
f5 47 e7 Se3 48 tt:lc6 would have solved all 
his problems: 48...tt:lf6 49 Ba8 'it>h6 (49 ...Be6
50 l:f8! f4 51 'it>f2 with a draw) 50 'it>f2 f4 51 
Ba4 g5 52 Ba5 tt:lg4+ (52. ..g4 53 Bf5 with a 
draw) 53 'it>f1 l:.e1 54 Ba6 tt:lf6 55 tt:ld4!, and 
Black is unable to strengthen his position. 
But the king in the corner of the board gives 
him an opportunity to launch a dangerous 
attack with his small army.
46...fs! (2) 47 e7 (8) 47 ...Be3 (2) 48 tt:lc6 f4! 
(5)
Signalling the start of the attack - the
direct consequence of 'it>h1. The problems, 
which had arisen literally out of nothing, 
caused even such an experienced fighter as 
Larsen to become nervous. And time- 
trouble, imperceptibly stealing up, did 
nothing to assist the concentrated working 
of his mind...
49 BaS+ (10)
49 
Ba8? was obviously bad: 49..J:e1+ 50 
'it>g2 l:e2+! 51 'it>f3 (or 51 'it>f1 f3!, but not 51 
'it>h1? f3! with a rapid mate) 51...l:e3+! 52 
'it>g2 f3+ 53 f
 l:e2 54 l:f8 (54 e8'iW? tt:lh2+ 
55 'it>g1 f2+) 54. .tt:le3+ 55 'it>g1 f2+ 56 l:xf2 
Be1+ 57 'it>h2 tt:lg4+ 58 'it>g3 tt:lxf2 59 'it>xf2 
l:e6 and wins.
A study on the theme of interference was 
also extremely risky - 49 tt:le5? l:xe5 50 
Ba5! Bxa5 51 e8'if, since after 5l....l:!.f5 52 
'iWd8+ tt:lf6 53 'iWd2 'it>h6! it is hard for the 
queen to restrain the onslaught of the black 
pawns.
But, apart from the move in the game, 
White had two other acceptable options:
a) 49 tt:ld4! - this paradoxical move, one 
which is hard to find, was suggested after 
the game by Timman. Although scattered 
over the entire board, the white pieces 
coordinate 
amazingly 
harmoniously:
49...1:xe7 (49 ...'it>h4 50 'it>g2!) 50 tt:lf3+ 'it>f5
51 tt:lh4+ 'it>f6 52 l:xf4+ 'it>g5 53 tt:lxg6, or
49...tt:lf6! 50 Ba6! Bxe7 51 tt:le6+! l:xe6 
(51...'it>g4 52 tt:lxf4!) 52 Bxe6 'it>f5 53 l:a6, 
and the defence holds;
b) 49 l:a3! - a reliable defence, found by 
me while working on this book and also not 
without its elegance: 49 ...l:e6 50 l:a5+ 'it>h4
51 l:a8 tt:lf6 52 'it>g2 l:xc6 53 l:f8! (threaten­
ing Sxf6) 53 ..J:!.c2+ 54 'it>f1 Bc1+ 55 'if2 ! 
tt:le4+ 56 'it>f3 tt:ld6 57 'it>xf4 l:c5 58 'it>f3 l:e5
59 l:d8 and l:xd6 with a draw.
49-'it>h4 SO Ba8! (4)
Already the only move: White does not 
succeed either with interference - 50 tt:le5?
443

Garry Kasparov on Garry Kasparov: Part One
'it>g3! or 50 Se5? Sh3+! 51 'it>g1 f3, or diver­
sion - 50 .la3? Sxa3 51 e8'i¥ Se3! 52 'i!Vd8+ 
'it>h3! 53 'iYd2 f3! and wins. His idea has 
become clear: by depriving the f4-pawn of 
support, he has neutralised 50...l:!:e1+(?!) 51 
'it>g2 Se2+(?!) in view of 52 'it>f3. On the 
other hand, now the black king becomes 
active.
50...tt:lf6!
With the threat of ...'it>g3, when its white 
colleague is in a mating net.
51 'ig2?? (5)
A fatal error! 51 'it>h2! was essential, for 
example: 5l...Se2+ 52 &g1 'it>g3 53 'it>fl f3
54 Ct:ld4! Sh 2 (54.. Jx e 7  55 .:l.a3! with a 
draw) 55 Ct:lxf3 'it>xf3 56 Sa3+ f
 57 .l:!.a6 
tt:e8 58 Sxg6 with a draw, or 5l...f3! 52 
e8'i! tt:xe8 53 Sa4+ 'it>h5 54 'it>g3 g5 55 
Ct:ld4, regaining one of the pawns and 
achieving a draw (although Black could still 
have tormented his opponent a little).
51. ..f3+ 52 'itf1 (2) 52...&g3 53 Ct:ld4 (2)
A desperate and, alas, belated attempt to 
save the king at the cost of the e7-pawn 
(53. ..l:xe7? 54 Sa3!). Mate would have been 
inevitable after 53 l:if8 Ct:lg4 54 e 8 'i tt:h2+
55 'it>g1 l:txe8 etc.
53...tt:g4 (5) 54 tt:xf3 (otherwise the pawn 
cannot be stopped: 54 e8'JIV Ct:lh2+ 55 'it>g1 
f2+) 54. .. Sxf3+ 55 'it>g1 tt:h2! (avoiding the
last trap: 55...Ct:lf2? 56 Sh8! l:!:a3 57 'it>fl! 
with a draw) 56 Bf8 Sc3 0-1
In view of 57 l:!:fl l:!:e3(c8) with a rapid 
mate.
My three wins in the endgame - against 
Seirawan, Petrosian and Larsen - probably 
made no less an impression than my usual 
combinative attacks: the chess world saw a 
'new' Kasparov, ready to accumulate small 
advantages little by little.
In the 8th round, with 61/2 points out of 
7, I met Boris Spassky, to whom I had lost in 
Tilburg. And, of course, I was burning with 
the desire to exact revenge and continue 
my winning streak. The commentary to this 
game, published in Volume Ill of My Great 
Predecessors, has had to be substantially 
refined and revised.
Game 87 
G.Kasparov-B.Spassky
Niksic, 8th round, 3.09.1983 
King's Indian Defence E84
1 d4 tt:f6 2 c4 g6 3 Ct:lc3 .tg7
Again a King's Indian - this is a chal­
lenge! Well, such a turn of events suited me 
and I decided to choose the Samisch Varia­
tion, which around that time I had exam­
ined 
at 
training 
sessions 
with 
Ti- 
moshchenko (true, from the black side).
4 e4 (7) 4...d6 5 f3 (4) 5...Ct:lc6 (5... 0-0 - Game 
Nos. 51, 81) 6 .te3 (9)
The harmless 6 d5?! tt:Je5 7 f4 tt:ed7 8 
tt:f3 0-0 9 j£,d3 c6 leads to equality (Yusu- 
pov-Spassky, Linares 1983).
6...a6 (3) 7 Ct:lge2 (7 'Wid2 2b8 8 l:!:b1 - Game 
No.15) 7...:tb8 8 'id 2 (8 Ct:lc1 - Game No.12;
8 h4!?) 8...0-0 (10)
8...b5 is more lively, although 9 cxb5 
axb5 10 d5 tt:e5 11 tt:d4 b4 12 Ct:lcb5 prom-
444

Challenger
ises White somewhat the better chances.
9 h4 (3)
Attack! The following line, which was 
fashionable at that time, is too insipid: 9 
lbc1 e5 10 d5 lbd4, and here after 11 lbb3 
there is the good reply 11...lbxb3 12 axb3 
c5, while if 11 tD1e2 - 11...c5 12 dxc6 lbxc6.
9...bS (11)
After 9 .h5 5passky himself successfully 
played both 10 o-o-o against Keene (Dort­
mund 1973), and 10 ..th6 against Fischer 
(8th match game, 5veti-5tefan/Belgrade 
1992).
10 hS (2) 10...bxc4?! (13)
Objectively a second-rate move, but 
5passky deliberately avoided the best move
10...e5 (not 10...lbxh5? 11 g4 lbf6 12 ..th6 
with an attack) 11 d5 lba5: in the well- 
known game Timman-Kasparov (Bugojno
1982) after 12 lbg3 bxc4 13 o-o-o lbd7?! 14 
hxg6 fxg6 15 lbb1! White gained an advan­
tage. 13...Sb4 is obviously stronger, al­
though against Loginov (Manila Olympiad 
1992) I was able to demonstrate the plus 
points of White's position: 14 * h6 a xh6 15 
1\Yxh6 'i/e7 (15...'it>h8!?) 16 ..te2 ..td7 17 lLlfl 
l:tfb8 18 fld2 c5 19 Jl.d1 tt:Je8 20 hxg6 fxg6
21 g4 etc.
11 g4! (35)
The most energetic and useful move. The
knight at e2, in expectation of ...e7-e5, 
guards the d4-square for the moment. But 
now 12 hxg6 fxg6 13 lbf4 and Wh2! is 
threatened. The immediate 11hxg6 fxg6 12 
ltJf4 is not so dangerous after 12...e6 13 
.‘ xc4 d5 14 ..tb3 Sxb3! 15 axb3 dxe4 16 
0-0-0 exf3 17 gxf3 lbe7! 18 ltJd3 tt:Jf5 19 
ltJe5 .1 b7 20 
g5 'ife8 with good counter­
play (Weih-5passky, Germany 1983).
Here the ex-world champion sank into 
thought...
11...JI.xg4!? (40)
Having seen that in the event of 1l...e5 
12 d5 followed by lbg3 and 0-0-0 Black is 
deprived of any counterplay (the g-pawn 
has advanced to g4!), 5passky realised that 
he had to do something, since otherwise he 
might be suffocated and quickly mated. 
And he took a decision which, from a purely 
chess standpoint is perhaps dubious (it is 
clear that the piece sacrifice is not fully 
correct), but from the practical, psychologi­
cal standpoint it is the best, since it sharply 
changes the character of the play. White 
will no longer have a direct attack, and he 
has to readjust to the conversion of a 
material advantage, while Black acquires 
some counterplay.
12 fxg4 tt:Jxg4 13 0-0-0! (29)
I think that 5passky underestimated this
445

Garry Kasparov on Garry Kasparov: Part One
reply and was reckoning on 13 hxg6? tt:xe3!
14 'ixe3 Sxb2! 15 gxf7+ fixf7 16 ^ 3  h6 17 
0-0-0 ^ 8 !  with a dangerous counterat­
tack. White does not allow the rook to go to 
b2, and Black’s difficulties increase.
13...tt:xe3 (13)
13. ..e5 is also insufficient, when the cor­
rect reply is not 14 d5 tt:d4 15 tt:g1 tt:xe3 16 
'ixe3 c5! 17 ..txc4 (17 dxc6? ^ 6 )  17 ...fib4
18 b3 'ia 5  and Black is still alive, but only
14 hxg6! fxg6 15 ..th3 tt:xe3 16 ..te6+! 'it>h8
17 'ixe3 ..tf6 18 'ih 3  h5 19 d5 with an 
obvious advantage.
14 'iVxe3
14...e6?!
A characteristic moment! After 14. ..e5!
15 d5 (15 hxg6 fxg6) 15...tt:d4 16 tt:xd4! 
exd4 17 Sxd4 ..txd4 18 'ixd 4  Black's posi­
tion is not easy, but he has some counter­
chances. Spassky, however, chose a move 
which, though perhaps objectively indiffer­
ent, did not fix the pawn structure and did 
not allow me a clear line of play: as if to say, 
go on, attack, and let’s see what happens...
15 hxg6 (8) 15...hxg6
The imprudent 15 . ..fxg6? would have lost 
to 16 ^ 3 !  'ig5+ (16..Sf6 17 #xh7+ 'it>f7
18 ..tg2! .l:th8 19 fid fl) 17 '!t>b1 .l:txb2+?! 
(17....l:tf6 18 ..tg2 is also insufficient) 18 
'it>xb2 Sb8+ 19 'it>a1 tt:b4 20 'ixe6+ 'it>h8 21
a4! tt:c2+ 22 '!t>a2 tt:b4+ 23 <;t>b2(b1) etc. 
After taking with the h-pawn, Black is 
hoping that his g7-bishop will defend him 
against mate - as in the 'Dragon'!
16 Sd2 (the immediate 16 tt:g1! and i2lf3 
was more accurate) 16...2e8? (3)
By allowing the switching of the knight 
from e2 to f3, Black comes under an irre­
sistible attack. However, my recommenda­
tion 16...'if6 also did not promise an easy 
life in view of 17 tt:f4!, when 17 . ..tt:xd4? 18 
.l:tf2! with the threats of tt:h5 and 'ih 3  is 
bad for Black.
17 tt:g1! (5) 17...dS (after 17...e5?! 18 d5 the 
bishop on g7 is inactive) 18 tt:f3 (4)
It is evident that White has succeeded in 
unravelling his pieces and that Black has 
lost any initiative. The threat of Sdh2 is 
imminent: White has sufficient force to 
mate the enemy king.
18...aS (2)
Played because everything else is hope­
less. But from this point incredible things 
begin to happen.
19 eS (16)
I also calculated 19 fidh2! dxe4 20 tt:xe4 
tt:xd4 21 .l:th8+! ..txh8 22 Sxh8+ 'it>xh8 23 
'iVh6+ 'it>g8 24 tt:fg5, mating, as well as
19. ..e5 20 tt:xd5 exd4, but here I saw that 
nothing was given by 21 Sh8+ and I failed
446

Challenger
to find the decisive move 21 Wf4!. Becom­
ing agitated, and thinking that I could win 
as I pleased, I did not even bother to calcu­
late this line to the end and I chose 19 e5. 
And it was only later, in a conversation 
during a communal evening walk, that it 
suddenly dawned on me: hang on, after
19...e5 there is the decisive 20 fih7! exd4 21 
Sxg7+! ..t>xg7 22 Wh6+ ..t>f6 23 lt:Jxd5+ ..t>e6
24 lt:Jg5+ ..t>d7 25 lt:Jxf7 etc.
I became terribly upset - I remember 
Milunka Lazarevic saying to me: 'You're just 
like Fischer: after a game he also used to 
get in a right state!' But how couldn't I be 
upset? Fancy missing such a simple win! It 
was staggering that I did not calculate this 
variation at the board . . The Tilburg story 
repeated itself and the diagnosis became 
obvious: giving vent to my emotions, I lost 
my accuracy.
19...1t:Je7! (7)
It transpires that Black has some coun­
terplay: ...c7-c5 and ...tt:Jf5.
20 j,h 3 (2)
Again 20 .l:'!.dh2! (threatening 21 .l:'!.h8+!) 
20. ..lt:Jf5 21 Wf2 was very strong, with an 
overwhelming advantage - say, 21...c5 22 
dxc5 Wc7 23 ;. h3 lt:Jh6 24 j,xe6!.
20. ..cSl 21 dxcS Wc7 (the situation has 
become sharper: White's centre has been
demolished and it is more difficult for him 
to attack) 22 Wf4? (3)
I should have gone one square further -
22 Wg5! with the murderous threat of 
j,xe6!, for example: 22 ...Wxc5 23 j,xe6! 
fxe6 24 Wh4 and tt:Jg5, or 22 ...lt:Jc6 23 ii.xe6! 
fxe6 24 Wxg6 lt:Jxe5 25 Wh7+ ..t>f8 26 .l:'!.fl, 
and Black's position is in ruins.
22...1t:Jc6! (2)
Now this is a strong move: the 'bridge­
head' pawn at e5 is under attack! Black 
would 
have 
lost 
ignominiously 
after
22...Wxc5? 23 Wxf7+! ..t>xf7 24 lt:Jg5+ ..t>f8 
(24. ....t>g8 25 ii.xe6+ ..t>f8 26 lt:Jh7 mate) 25 
lt:Jxe6+ ..t>g8 26 lt:Jxc5.
23 .l:'!.e1?! (2)
Losing the remnants of White's advan­
tage. 23 j_xe6! lt:Jxe5 24 lt:Jxd5 li:Jd3+ 25 
l:txd3 Wxf4+ 26 lt:Jxf4 cxd3 27 ..id5! would 
still have left him with the better chances in 
a sharp multi-piece ending.
23...d4! (5) 24 Sxd4 (4)
If 24 lt:Jxd4 I did not like 24...lt:Jxe5, al­
though after 25 ..t>d1! Wxc5 26 lt:Je4 an 
unclear battle could have ensued.
24...1t:Jxd4 25 lt:Jxd4! (2)
This is still correct: 25 Wxd4? Wb7 
(25...Sed8!?) 26 Wf2 j,h6+ 27 ..t>b1 Sed8! 28 
c6! (28 lt:Ja4? is bad in view of 28. . .Wb4 29 
li:Jb6 c3 30 b3 ,\d2) 28. ..Wxc6 is advanta­
447

Garry Kasparov on Garry Kasparov: Part One
geous to Black.
25...'ifxc5 26 lt:lf3?! (26 i.g2! was better)
26...6ed8?!
Missing a chance to seize the initiative 
by 26. . .'iVb6! 27 Se2 Sed8 28 lLlg5 (28 i.g4?! 
.l:td3!) 28 ...iVg1+ 29 i . f l  l!b7 etc.
27t'Llg5! 'ie7 (3)
The start of a wild time scramble. After
27 ...Sd7 White would have been unable to 
win even after the best move 28 .txe6! fxe6
29 i¥h2 i.h 8  30 'iVh6 - it is a draw both in 
the event of 30...iVf2 31 'iVxg6+ ^f8 32 
lbxe6+ &e7 33 .Ue2 'ifl+  34 ^c2 iff7(a1), 
and after 30...'iVc6 31 't!Vxg6+ .Ug7 32 'iVh6 
J:gb7 (33 .l:g1 ? ifb6!) or 30. ..'itb6 31 t'Lla4 
'i:Vc6 32 lt:lc5 'ib6!.
28 'i:Vh4 Sd3
29 'i:Vh7+
Rather more practical winning chances 
were offered by 29 lt:lce4!? with the idea of
29...C3? 30 .l:ifl! cxb2+ (30...'iVb4 31 'Wih7+, 
mating) 31 ^ 1  Sb6 32 'ih7+ Wf8 33 lLlxf7! 
or 29....txe5! 30 ^ 7 +  ' f  31 lif l .txb 2+?
32 'it>c2 f5 33 iVxg6, and Black has no de­
fence. Instead of 31....ixb2+ it would not be 
easy for him to find 31...Sc3+!! 32 bxc3 
'Wia3+ 33 'it>d1 Sd8+ 34lt:ld2 Sxd2+ 35 'it>xd2 
'i:Vxc3+ with perpetual check.
29. ..'it>f8 30 t'Llxe6+?! (3)
Again I missed my way! Here too 30
t'Llce4! would still have retained a good 
game: 30...l:xh3?! (30...Sxb2? 31 t'Llxe6+! 
etc.) 31 tvxh3 i.xe5 32 S fl! i.x b 2+ 33 &c2 
f5 34 Hb1l (34 lt:lc5 .if6!) 34. ..fxe4 35 't!Vh6+ 
&e8 36 'ir'xg6+ &d7 37 lid1+ &c8 38 lt:lxe6 
l:b6 39 'i:Vg8+ ^b7 40 Sd7+! 'iVxd7 41 t'Llc5+ 
&c7 42 t'Llxd7 'it'xd7 43 'if'd5+ ^c7 44 'i'xa5 
with winning chances, or 30. ..i.xe5! 31 S fl 
l:ic3+!! with the same draw as in the previ­
ous note.
In any event, it would have been easier 
playing White: Black would have had to 
find the only moves to save himself. But I 
wanted to do everything with checks...
30...fxe6 31 l:!.fl+ '£e8 32 ifg8+ i.f8
33 'ikxg6+?
The most annoying thing is that even 
here White could still have saved himself 
with the fantastic study-like move 33 
lt:ld5!!. For example: 33. ..^d7!? (33...exd5 34 
.l:xf8+! 't1Vxf8 35 'iVe6+ 'i!Ve7 36 'iVg8+ with 
perpetual check) 34 t'Llxe7 i.h6+ 35 'it'c2 
.l:txg8 
36 
lt:lxg8 Sxh3 
37 
Sd1+! 'it'c7 
(37 . ..'it>e8 38 t'Llf6+) 38 t'Llxh6 l!xh6 39 Sd4 
with a draw (I discovered this only later).
33. ..'it>d8! 0-1
White lost on time. After 34 .txe6 'iVb4! 
35 lt:ld1 'id2+ 36 ^b1 Sf3! he would have 
lost, although not immediately. Times: 
2.30-2.29.
448

Challenger
My only defeat in the tournament - and 
a highly annoying one! Spassky again 
displayed remarkable resourcefulness, and 
although he was inaccurate in some de­
tails, on the whole he proved more cunning 
(it was some time before I was able to 
equalise the score in our individual games, 
which I did only by defeating Spassky in 
Barcelona 1989 and Linares 1990).
In my anger the next day I defeated Niko- 
lic with Black (cf. Game No.55, note to 
White's 45th move). Then I made draws 
with Tal, Miles and Andersson, and before 
the end I also defeated Timman and Gli- 
goric - and I finished two points ahead of 
the 2nd placed Larsen! Nikitin: ‘Here too 
Karpov's protectors did their favourite a 
disservice: after this tournament the ratings 
ofthe two Ksfinally became equal.'
But in Niksic for the first time I also had 
to display my organisational skills. To save 
the matches took some doing: I organised a 
letter from the grandmasters to FIDE and 
opened negotiations with Korchnoi. The 
players 
in the tournament responded 
favourably to my request to sign a letter 
demanding that the semi-final matches be 
held: the desire to see them was universal 
(the text of the letter is given in Kasparov vs. 
Karpov 1975-1985). This was quite possibly 
the first petition in chess history to be 
signed by nearly all the world's leading 
grandmasters. Some of them (Timman, 
Seirawan and Miles) expressed surprise: 
'Why didn't you go to Pasadena? How could 
you riskyour entire chess career just because 
they chose the wrong town... '
It remained to come to an understanding 
with Korchnoi, who could have used his 
formal right to go through to the final. But 
‘Viktor the Terrible' took the noble decision 
to replay the semi-final match, thereby 
showing that his criticism of the 'champi­
onship on paper' was not just empty words. 
Closer to the end of the tournament he 
travelled specially to Niksic. Negotiations 
about the match, sanctioned by Moscow, 
were initially carried out through interme­
diaries and proved very difficult. But the 
stumbling-block was removed when it was 
promised that Korchnoi's chief and lawful 
demand would be met - the termination of 
the boycott by Soviet players, begun in 
1976.
Our personal relations were helped by 
the 
grandmaster blitz tournament 
in 
Herzeg Novi, organised on 14th September, 
immediately after the main tournament in 
Niksic. I won this event by a solid margin 
(13V2 out of 16!), twice defeating Korchnoi, 
who finished 2nd (10V2). Possibly he was 
impressed by the fact that I was willing to 
play with him in the same tournament, 
even though the negotiations were still in 
progress. For him this blitz tournament was 
the first breakthrough of the seven-year 
blockade! We were able to have several 
frank talks about the coming match, which 
we were both impatiently awaiting.
Thus the ‘miracle' had occurred. It was 
due to be completed by the FIDE Congress 
in the autumn. A key role at that time was 
played by the English grandmaster Ray­
mond Keene, who in FIDE held the post of 
Secretary of the Players' Union. After flying 
to Moscow for discussions, he was sur­
prised when he was met at the airport by 
Krogius himself, the head of the Chess 
Section (a rare honour!), and when they all 
began vying with one another to tell him 
how they were helping Kasparov (this was 
something new!). He stated that he could 
quickly arrange both matches in London, 
but on condition that the Soviet side pub­
licly acknowledged that, in choosing Pasa­
dena, Campo had not exceeded his author­
449

Garry Kasparov on Garry Kasparov: Part One
ity as FIDE President, and that they pay the 
required compensation. The total penalty 
demanded was $160,000 - far more than 
the prizes in the wrecked matches!
The tournament in Niksic showed that 
my play had become deeper and more 
diverse. I sensed my growing strength and 
realised that this was the direct result of 
my serious preparation for the Candidates 
matches. And with even greater enthusi­
asm our team continued its analytical 
work.
Match with Korchnoi
Semi-final Candidates match 
Kasparov- 
Korchnoi (London, 20th November - 17th 
December 1983): 7-4.
A couple of weeks after Niksic, at the very 
end of September, I was invited to Barcelona 
to be presented with the chess 'Oscar' for the 
previous year, 1982 (in the preceding nine 
years this prestigious prize had been won 
eight times by Karpov and once, in 1978, by 
Korchnoi). I received 1021 votes, and Karpov 
943. A remarkable feature of the trip was 
that for the first time my mother was able to 
travel with me. It was rare for a Soviet chess 
player to be allowed to take a close relative 
abroad with him, and in my case this was 
especially important, 
since there 
were 
persistent rumours that I was going to 
defect to the West. It is possible that, deep 
down, my opponents wanted this - so that I 
too could be branded a traitor, like Korchnoi, 
and then every effort would be made to help 
Karpov... When we returned, my mother 
gave a detailed account of this memorable 
trip in an article entitled 'The cloudless 
Spanish sky', published in the Baku chess 
newspaper.
A further week later, at the FIDE Congress 
in Manila, a confessional letter from the
Soviet Federation was read out, and Cam- 
pomanes stated with satisfaction that he 
was ready to organise the semi-final Can­
didates matches anew. The text of the 
resolution adopted on Keene's proposal 
read: 'The General Assembly unanimously 
extols the sportsmanship of Grandmaster 
Korchnoi and Grandmaster Ribli in agreeing 
to play their semi-final matches, and urges 
that all boycotts, especially that of Mr 
Korchnoi, should be lifted forthwith.' This 
was the biggest concession of the USSR 
Chess Federation in the entire history of its 
relations with FIDE.
Now 
the 
two 
Candidates 
matches, 
Korchnoi-Kasparov 
and 
Smyslov-Ribli, 
which initially had been scattered to differ­
ent corners of the world, were due to come 
together on 20th November 1983 in the 
Great Eastern Hotel in London.
I concluded my last pre-match training 
session at the start of November. Although 
nearly all the press and the experts were 
predicting victory for me, I realised that, 
despite the enormous age difference (32 
years), Viktor Korchnoi was a very dangerous 
opponent, with a mastery of numerous 
chess techniques. It was assumed that he 
would avoid complications (perhaps, also 
remembering our game at the Olympiad in 
Lucerne) and place the main emphasis on 
the concluding stage of the game, where he 
would endeavour to do everything to exploit 
his enormous experience and my impulsive­
ness. I knew that I must not allow him to 
dictate the play in simple and technical 
positions, and so earlier, at the summer 
training session before the 'match' in Pasa­
dena, together with my trainers I did a great 
amount of work not only on the opening, 
but also the endgame, paying particular 
attention to a study of practical endings. In 
the match this was repaid with interest!
450

Challenger
I was accompanied on the flight to Eng­
land by my mother, the leader of our dele­
gation Azer Zeynally, his deputy 'on security 
matters' Viktor Litvinov (from then on he 
would accompany me on trips abroad right 
up to 1987), my doctor Khalid Gasanov and 
my trainers - Nikitin, Timoshchenko and 
Vladimirov. Unfortunately, we were able to 
arrive in London only on 18th November, 
and the two days, which were also filled 
with organisational problems, were insuffi­
cient for normal acclimatisation.
The atmosphere at my match with the 
‘defector' proved much calmer than had 
been expected. My relations with Korchnoi 
were normal. Even so, I was not quite at 
ease, as I had not yet recovered from the 
stormy pre-match tensions which for six 
months had kept me in suspense, and 
when I sat down at the chess board it was 
difficult to appreciate the reality of what 
was happening. The result of the 1st game 
was partly predetermined by the fact that I 
was psychologically unprepared for an 
uncompromising battle.
Playing White, without hesitation I em­
ployed my favourite variation in the 
Queen's Indian Defence - 1 d4 tt'lf6 2 c4 e6
3 tt'lf3 b6 4 tt'lc3 ..tb7 5 a3 dS 6 cxdS tt'lxdS 7 
e3, but here I encountered a surprise -
7 ... g6! (instead of the usual 7.....te7 or
7... tt:Jxc3 - Game Nos. 43, 52, 85). This move 
was already known (it had been played by 
Short and Adorjan), but I had not studied it 
seriously. And I gave insufficient attention 
to the five-minute game 
Tal-Korchnoi 
(Herzeg Novi 1983), which went 7 ...‘Sxc3 8 
bxc3 g6. Something similar had also been 
tried against me by Sosonko in the varia­
tion with 7 'ic2 (cf. Game No.73, note to 
Black's 9th move). But my trainers and I had 
missed the idea of ...g7-g6.
Black's reply abruptly changed the pat­
tern of the position: it led to a kind of 
Grilnfeld 
Defence, which was part of 
Korchnoi's armoury long before I was born. 
Now it is hard for White to build up a 
combined attack in the centre and on the 
kingside (which is precisely with what I had 
been very successful!), and he has to seek 
other paths. My highly experienced oppo­
nent keenly sensed that I would become 
nervous - especially in the first game of the 
match - and that I would lose my aim. 
More than that: the effect of the surprise 
proved stunning! I lost this game ignomini­
ously, and it has remained for ever my only 
defeat against Korchnoi (Game No.38 in 
Volume V of My Great Predecessors).
Before the match Viktor Lvovich gave the 
following description of me: 'Kasparov is a 
player with a single knock-out blow. But if 
you can successfully parry his fierce assault 
and be the first to land a blow, Kasparov 
may lose confidence and begin to falter.' 
After the first game it could have seemed 
that he was right. Myplay in it was depress­
ing. I also remembered a grim statistic - in 
all of the 12 Candidates matches that 
Korchnoi had won (and altogether, inciden­
tally, at that point he had played 15, as well 
as two matches for the world champion­
ship), once he gained the lead he never 
relinquished it. However, as Vladimirov 
philosophically remarked, 'there is always a 
first tim efor everything...'
In the 2nd game Korchnoi met my Tar- 
rasch Defence with quite a dangerous 
novelty, but I managed to neutralise it (cf. 
Game No.91, note to Black's 12th move), 
and on the 31st move I accepted my oppo­
nent's offer of a draw. The 3rd game was 
again a Queen's Indian with a2-a3, where I 
chose the rare move 7 Wia4+, but the origi­
nally-played opening did not bring White 
any dividends and a draw was agreed as
451

Garry Kasparov on Garry Kasparov: Part One
early as the 18th move.
In the 4th game after 1 d4 ds 2 c4 e6 3 
lLlf3 I gave the Tarrasch a rest by playing
3...lLlf6, and for the first time in my career I 
defended the main variation of the Catalan 
Opening - 4 g3 3 e7 5 .ig2 0-0 6 0-0 dxc4 7 
1Wc2 a6 etc. Of course, in this new position I 
had much to fear, but after Korchnoi 
wrongly offered the exchange of queens on 
the 21st move I conducted the ending 
confidently. The game was adjourned, but 
before the resumption I accepted the 
opponent's draw offer.
We were already one third of the way 
through the match. Korchnoi was leading 
2V2-1V2 and still held the initiative. To 
change the character of the battle, radical 
measures were required. I needed to prop­
erly compose myself, become fully accus­
tomed to the working rhythm and endeav­
our to think carefully about my subsequent 
steps. In view of the seriousness of the 
position, we decided to use the only allot­
ted time-out.
Alas, searches during the match for im­
provements for White in the Queen's 
Indian with a2-a3 proved unsuccessful, and 
from the 5th game after 1 d4 lLlf6 2 c4 e6 I 
had to switch to an 'emergency airport' - 3 
g3 dS 4 ..ig2 (cf. Game No.89, note to Black's 
5th move). However, there was no great 
fight, and on the 22nd move the players 
agreed a draw. Incidentally, since the 
Catalan Opening was also employed by 
Korchnoi, it unexpectedly became the main 
opening of the match, and decided its 
outcome (with Black I gained two draws, 
and with White I scored 2V2 out of 3).
The score became 3-2 in Korchnoi's fa­
vour. At first sight, things were going badly 
for me. 'The time-out did not help Kasparov', 
spitefully commented one of the English 
newspapers. 
Naturally, 
another 
feeble
failure to exploit the white pieces influ­
enced the opinions of chess commentators 
regarding the outcome of the match. For 
the first time the Western press began 
predicting a win for Korchnoi. Thus in the 
New York Times the English grandmaster 
Michael Stean gave a detailed verbal de­
scription of the first five games, from which 
it followed that, having managed to impose 
his play, Korchnoi's advantage would be 
irreversible.
However, it is a thankless task making 
forecasts in such matches. After all, Korch­
noi had not managed to build on his suc­
cess, and a lead of one point does not give 
any guarantees when there are still seven 
games to go. Also, the opening of the 5th 
game had forced my opponent to realise 
that in the 7th, 9th and 11th games things 
would not be easy for him - of course, on 
condition that the standard of my play 
improved, but at some point this was 
bound to happen! It was not surprising that 
Korchnoi was in a hurry to land a second 
blow, aimed at breaking my resistance.
The morning of 4th December, the day of 
the 6th game, began for me with an unex­
pected telephone call: 'Moscow on the line... ' 
The subsequent conversation with Botvin- 
nik was the starting-point of the changes 
which occurred in the match. Mikhail 
Moiseevich literally flabbergasted me with 
the question: 'Doyou remember what event 
occurred 50 years ago?' Half-awake, it was 
not easy to get my bearings, but I extricated 
myself: 'In 1933 you played a match with 
Flohr.' 'And how did the battle go?’ a new 
question promptly followed. I had to strain 
myself. 'I think that you lost the 1st and 6th 
games, but then gained revenge in the 9th 
and lOth', I replied. ‘Well, see now what a 
favourable position you are in: you haven't 
yet lost the 6th game!’, Botvinnik unexpect­
452

Challenger
edly concluded. After a slight pause he 
added: 'But in general, everything is alright. 
A little more composure, andyou should win 
the match.' I was filled with positive emo­
tions: at this difficult moment it was pleas­
ant to learn that my chess mentor had no 
doubts about a successful conclusion to the 
match.
But neither my most ardent fans, nor 
Korchnoi's most pessimistic supporters, 
could have predicted the course of the 
subsequent events: the degree of misfor­
tune that struck my opponent in the second 
half of the match was just too great. How­
ever, initially the 6th game developed 
favourably for Korchnoi.
Game 88 
V.Korchnoi-G.Kasparov
Semi-Final Candidates Match, 
6th game, London, 4/5.12.1983 
Queen's Gambit D30
1 d4 ds 2 c4 e6 3 lt:Jf3 cS
During the time-out we neutralised the 
opponent's novelty that he employed in the 
2nd game, and I was ready to continue the 
duel in the 'Tarrasch'.
4 cxds exdS 5 g3 lZ'lc6
Later, in order to avoid the variation 
which occurred in the game, I played only
5...ct:Jf6 6 ..tg2 .i e7 7 0-0 0-0, intending 8 
ctJc3 ct:Jc6, or 8 .te3 b6!? and ... .tb7, trans­
posing into a solid Queen's Indian set-up, 
where i1.e3 is not considered dangerous for 
Black.
6 ; g2 lt:Jf6 7 o-o ..te7 8 ii.e3!?
Avoiding the usual 8 t:Lic3 o-o 9 dxc5 
.txc5 10 .tg5 (Game No.63) or 9 -S.g5 (Game 
Nos. 79, 91), Korchnoi surprises me with a 
rare move of Taimanov's.
8...c4
I made this reply without any particular 
thought, since I had studied the similar 
variation 8 ctJc3 o-o 9 •’ e3 c4 10 lt:Je5 h6! 
(which later I successfully played against 
Larsen and Hart) and I did not see that it 
made any great difference where White's 
queen's knight was - at c3 or b1).
9 ct:JeS 0-0 10 b3! (the idea of delaying the 
development of the knight on b1 becomes 
clear: the open c-file gives White additional 
resources) 10...cxb3 11 'i:Vxb3
And here is a novelty! Black has far fewer 
problems after 11 axb3 lt:Jb4 (Hartston- 
Bennett, London 1978). The resulting unex­
plored position naturally put me on my 
guard.
11...Wb6?!
The exchange of queens gives White a 
slightly better ending. Two other continua­
tions, which occurred later, are more inter­
esting:
a) 
11...ctJa5 12 'i:Va4 a6 (12. ...te6!?), and 
here I was afraid of 13 i1.d2!, but after
13 ...ctJc4! 14 lt:Jxc4 b5 Black has an accept­
able position (15 'i:Va5 bxc4 16 'ixd8 l:txd8
17 i1.a5 l:!.d7 18 lt:Jc3 .td8! or 17...l:!.e8!? 18 
ctJc3 .;.e6 with equality), or 12 'iVd3!? g6 13 
tt:Jc3 Jtf5 14 'Wid2 (14 ^ 5  a6!) 14...11c8 15 
Jtg5 ctJc4 16 ct:Jxc4 l:!.xc4 with counterplay 
(Bischoff-Dittmar, Boblingen 1994);
453

Garry Kasparov on Garry Kasparov: Part One
b) 
11...jLd6!? (as yet the queen's knight 
has not come out to c3, attacking the d5- 
pawn, and Black tries to drive the other 
knight from the centre) 12 f4 (after 12 
'Llxc6?! bxc6 the effect of keeping the 
knight on b1 is lost) 12...'Lla5 (12... jLf5!?) 13 
'ifd3 (Klimov-Lasin, St. Petersburg 2003) 
13. ..g6!, and if 14 f5, then simply 14. ..'Llc6 
with approximate equality.
12 .l:i.cl!
Exploiting the absence of the knight 
from c3 (however, 12 ctJc3!? is also not bad). 
After 12 WUxb6 axb6 Black's activity would 
compensate for the spoiling of his pawn 
structure: 13 ctJc3 ..ie6 and ... Sfc8, or 13 
Hc1 'Llb4 14 'Llc3 jLf5 with equality. But 
now he is forced to exchange queens on b3, 
which activates the rook on a1.
l2...WUxb3 13 axb3 'Llb4
14ctJa3?!
An original move, temporarily prevent­
ing the development of the c8-bishop 
(because of M.c7), but the awkward position 
of the knight at a3 prevents White from 
exploiting the tempo gained. The natural
14 'Llc3 would have set Black quite difficult 
problems, for example:
a) 
14. ...Md8 (14. ....\le6? 15 'Llb5!) 15 'Llb5 
(15 'Lla4 il.f5!) 15. ..a6 16 'Llc7! (my earlier 
move 16 .Mc7 is worse because of 16 . .. . - f8!)
16...fib8 17 .: d2 ..if5 (17.....\ld6 18 .Ma4!) 18 
fia4 'Llc2 19 e3 il.d6 20 g4! 'Llxg4 21 'Llxd5 
with a continuing initiative;
b) 14. ..ii.f5 15 g4! il.e6 (the defence is 
more difficult after 15...il.xg4?! 16 'Llxg4 
'Llxg4 17 'Llxd5 'Llxd5 18 jLxd5 'Llxe3 19 
fxe3 flfd8 20 fic7 Hxd5 21 lxe 7) 16 g5 'Lle8
17 'Llb5 a6 18 il.d2 fib8 19 'Lla7!? f6 
(19...fla8 20 fla4!) 20 gxf6 gxf6 21 M.a4, and 
Black has not yet achieved full equality;
c) 14. ..a6 15 'Lla4! -i f5 16 'Llb6! (16 fic7 
il.d6 17 Hxb7 'Llc2 18 Sd1 is also not bad, 
but not my earlier suggestion 18 Bc1?! 
because of 18...'Llxe3! 19 fxe3 Sae8 with 
equality) 16 ...M.ad8 17 Sa4ctJd7 (17...'Llc2 18 
I g5) 18 'Llexd7 il.xd7 19 'Llxd7 flxd7 20 
ild 2 'Llc6 21 e3 with the two bishops and 
some advantage.
14...a6!
Emphasising that at a3 the knight stands 
worse than at c3. Now Black has a quite 
reasonable position.
15 il.d2 (15 ctJb5 il.f5! with equality, while if
15 'Llc2 the simplest is 15. ..'Llxc2 16 flxc2 
' d6!? 17 'Lld3 il.e6 18 'Llc5 Sfc8) 1S....Mb8
With the intention of seizing the initia­
tive by ... f5. Therefore White has to do 
something.
16 il.xb4!?
The start of a clever strategic plan, which
454

Challenger
I did not see through immediately. White 
exchanges his ineffective bishop for the 
important knight, which is fulfilling both 
defensive and attacking functions.
I6.....txb4 17 tt:d3 (at c5 the knight will 
immobilise Black's queenside) 17.....ltd6 
After obtaining the advantage ofthe two 
bishops, I did not want to part with them 
(the alternative was 17 . ..i.d2!? 18 l:!.c2 .ith6) 
and I was happy with my position, but I 
failed to take into account the static weak­
ness of the d5-pawn. But if I had discarded 
my prejudices and played 17. ...txa3, I could 
have equalised easily: 18 .l:!.xa3 ..tf5! (my 
Informator move 18.....tg4 is worse because 
of 19 f3!? i.f5  20 tt:Jc5 .l:!.fe8 21 'itf2) 19 b4 
(19 tt:Jc5 a5! and ...b7-b6) 19....l:!.bc8 20 l1ac3 
:txc3 21 Sxc3 .l:!.c8! 22 l:!.xc8+ (22 tt:Jc5 b6) 
22. ....txc8 23 tt:f4 ..te6 with a quick draw.
18 lt:Jc2
Unexpectedly for me, Korchnoi transfers 
his knight to e3, to intensify the pressure 
on the d5-pawn, and then advances b3-b4 
and supports his other knight at c5, or plays 
b4-b5. In this case, alas, Black has no real 
counterplay.
I8....tg 4
A futile waste of time: the place for this 
bishop is at e6. After 18. ...te6! 19 tt:e3 .l:!.fc8 
compared with the continuation in the
game Black would have had two extra 
tempi and he would have held the position 
without any problems, for example: 20 b4 
fixc1+ 21 .l:!.xc1 g6 22 .l:!.b1 .l:!.d8 23 tt:Jc5 ..tc8.
19 'itfl ..tfS?l
Another strange, 'futile' move. The obvi­
ous 19....l:!.fc8 20 tt:e3 ..te6 would have saved 
a tempo. After playing 19...-tf5 I offered a 
draw, but this was quite reasonably refused
- the initiative is now with White.
20 tt:JcS Hfc8
The panicky double exchange 20.....txc5?!
21 dxc5 ..ltxc2 22 Sxc2 would have con­
demned Black to a cheerless defence.
21lt:Je3 ..te6 22 b4 'itf8 23 .Mc2 'ite7
The weak 23. ..b6? would have allowed 24 
tt:Jxe6+ fxe6 25 Sxa6, winning a pawn:
25...J.xb4 26 .Jth3! 'ite7 27 .l:!.xc8 Sxc8 28 
Hxb6 .Jtd6 29 if5 !?  and J.d3.
24 'ite1 hs
A useful move with the hope of either 
initiating play on the kingside by ...h5-h4, or 
of possibly playing ...lt:Jg4.
In The Test of Time I criticised 24. ..b6(!?) 
in view of 25 lt:Jxa6 Sxc2 26 lt:Jxc2 Ha8(?!) 27 
b5 lt:Je4 28 .l:!.b1, but 26. ...l:!.c8! is more accu­
rate: 27 lt:Je3 (27 'itd2 tt:g4) 27 ...l:!.a8 28 Sa2 
(28 b5 J.b4+!) 28...Sc8 with compensation 
for the pawn (thanks to the poor position of 
the knight on a6). So that Black had an 
interesting opportunity to change the 
character of the play.
25 .Mb2 Hc7
Not hurrying with 25 ...h4 (for the mo­
ment this would have made little change). 
From c7 the rook defends the b7-pawn and 
keeps the knight at c5 under attack (in the 
event of b4-b5), while the other rook can be 
switched along the back rank to where the 
battle is the most intense.
26 tt:d3
After completing all his preparations, 
White has created the threat of b4-b5. At
455

Garry Kasparov on Garry Kasparov: Part One
this point I felt depressed, sensing that I 
had succumbed to the opponent's pressure.
26..J:ta8!
Now b4-b5 loses its strength because of 
... a6-a5. In my view, this was a turning 
point not only in the game, but also in the 
match: up until then all the events had 
been dictated by Korchnoi.
27 bS?!
Although he appreciated the riskiness of 
this step, Korchnoi could not deny himself 
the pleasure of winning a pawn. 27 fiba2 
with the idea of .Ma5 was stronger, for 
example:
a) 27..J:td8 28 .Ma5 l:tc3!? (threatening 
...Hxd3 and .....txb4) 29 Sb1 (of course, not
29 lt:Jxd5+? i.xd5 30 /-■ xd5 Bxd3 and wins) 
29. ....tc7 30 .Mc5 lt:Je4 31 ..txe4 flxc5 32 tt:Jxc5 
dxe4 33 .l:d1 ..td6! 34 d5 ..tc8 35 ltJc4 f5, 
and White's achievements are modest, or
28 b5!? axb5 29 fia5 i.d 7 (29. ..b4 30 ..txd5)
30 tt:Jxd5+ tt:Jxd5 31 ..txd4 .l:!.c4!? 32 e3! with 
some pressure;
b) 27 ...l:tc6!? (with the idea of ...Sb6) 28 
b5 Hb6 29 .ta5 g6, and Black's defences 
hold.
But my opponent, burning with a desire 
to achieve immediate gains, was over- 
hasty...
27...aS
With the threat of ...b7-b6. The situation 
has changed sharply: it is clear that White 
has taken on increased obligations.
28 b6 2c6 29 .tbs
29 l:ta4 is harmless: 29...Ha6 (29.....l:!.c3!?)
30 l:tb5 l:tcxb6 31 l:txb6 l:txb6 32 .l:txa5 ltJe4 
or 32.....tc7.
29...a4 (there is nothing else)
30 tt:JxdS+?!
30 
tt:Jc5?! i.xc5 31 dxc5 .tcc8! is also in 
Black's favour. But it was not yet too late to 
reconsider - the simplification after 30 
ltJb4! ..txb4+ 31 l:xb4 a3 32 l:tb3 a2 33 l:tb2 
'itd6 34 l:tbxa2 Bxa2 35 Hxa2 Bxb6 would 
have led to a draw.
30...tt:JxdS 31 i.x d s i.x d s 32 flxds .Mxb6 33 
l:txhs
And so, White has won the longed-for 
pawn, but in return he has granted the 
opponent two connected passed pawns on 
the queenside and excellent counterplay. In 
the end, Korchnoi's downfall was caused by 
his eternal penchant for material! However, 
he can have had no great desire to suffer 
for free after 33 e4 l:tb3 34 'itd2 (not my 
earlier variation 34 e5?! ..ta3!) 34...i.b4+!? 
(34..b5 35 I c 1 !; 34. ..g6 35 f4!) 35 tt:Jxb4 
Ix b 4  36 'itc3, 33 ...a3 34 ..l:!.a2, or 33 ... g6 34 
'itd2, with chances of blocking the powerful 
black pawns.
456

Challenger
The subsequent moves, up to the 40th, 
were made in a time scramble (which was 
more acute for Korchnoi).
33 ...Sb3?!
With the tempting idea of advancing the 
b-pawn. However, both 33 ...i.b4+!? 34 Wd1
i.c3, and 33. ..g6!? 34 J:i.g5 i.b4+ or 34 
l:!.d5(h4) a3 came into consideration.
34 Wd2
The less obvious 34 Wd1!? would have 
enabled White to parry 34. ..b5 (nothing is 
changed by the inclusion of 34... g6 35 J:i.g5) 
with the simple 35 tt:Jc1, with the perpetual 
pursuit of the rook.
34... bS (now after 34. ..g6 35 Bg5 the king 
would have been brought up to the defence
- 36 Wc2 with equality) 35 h4?!
35 
e4? did not work in view of 35. ...l:tc8 36 
e5 i.b4+ 37 tt:Jxb4 fixb4, when the black 
pawns are irresistible. But accurate equality 
could still have been secured by the psycho­
logically difficult move 35 l:!.c1!, for exam­
ple: 35 . ..b4 (35 ...g6 36 fig 5) 36 Sb5! a3 37 
i c 2! l:!.c3+ 38 Wb1.
35....1:tc8
Although this suggests itself, 35 ...i.b4+!? 
came into consideration.
36 g4?
Another 'natural' time-trouble move. In 
fact it was essential to play 36 fig 5! g6 37
g4 (37 h5(?!), given in The Test of Time, is 
worse because of 37. ..gxh5 38 fixh5 :.c4) 
37 ...a3 
38 
h5!, 
37...Wf6 
38 
tt:Jc5, 
or
37. . .Scc3(c4) 38 We3 Wf6 39 f4 with double­
edged play.
36...a3! 37 f4
Black now has a winning position; thus,
37 fig 5 did not save White in view of
37...b4! 38 fib5 l:i.c4! 39 e3 Wd7, and if 40 
h5, then 40...J:i.cc3! 41 tt:Jxb4 Bc4!.
37...ficc3?!
With the erroneous idea of sacrificing 
the exchange on d3, which in time-trouble 
seemed very promising to me. However, it 
is unwise to undertake such committing 
and unforced operations just before the 
time control. For the moment Black needs 
both his rooks, and therefore 37. ..l:!.c4! was 
more accurate - after 38 We3 l:tc2! 39 l:th8 
b4 40 fia8 fibc3 and ...b4-b3 or 38 e3 b4 39 
l:!.b5 Wd7! 40 l:!.c5!? i.xc5 41 tt:Je5+ We6 42 
tt:Jxc4 fic3! 43 dxc5 fixc4 the a- and b- 
pawns would have decided matters, while 
after 38 fid5 (other rook moves are met by 
...b5-b4) 38. ..We6 39 e4 .l:!.cc3 40 tt:Jc5+ i xc5 
41 l:!.xc5 l:!.h3! White comes under attack.
38 fids (38 Bh8 b4 39 l:!.a8 l:tc4! would 
hardly have been any more resilient)
38...We6 39 l:!.hS
39...b4?
457

Garry Kasparov on Garry Kasparov: Part One
But this is a serious error, allowing the 
rook at h5 to come into play. It was not yet 
too late to bring the rook back - 39..fic4i, 
retaining every chance ofwinning.
Previously I thought that after the im­
mediate 39..l'1xd3+(?i) 40 exd3 it.xf4+ 41 
'it>e2 l:b2+! (41.....id6 42 'it>e3!) 42 'it>f3 it.d6 
‘Black could have set his opponent insolu­
ble problems', but here too White is saved 
by the switching of his rook from h5 to the 
a-file: 43 d5+! 'it'd7 44 :l:h8 b4 45 .l4a8 .l4c2
46 'it>e4 .l4g2 (46 ...'it>c7 47 Sa6!) 47 Sa7+ 
'it>d8 48 .Ucl! (with the ideas of .l4c6 and 
l:!.a8+) or 45 ....ite5 46 d4i ..ixd4 47 'it>e4 ..ic3
48 l:!.dl with equality.
40 Sa5 fixd3+
Now this is the only winning chance, not 
counting the other exchange sacrifice -
40...Sb2+ 41 lt:Jxb2 ..ixf4+ (41...axb2?i 42 
f5+!) 42 e3 ..ixe3+ 43 'it>e2 axb2 44 flb l with 
a probable draw: 44...i.xd4 45 l:txb2 lie3+
46 'id2 .i:g3 47 l:tbl or 44...it.cl 45 l:.b5 b3
46 d5+ (46 h5 f6i) 46...'it>e5(d6) 47 Sb7 'it>xd5
48 Sxf7 Se3+ 49 'it>dl etc.
41 exd3
Here the game was adjourned, and I 
sealed the obvious move.
41.....ixf4+
After a detailed analysis it became clear 
that the position was one of dynamic
balance: as a counter to the passed pawns, 
White creates play against the enemy king. 
Of course, I was upset about the missed 
win. But Korchnoi, apparently also thinking 
that a draw was not far off, did not analyse 
the position thoroughly enough, and on the 
resumption interesting events occurred.
42 'ite2 fic3!
With the idea of ...i.c l, shutting in the 
rook on a l and preparing ... b4-b3. 42 ...-'4b2+
43 'lif3 i.d 2  is too slow in view of 44 'it>e4 
..ic3 45 Ila6+ rtie7 46 S fli followed by 'it>d5 
and l:!.a7+, while the ‘subtle' 42.....ic7?i 
allows a counterattack - 43 Sa6+ .itd6 (or
43 ... 'id5?!) 44 l:tcli or 43 ...'it>d7 44 l:tfl!.
43 g5?!
In our analysis we did not seriously con­
sider this move. A straightforward draw 
would have been ensured by 43 'it>f3 ..ic l (it 
is no better to play 43...itd6(d2) 44 rtie4,
43.....1c7 44 Sa4, or 43...Scl 44 l:tlxa3i) 44 
'ie 4  'itd6 45 .l4a6+ 'it>c7 46 d5 or 45...'it>d7 46 
Ha7+ etc. But when resuming a game 
Korchnoi always like to try and startle his 
opponent with an unexpected move...
43.....1c1! 44 h5 b3 (forcing White to return 
the exchange) 45 .I:t5xa3 ..ixa3 46 l:txa3 b2
47 fla6+ 'it>f5 48 Sb6 (it was not possible to 
save the pawns - 48 Sa5+? 'it>f4! 49 l:tb5 
l:!.c2+) 48 ...l:tc2+ 49 'it>e3 'it>xg5
458

Challenger
In this sharp ending, which demands 
precise calculation by both sides, White is 
running considerably greater risks.
50 d5l
The most energetic. White is saved by a 
miracle after 50 l:i.b5+ f5 (or 50...it>f6!? 51 
l:tb6+! r;e7 52 d5) 51 d5 <it>xh5 52 d6 l1c5 53 
lxb 2  2d5 54l:i.b6 g5 55 d4 'it>g4 56 Sc6 (56 
'>t>d3? 'it>f3) 56...'it>g3 57 Sc5! Sxd6 58 Sxf5 
with a draw.
50...r;xh5 51 4d4 (51 d6?! is too risky:
51...5.6! 52 Sxb2 Sxd6 53 2f2 f6 54 d4 g5) 
51. ..g5 (51. . .'it>g4 52 Sb7!) 52 Sb8
In order to activate his passed pawn. 52 
r;e5 g4 53 d6 Sc5+! 54 'it>f4! or 52. ..Se2+ 53 
r;f5 l:tf2+ 54 <it>e5 f6+ 55 ^e6 'it>g6 56 d6 
l:te2+ 57 'it>d5 'it>f7 58 Sb8 etc. would also 
have led to a draw.
52...g4 53 d6
Here I stopped to think...
53...l:,c6!?
The last chance of achieving a turning- 
point. I saw that after 53. .Jc 8  54 l:txb2 (54 
Sxc8? b 1 'i 55 d7 'ib6+ 56 &c3 'it'a5+ 57 
r;c4 'i¥a4+ and ...iVxd7) 54...g3 55 &e3! 
White would succeed in eliminating the 
danger - 55 ...'it>g4 56 l:tb4+ 'it>h3 57 Sb5 or 
immediately 57 '1t>f3 with an inevitable 
draw.
54 r;e5!
Black's idea consisted in 54 ^d5 l:tc8! 55 
fixb2? g3 56 d7 (56 &e4 'it>g4) 56...l:td8 57 
r;d6 f5 58 &e7 l:txd7+ 59 <it>xd7 f4, when the 
pawns cannot be stopped. But after 55 5xc8!! 
b 1'i 56 d7 White is nevertheless saved bythe 
threat of d7-d8'\W - 56...'iVb5+! (56 ...'it'xd3+ 57 
'it>c6 iVc4+ 58 '>t>d6 with a draw) 57 ^d6 lWh6+
58 ^e7 'iVe6+ 59 ^d8 g3 (if 59...'iVe5 there is 
the saving 60 d4! 'i:Vxd4 61 'it>e7 with a draw) 
60 r;c7, for example:
a) 60...'iVe7 (60... g2 61 fl.h8+ and d8'iV) 61 
l:te8! "i:Vc5+ 62 'it>b7 'ifd5+ 63 'it>c7 f5 64 d8'1W 
"i:Vxd8+ 65 I:txd8 f4 66 .l:.g8 with a draw;
b) 60...'iVe5+ 61 'it>c6 g2 (61...'ic3+ 62 
r;b7 #b4+ 63 'it>c7 with a draw) 62 d8'iV 
'Wie6+ (62 ...g1'iV? 63 ^ 8 + !) 63 'it>b7 g1'iV 64 
'Wih8+ "i:Vh6 65 'ife5+ 'it'gg5 66 '1We2+! (not 66 
^i2+? Wg6 67 l:tg8+ 'it>h7 or 67 fl.c6+ f6)
66...'ih4 (66 ... 'ifg4 67 Sc5+) 67 "iVh2+ &g4 
68 'i!Vg2+ (68 fl.c4+? f
 68..it>h5 69 'ir'e2+ 
with perpetual check in this position with a 
rare material balance.
54....!:i.c5+
55 '>t>f6?!
Playing with fire! Korchnoi’s idea is hard 
to understand: surely he wasn't looking for 
winning chances?! 55 'it>d4 l:tc8 56 l:txb2 
was simpler with a clear draw, as in the 
variation from the note to Black's 53rd 
move.
459

Garry Kasparov on Garry Kasparov: Part One
55. ..g3! 56 Sxb2 Sd5 57 &xf7 l:l.xd6 58 Sd2 
'ig 4
After speedily passing the second time 
control, White again faces a difficult choice.
59 d4!
The only move: White would have lost 
after 59 rtie7? Sd4! 60 'it>e6 'ltf4!. But now 
he can give up his rook for the g-pawn, 
since for the d-pawn Black will have to pay 
the same price.
59...^ 5!?
This cunning route for the king sets 
White new problems, whereas 59 ...'it>f4 
would have allowed him a simple draw: 60 
'ie7 l:tg6 (6o....l:id5 61 We6) 61 Sg 2! rtie4 62 
ci;f7 l:tg4 63 ci;e6(f6) Wxd4 64 rtif5. The 
amount of work carried out by the black 
king during the resumption is impressive!
60 We7 Sd5 61 l:d3! (the only way: 61 Sg2? 
Wf4 62 .l'ld2 rtie4 63 Sg2 rtif3 64 Sd2 g2 and 
wins) 61. ..rtif4 62 rtie6 Sg5
63 d5?
A fatal mistake when literally a step 
away from a draw - 63 Sdl! g2 (63 ...flg6+
64 rtif7 Sd6 65 rtie7) 64 Sg1 rtie4 65 d5 
I:!.g6+ 66 'it>f7 or 63...'ie4 64 d5! Sg6+ 
(64. ..I:!.e5+ 65 rtid6 g2 66 Sel+  rtid4 67 
i:tdl+) 65 'it>e7! rtie5 66 d6 Sg7+ 67 'if8  l:td7 
68 Sd3 rtif4 69 Sd4+, when a peaceful 
outcome is inevitable (69...'ie3 70 Sg4 'if3
71 l:i.g6 g2 72 Sf6+ 'it>e2 73 Sg6 or 69..rtif3 
70 fld3+ rtig4 71 rtie8 g 2 72 S d l).
Korchnoi splendidly conducted a difficult 
defence, but at the very end he no longer 
had the strength to find the last accurate 
move.
63 ....:.g6+! 
(denying the opponent the 
illusory hope of interposing a check -
63 . ..g2? 64 Sd4+! 'it>e3 65 S d l with a draw)
64 'it>e7
Or 64 e;t>f7 g2 65 Sd1 Sd6 66 'it>e7 Sxd5 
67 l:i.xd5 gl'iY and wins.
64...g2 65 I:!.d1 rtie5! (as they say in such 
cases, the rest is a matter of technique) 66 
d6 I:!.e6+ 67 rtid7 l:!xd6+ 68 l:!xd6 g 1 f 69 
I:!.e6+ 'lt>f5 70 l:!d6 'i¥a7+ 71 'id8 rtie5 72 gg6 
'i¥a5+ 73 'it>d7 'ia4+ 74 rt;e7 Wh4+! 75 rtrf8 
#d8+ 76 rtif7 rtif5 77 Sh6 #d7+ 78 rtrf8 'it>g5 
0-1
And so, to the surprise of both players, 
the match score became equal:3-3. The 
psychological initiative was now on my 
side. Korchnoi's oversight in such a signifi­
cant game (and after so much effort!) broke 
his will and undermined his confidence and 
composure. 5uch a defeat was too cruel a 
trial, even for a highly-experienced fighter. 
Besides, Korchnoi was bound to sense that I 
was gradually gaining in confidence and 
that the time was not far off when I would 
be operating at full strength.
However, it should not be forgotten that 
in the semi-final match of the previous 
cycle with Polugayevsky (1980). after a 
crushing defeat in the 12th, concluding 
game, Korchnoi nevertheless managed to 
snatch victory in the additional games. 
Indeed, when a player is behind, he aims in 
the first instance to level the scores, and on 
achieving his aim he often relaxes involun­
tarily, although the entire struggle still lies 
ahead. Therefore only the 7th game could
460

Challenger
decide how real were the changes that had 
occurred during the course of this bitter 
struggle.
I think that Korchnoi made a mistake by 
not taking a time-out after his defeat in the 
6th game. The 7th game was scheduled to 
be played the following day, less than 24 
hours later. Memories of the disaster dur­
ing the adjournment session were still too 
fresh, and my opponent looked depressed.
Game 89 
G.Kasparov-V.Korchnoi
Semi-Final Candidates Match, 
7th game, London, 6.12.1983 
Catalan Opening E04
1 d4 li:Jf6 2 c4 e6 3 g3 d5 4 ..ig2
The favourite opening of Korchnoi him­
self, whereas before the match I had em­
ployed it only once - against Andersson 
(Niksic 1983), and that when I knew almost 
for sure which system of defence my oppo­
nent would choose.
4...dxc4 5 li:Jf3
5.....id7!?
Korchnoi did not arrive for the game 
empty-handed. The effusive Miguel Najdorf 
tried to convince everyone in the press
centre that he had played this 50 years 
earlier. But in the early 1980s this move had 
not found its way into the Encyclopaedia of 
Chess Openings and for me it was a novelty, 
which I had to figure out at the board.
It would have been naive to hope that 
my opponent would repeat the dubious 
experiment from the 5th game, where after
5...c5 6 0-0 li:Jbd7?! (avoiding the main lines 
with 6...li:Jc6 7 'i!Va4 cxd4 8 li:Jxd4 'i!Vxd4 9 
l:i.dl, as in the aforementioned game with 
Andersson, or 7 tt:Je5 ..td7 8 li:Ja3 cxd4 9 
lt:Jaxc4, Kasparov-Andersson, 1st and 3rd 
match games, Belgrade 1985) 7 li:Ja3 li:Jb6 8 
lt:Jxc4 lt:Jxc4 9 'i!Va4+ ..id7 10 11Vxc4 White 
gained a small but enduring advantage.
In the 9th game Korchnoi chose another 
little-studied continuation - 5 ...li:Jbd7 6 0-0 
l:tb8?!. But this plan was familiar to me 
from a training game with Vladimirov 
(1982), and after 7 a4 b6 8 li:Jfd2! e5!? 9 
lt:Jxc4! exd4 10 11Vxd4 ..ic5 11 'iWd3 0-0 12 
li:Jc3 ..ib7 13 ..ixb7 l:txb7 14 'iWf3 'ia 8  15 
..tf4 White gained the initiative.
6 'iWc2
On encountering a surprise, I decided for 
safety's sake to regain the gambit pawn 
immediately. 
Apparently, 
in 
my 
sub­
conscious the thought occurred to me: 'The 
scores are level - is it worth taking an un­
necessary risk?i' Significantly more compli­
cated play results from 6 li:Jbd2 ..tb4 (Sos- 
onko-Korchnoi, Wijk aan Zee 1984; Zurich
1984) or the most critical line 6 tt:Je5 ..ic6 7 
tt:Jxc6 lt:Jxc6 8 0-0 (8 Wa4 Wd7!, Hulak- 
Korchnoi, Sarajevo 1984) 8...'i!Vd7 9 e3!? (9 
li:Jc3 li:Jxd4 10 ..ib7 .l:Ib8 11 ..ig2 ..te7 with 
equality, 
Yusupov-Karpov, 
Belfort 
1988)
9..1:tb8 10 'i!Ve2 b5 11 b3! cxb3 12 axb3 with 
good compensation for the pawn (Beliavsky- 
Karpov, 55th USSR Championship, Moscow 
1988). It was because of this that the move
5.....1d7 did not become widely established.
461

Garry Kasparov on Garry Kasparov: Part One
6...cS!
7 0-0
Again a solid, but rather insipid move. 7 
tt:Je5 is harmless in view of 7...tt:Jc6! (Va- 
ganian-Portisch, 3rd match game, Saint 
John 1988), but chances of gaining an 
advantage were offered by 7 'ixc4!? - this 
position was reached by transposition in 
the 8th game, and after 7....tc6 8 dxc5 
tt:Jbd7 9 .te3 .id5! 10 'Wia4 .ic6  11 'Wic4 .id5
12 1^4 'ic8  (12 . ..a5! with equality) 13 tLlc3 
.txc5 14 .txc5 'Wixc5 15 tt:Jxd5 tt:Jxd5 16 'Wid2 
l:!.c8 17 o-o o-o 18 Hac1 'Wib6 19 'Wid4 Hfd8
20 .l:!.fd1 'ixd 4  21 tt:Jxd4 White had a slight 
edge.
7 ....tc6 8 'ixc4  tt:Jbd 7
The opening has turned out favourably 
for Black - he has achieved the maximum 
he can hope for in the Catalan: his minor 
pieces are controlling the centre, and the 
advanced position of the white queen gives 
him tempi for development. It is already 
White who has to play accurately.
9.tgS
9 
tLlc3 is satisfactorily answered by the 
energetic 9 ...b5 10 'id 3  b4 11 tLlb1 i. e4 
(Kochiev-Lputian, Pavlodar 1982) or the 
developing 9...Hc8 (Bacrot-Korchnoi, Odessa 
(rapid) 2007).
9...Sc8
9...cxd4 10 tt:Jxd4 .txg2 11 '4>xg2 §.e7 was 
simpler, with equality (Lerner-Dorfman, 
Tallinn 1983), since now White creates a 
certain lack of harmony in the opponent's 
position.
10 .txf6!?
A somewhat unexpected but quite justi­
fied exchange of bishop for knight: 10 tt:Jc3 
cxd4 (10. ..b5!?) is harmless. All the same the 
bishop has no future, and in addition each 
of the three possible recaptures has its 
drawbacks. Korchnoi hesitated for about 
half an hour, but in the end safety consid­
erations outweighed, and he went in for 
simplification.
10...tLlxf6?!
The most natural continuation - and the 
least good! After 10. ..gxf6!? Black's two 
bishops compensate for the defects of his 
pawn 
structure 
(Inkiov-Pinter, 
Zagreb 
Interzonal 1987). But from the standpoint 
of seizing the initiative, the best was
10...'ixf6! 11 tLlc3 .te7 - this recommenda­
tion of mine was analysed in lnformator 
Volume 36.
11 dxcS .txf3
It is a pity to part with this strong bishop, 
of course, but without detriment to the 
position the pawn cannot be regained:
11...'id5 12 'Wixd5 tt:Jxd5 (12....txd5 13 b4)
462

Challenger
13 tt:ld4 (there is also no rapid equality after
13 Itc1 ..td7 14 tt:lc3 tt:lxc3 15 lixc3 l:xc5 16 
Bxc 5 ..txc5 17 tt:le 5) 13..i.xc5 14 tt:lxc6 bxc6 
(14...Sxc6?! 15 tt:lc3) 15 tt:ld2, or 1 1 ... 1 xc5 12 
'ixc5 ..txf3 13 'ib 5+ 
c6 14 gxc6+ bxc6 15 
'ia4, and thanks to the weakness of the c6- 
pawn White's chances are slightly better.
12 ii.xf3 gxcS
It only remains for Black to castle, in or­
der to feel completely safe. At this moment
I 
noticed that Korchnoi, expecting that 
peace 
negotiations would soon begin, 
relaxed somewhat. But it turns out that 
even such a seemingly lifeless position 
conceals a number of subtleties.
13 'iVb S + (little is promised by 13 e3 'iVd7 14 
Wb3 0-0 15 tt:lc3 lic7) 13...'id7 14 tt:lc3!
White completes his development with 
gain of tempo, whereas Black is still faced 
with the problem of defending his queen- 
side.
14...®xb5
Black himself is forced to activate the 
enemy knight: after 14... 0-0?! 15 'ixb7! 
'i¥xb7 
16 
..itxb7 
l:.b8 
17 
..ia6! 
g d4 
(17. ...:xb2? 18 tt:la4 Sc2 19 gd3!) 18 Sfd1
ii.xc3 19 bxc3 tt:le4 20 Sd7 
21 Sc7 
tt:ld5 22 l!xa7 White has an obvious advan­
tage.
15 tt:lxbs rt;e7
After the exchange of queens the black 
king has taken up a comfortable position in 
the centre of the board, and it would seem 
that no dangers should be anticipated.
Black is satisfied with 16 ..txb7?! l4b8 17
ii.a6 (17 l:r.ac1 ? Sxb7 18 1xc5 tt:ld7 19 fig5 
h6 and wins) 17 ...Sb6 18 Sac1 tt:ld7 19 
l:lxb2 or 16 I1ac1 , b6!? (16. ..tt:ld5 will also 
do) 17 ..ixb7 .:x c 1 18 l:.xc1 tt:lg4 19 e3 
tt:lxe3!. But the tempo available to White 
can be used more effectively.
16 b4!
An original decision, called by Petrosian 
'an oasis, unexpectedly found in a barren 
desert'. In itself this move is not so strong, 
but its psychological effect was enormous: 
Korchnoi became nervous - instead of the 
expected draw offer the opponent set him a 
new problem!
16...ii.xb4
16.....tb6? is dangerous, not because of
17 ..ixb7 :tc4 18 a3 tt:lg4! 19 e3 Sb8 20 i.f3  
tt:le5 21 ..ie2 .:c2 22 t d1 l!d2 with active 
play for the pawn, but in view of 17 a4! a6
18 a5 ii.O  19 ^ xb7! axb5 20 l!ac1, and for 
the passed a-pawn Black has to give up a 
piece.
17 tt:lxa7 l:lc7?
A blunder, which can only be explained 
by extreme nervous tension. 
17...l:!.a8!
463

Garry Kasparov on Garry Kasparov: Part One
would have maintained the balance, for 
example: 18 lLlbS .l:!.a5 19 a4 .l:!.c8! (more 
active than my Informator suggestion
19....l:!.b8: after 20 ..ixb7 Bc4! the a4-pawn is 
lost), or 18 Hfb1 .l:!.xa7 19 .l:!.xb4 Sb8 20 a4, 
and in The Test of Time I wrote that 'Black 
faces a gruelling defence', but in fact the 
a4-pawn is also weak and after 20. ..b6 
followed by ...l2Jd7 White has no real 
chances of success.
18 Sfc1!
It would appear that Korchnoi underes­
timated this move, thinking that Black had 
the reply 18 ...Bhc8. It is not often that one 
sees 
scattered 
pieces 
coordinating 
so 
successfully: it suddenly turns out to be 
impossible to defend the b7-pawn!
18....l:!.d7?
But this is already confusion. All the 
same the b7-pawn cannot be saved, but 
one pair of rooks should have been ex­
changed - 18....l:!.xc1+ 19 .l:!.xc1, although 
after 19...l2Jd5 20 .i.xd5 exd5 21 .l:!.c7+ f
22 .l:!.xb7 or 19 ....l:i.a8 20 .l:!.c7+ 'it>f8 21 .l:!.xb7 
..ic5 22 l2Jc6 ..id6 (after 22 ...Hxa2? 23 lZJe5! 
the 
f7-point 
comes 
under 
pressure:
23 . ...l:i.a7? is not possible because of 24 
.l:!.b8+!) 23 Ba7 Sxa7 24 l2Jxa7 Black's fur­
ther plan, in the words of Nikitin, 'would 
have resembled slow torture before the
carrying out of the death sentence'. And yet 
here there would still have been chances of 
a draw, whereas now they quickly evapo­
rate.
19 Sab1 (the extra pawn, activity of his 
rooks and the unexpected vulnerability of 
the black king on e7 make White's advan­
tage decisive) 19.....id2 20 .l:!.c2 .l:!.hd8
21 ..ixb7!
The right way: there is point in going in 
for simplification. In just five moves the 
position has changed beyond recognition - 
Black's queenside has been devastated, and 
his pieces are unable to coordinate their 
actions. The outcome of the game is de­
cided, but on his way to winning White still 
had to overcome the fierce resistance of an 
opponent who had absolutely no desire to 
lose a second game in a row.
21...'it>f8 (this retreat from the centre is 
forced) 22 lLlc6 Sc7
There is no longer any choice: if 22 ...Be8 
White wins easily by 23 lLle5 .l:!.dd8 24 .l:!.c7, 
to say nothing of 24 l2Jc4 ..ih6 25 a4 or the 
immediate 23 a4!.
23 Sbb2!
Inspired by such a turn of events, I made 
the most accurate moves, as they now say 
'following the first line of the computer'.
23 ....l:!.d6
464

Challenger
Again 
the 
most 
resilient move. 
If
2 3..M.d5, then 24 e4! l2lxe4 25 CDa7(d4) and 
wins. After 23-...l:!.dd7 24 ltJe5! Black also 
suffers further loss of material: 24....l:!.e7 25 
..ic6i ga5 26 Bb5 etc.
24a4!
The time has come for the swift advance 
of the passed pawn. The main thing is not 
to be in a hurry to disentangle the amusing 
cluster of pieces: thus 24 .l:!.xd2?! .l:!.xd2 25 
Bxd2 Bxb7 would have given Black some 
saving chances.
24. ...ie l (a desperate attempt to divert 
White's attention from the queenside, if 
only for an instant) 25 .Mb1
The threat of ...CDg4 could have been ig­
nored: after 25 a5 l2lg4 26 a6! ..ixf2+ 27 
'it>g2 White would also have won (27. ...ia7
28 l2lxa7 l2le3+ 29 'it>f2 l2lxc2 30 ltJb5 etc.). 
But I firmly decided not to allow Black the 
slightest counter-chances.
25...121d5 (still hoping to go fishing in trou­
bled waters) 26 ..ia8
White does not rush, and just in case he 
gains time by repeating moves.
26...5c8 27 i.b 7 Bc7 28 Bc4!
This accurate manoeuvre effectively puts 
an end to all Black's hopes. Now it is the 
turn of the a-pawn.
28...121e7 (an attempt to exchange the
knights, when it might be possible to save 
the ending with opposite-colour bishops)
29 ctJeS!
Again the best move, although the fol­
lowing elegant line was also sufficient: 29 
a5 l2lxc6 30 a6 ..ia5 31 l:!.xc6 Bdxc6 32 ..ixc6 
(32 a7? Sa6 33 ..ixa6 Sxa7 with a draw)
32 ...l:!.a7 33 ..ib7 and wins.
29.....1a5 30 fib5
A simple combination - 30 Sxc7 ..ixc7 31 
a5! ..ixa5 32 CDc4 ..ic7 33 ltJxd6 ..ixd6 34 
B d l - would have led to a technically won 
endgame. But White, not concerning him­
self with material gains, paves the way for 
his a-pawn with an 'iron hand'.
30...1tJg6 (again trying for the exchange!) 31 
l2lc6
The knight is back where it started, but 
now Black does not have even a hint of 
counterplay. 31 Sxa5 Sxb7 32 ctJc6 was also 
strong.
31. 
..l:!.d1+ 32 'it>g2 ..ie l
33 a5
The unexpected 33 ..ia6i would have 
won more spectacularly after 33...'it>g8 34 
Bb8+ ltJf8 35 ..ib5 g6 (35. ...l:!.a1? 36 l2le7+! 
.Mxe7 37 Bxf8+i, mating) 36 a5 etc.
33...l2le7 34 a6 l2lxc6
If 34....l:!.a1, then 35 ltJa5 and 36 a7!. The 
knight, which has caused Black so much
465

Garry Kasparov on Garry Kasparov: Part One
trouble, has nevertheless been exchanged, 
but the a-pawn is already too far ad­
vanced...
35 Sxc6 Sxc6 36 .txc6 S a l (opposite-colour 
bishops often favour the weaker side, but 
here the black bishop presents a pitiful 
spectacle) 37 Sb8+ 'lie7 38 Iib7+ rtid6
In the event of 38...:;t>f6 39 a7 and .:!.d7 
Black would have had to part with a whole 
rook.
39 ..ib5 .tc3 40 Sxf7
Here Korchnoi could have resigned, but 
he decided to drink the bitter cup right to 
the bottom.
40.....tf6 41 .Ud7+ Wc5 42 ..td3 h6 43 .l:ib7 
Sa3 44 a7 4d5 45 f3 rtid6 (instant death) 46 
.l:!.b6+ 1-0
In view of l:ta6 (after all the bold a-pawn 
achieves its cherished goal!).
Thus within literally 24 hours the match 
had been turned on its head. The roles were 
reversed: the chasing player had become 
the leader (4-3), and the recent leader had 
fallen behind. Two successive defeats were 
enough to unsettle anyone, even the most 
experienced match fighter. It was no sur­
prise that at this point Korchnoi made use 
of his one time-out. The changed situation 
obliged him to go on to the offensive, but, 
on the other hand, the time for taking 
reckless risks had not yet arrived.
In the 8th game Korchnoi remained true 
to his initially chosen strategy and pinned 
his hopes on the endgame (cf. Game No.89, 
note to White’s 7th move), but without 
success - a draw on the 40th move. This 
unpretentious duel also played a signifi­
cant role: whereas Korchnoi could have 
regarded his failure in the 7th game as 
accidental, the draw in a better endgame in 
the 8th game clearly showed that it was 
unpromising to continue his strategy of
simplification.
And in the 9th game Korchnoi went in 
for complicated play in a Catalan middle- 
game (cf. Game No.89, note to Black's 5th 
move). But the psychological initiative was 
now on my side, I had more strength left, 
and an open battle led to a crushing defeat 
for Black on the 30th move. As if to confirm 
Korchnoi's description of me given before 
the match, the finish of this game resem­
bled the direct knock-out blow of a boxer. 
True, in a chess match one 'knock-out' is 
not enough for overall victory...
In a desperate situation, trailing by 'mi­
nus two', Korchnoi nevertheless found the 
strength to continue the fight, and the 10th 
game became the fiercest in the match. On 
this occasion my opponent avoided the 
Catalan in favour of the Queen's Gambit. I 
chose the Tartakower-Makogonov-Bonda- 
revsky Variation (cf. Game No.20, note to 
Black's 11th move) and in wild complica­
tions I parried the last attack by the 
'wounded animal'.
The score became 6-4, and I only needed 
another half point. However, I wanted to 
conclude the match not with a full-stop, 
but an exclamation mark! The situation 
obliged Korchnoi to complicate the play, 
and after 1 d4 4Jf6 2 c4 e6 3 g3 instead of
3 ...d5 he chose 3...c5 4 d5 exd5 5 cxd5 b5 
(also avoiding 5 ...d6: my opponent pre­
ferred to play this set-up with White - 
Game No. 78) 6 .tg2 d6, but the unexpected 
7 b4! (7 tbf3 is more solid: 7... g6 8 4Jfd2 
4Jbd7 9 lDc3 a6, Portisch-Korchnoi, Olym­
piad, Lucerne 1982) 7 ... 4Ja6 (the 'Benko 
Gambit' 7...cxb4 8 a3! bxa3 9 lbxa3 favours 
White, 
Zaichik-Vladimirov, 
Krasnoyarsk
1981) 8 bxc5 4Jxc5 9 CLlf3 followed by lbd4- 
c6 enabled White to seize the initiative and 
win on the 32nd move - 7-4!
Thus on 16th December 1983 this victory
466

Challenger
in the semi-final Candidates match con­
cluded an important stage in my chess 
career, which had given me valuable ex­
perience in match play. That same day, by 
gaining a draw, Smyslov confidently won 
his match against Ribli - 61/ 2-41/ 2. There was 
something symbolic about the fact that 
both Soviet grandmasters, who had been 
disqualified in the summer, in the end 
became the finalists in the Candidates 
cycle.
Robert Byrne: 'The impetuous youthfrom  
the Caucasus showed staggering patience 
and 
composure, 
displaying 
wonderful 
psychological stability in a difficult situa­
tion. In the course of the match he was able 
to readjust and, curbing his imagination, 
acquire a taste fo r the simple positions 
imposed by his opponent with a small 
number of pieces, fo r which Kasparov al­
ways harboured a dislike.'
Raymond Keene: 'Kasparov played like 
Karpov, mainly exploiting his opponent's 
mistakes. He is by nature a skilful and re­
sourceful player, but in this match he has 
shown little of his true skill.'
Viktor Korchnoi: ‘After the 6th game I lost 
faith in my technique and my seconds. The 
score was equal, but psychologically the 
match was lost. M y pre-match impression of 
Kasparov as a player with one knock-out 
punch was wrong. Kasparov is very practical 
fo r his age. He takes risks only when he is 
sure that they arejustified.'
Some western commentators suggested 
that I should thank Korchnoi for accelerat­
ing my chess development and for helping 
me to grasp the subtleties of positional 
play. Indeed, the benefit from this match 
with an exceptionally strong opponent is 
hard to overestimate. For me, a 20-year-old 
youth, it was a kind maturity test. Ahead 
lay the most difficult trials, and not only at
the chess board...
On the results of 1983, thanks to my 
wins in the matches with Beliavsky and 
Korchnoi, and also the super-tournament in 
Niksic, 
I 
received my 
second 
‘Oscar'. 
Journalists gave me 984 votes, and the 
world champion Karpov - 918. By the end 
of the year my rating was now higher than 
Karpov's - the first time this had happened 
in the entire post-Fischer decade!
Match with Smyslov
Final Candidates Match Kasparov - Smyslov 
(Vilnius, 9th March - 11th April 1984): 8V2- 
41/2.
Vilnius, the White Hall in the Art Mu­
seum. It was here in the spring of 1984 that 
the final Candidates match took place, 
between two opponents who bore abso­
lutely no resemblance to each other. During 
the match one of them celebrated his 63rd 
birthday, while immediately after it the 
other celebrated his 21st. Before the start of 
the Candidates series people were asking: 
'What chance do they have at that age?!' 
The evergreen Vasily Smyslov had to show 
that he still had sufficient strength for a 
fierce and uncompromising battle, while I 
had to find some other qualities to com­
pensate for my lack of experience. The 
Interzonal Tournament, the quarter-final 
and the semi-final were for each of us a 
victory against time. The age limits for the 
contenders for the crown were stretching in 
both directions at once.
Smyslov's competitive feats staggered the 
imagination: after passing through the 
crucible of fighting Botvinnik for many 
years, he became world champion six years 
before I was born, and a quarter of a century 
later he reached the final Candidates match! 
This was a genuine sensation! Towards the
467

Garry Kasparov on Garry Kasparov: Part One
end of his brilliant career it appeared that 
the great player was now playing only for 
pleasure. But, by tradition, in high-quality 
positional style. Smyslov’s strength always 
consisted in his ability to accumulate micro­
scopic advantages by seemingly unpreten­
tious exchanges and manoeuvres, and in the 
endgame he was considered an unsur­
passed virtuoso. Apart from his phenomenal 
technique, his trumps were his colossal 
experience and unprecedented emotional 
drive (which was noticeable during the 
London semi-finals). And I approached this 
match very seriously, although at heart I was 
confident of success.
The forecasts of the world press and 
most 
experienced 
grandmasters 
were 
unequivocally in my favour. But Karpov’s 
comments on the forthcoming final were 
rather obscure. To the traditional compari­
son - 'a competition between youth and 
boldness on the one hand, and common 
sense and experience on the other', he 
added: 'This is like the eternal struggle 
between the raging sea and the solid land.' 
As we know, the raging sea is usually 
unable to overcome the solid land, as 
otherwise our world would not exist. In 
fact, Karpov was absolutely sure that I 
would win. When the Ogonyok magazine 
invited its readers to predict the result of 
the match, the editors asked the world 
champion to do the same. Karpov’s sealed 
envelope contained an accurate forecast - 
81/2-41/2 in Kasparov’s favour.
Nevertheless, in the Soviet press my 
chances were deliberately played down. 
Why? Perhaps someone was afraid of 
inspiring me excessively, or, God forbid, of 
boosting my popularity? Of course, Karpov 
himself did not harbour any illusions, 
realising perfectly well that after the col­
lapse of the Pasadena operation a match
with me could not be avoided. The threat to 
his title was all too obvious. Karpov is a 
cool-headed person and he could objec­
tively and accurately assess the danger. Just 
like the people around him, whose position 
depended on Karpov retaining his title, and 
who wanted him to feel for as long as 
possible that they were his support.
Smyslov made a valid point when he said 
to me just before the start of our match: 
'Young man, if that business of our semi­
final matches had occurred not in the sum­
mer of 1983, but slightly earlier or slightly 
later, we would never have met in the final.' 
This subtle thought demands an explana­
tion: slightly earlier was before November 
1982, when Brezhnev died, and Aliev be­
came a member of the Politburo; slightly 
later was early 1984, when the country was 
headed by Chernenko and Aliev’s influence 
had sharply waned.
Asriyan: ‘Early in March I phoned Kas­
parov, to interview him before the match at 
the request of the Baku Sport newspaper. It 
turned out to be interesting in the extreme 
and contained some unexpected news. 
Garry informed me that two days earlier, 
28th February, he had become a member of 
the Communist Party. Apparently, before the 
match with Karpov (there were no doubts 
that he would beat Smyslov) he wanted to 
deprive the world champion and his sup­
porters of the opportunity to exploit the 
ideological factor, and to equalise the 
chances also on this non-chess front... To 
become world champion - everything was 
subordinated to this aim.’
In our preparations for the final ‘battle of 
the generations' first and foremost my 
trainers and I studied the experience of the 
matches with Beliavsky and Korchnoi, to 
exclude previous mistakes. And, of course, 
we carefully analysed the games of my
468

Challenger
future opponent, endeavouring to deter­
mine his weak points. Our opening prepa­
ration was also extensive: in a match at 
such a level, especially with such a harmo­
nious player as Smyslov, much could be 
decided by successful handling of the 
opening. Which is in fact what happened. 
The encounter developed into two m ini­
matches of four games: in one I battled 
with White against the Cambridge Springs 
Defence, while in the other I again upheld 
the Tarrasch Defence with Black. It was the 
winning of these mini-matches that led to 
my overall victory.
Things were also affected by a curious 
mysticism. Nikitin: 'Just before the start of 
the match with Smyslov, Leonid Ostrovsky, a 
prominent chess arbiter from  Kiev, sent 
Garry’s mother a letter which with stagger­
ing accuracy predicted not only the overall 
score, but also the result of each game!’ This 
unknown person claimed to be a parapsy­
chologist, and two months later, when 
Nikitin visited him in Kiev, he said about my 
forthcoming duel with Karpov: ‘You will win 
the match, but in a fierce struggle.’
Initially the forecasts for the Vilnius 
match by the man from Kiev merely pro­
voked a smile, but already after two games 
I became slightly disconcerted. In the 1st, 
playing White against the Schlechter De­
fence, I threw away a solid positional ad­
vantage, and in the 2nd I ended up in an 
unpleasant position in the Tarrasch De­
fence (cf. Game No.91, note to Black’s 12th 
move), and this was probably the most 
dramatic moment of the match, largely 
determining its further course. By some 
miracle I managed to extricate myself and 
then hold out in a difficult endgame.
After this I quite confidently - again 
‘strictly according to schedule!' - won the 
3rd game, in which Smyslov surprised me
with the Cambridge Springs Defence, but I 
was able to transpose into a better end­
game and exploit the power of my two 
bishops (cf. Game No.90, note to Black's 9th 
move). The 4th game was a Queen's Gambit 
with 5 .tf4, and I won with Black, also as 
predicted, after which I regularly glanced 
with curiosity at the sheet with the fore­
casts, and at times even joked that the 
prophet could at the same time have sug­
gested the forthcoming openings ...
The score became 3-1, and my opponent 
took the first of his two allotted time-outs. 
In the 5th game I was burning with the 
desire to put an end to these mystical 
events, which were forcing me to believe in 
the super-natural. The ex-champion em­
ployed a novelty with Black in the Botvinnik 
Variation - the modest 10. ...ie7 instead of 
the usual 10 ...tt:Jbd7. In a very sharp situa­
tion I seized the initiative and seemed to be 
close to success, but here Smyslov brilliantly 
extricated himself, exploiting my inability 
to find a decisive strengthening of the 
position. It all ended in a 'planned' draw, 
and I was not exactly delighted with such a 
pre-programmed result.
In the 6th game, after playing the Lasker 
Defence to the Queen's Gambit, I quite 
confidently gained a draw in a somewhat 
inferior position. Then, on Smyslov's birth­
day, I took my first time-out. In the 7th game 
my quiet variation against the Cambridge 
Springs led to a quick peace agreement. In 
the 8th, after finding an improvement for 
Black, I reverted to the Tarrasch Defence and
I even managed to seize the initiative - but 
again I was unable to find the right way to 
build on my advantage. Indeed, how could I 
have found it, if on the sheet sent to me a 
half point was clearly marked!
It was in this semi-mystical state that the 
9th game was played.
469

Garry Kasparov on Garry Kasparov: Part One
Game 90 
G.Kasparov-V.Smyslov
Final Candidates Match, 
9th game, Vilnius 30.03.1982 
Queen's Gambit D52
1 d4 ds 2 tt:lf3 tt:lf6 3 c4 c6 4 tt:lc3 e6 S ii.gS 
tt:lbd7 6 e3 iVaS
Smyslov's frequent employment of the 
Cambridge-Springs Defence was one of the 
surprises of the match: in the ex-world 
champion's career spanning more than 40 
years, this variation had occurred only a 
handful of times. In the 1920s and 1930s it 
was tested in Alekhine's matches with 
Capablanca, Bogoljubow and Euwe, and 
after the war its popularity greatly waned, 
but towards the end of the 20th Century it 
again rose.
7 cxds!
Again, as in the 3rd game, influenced by 
the mysterious forecast, I chose the most 
critical continuation. 7 tt:ld2 is much qui­
eter, for example:
a) 
7...dxc4 8 ..ltxf6 tt:Jxf6 9 tt:Jxc4 'ic7  10 
..te2 (10 S c l! is more accurate) 10. ....\te7 11 
0-0 0-0 12 .l:i.cl .l:i.d8 13 'iVc2 J d7 14 tt:le4 
tt:lxe4 15 iVxe4 c5 16 dxc5 ..ltc6 17 'i'e5 
'ixe5 18 tt:lxe5 .l:i.d2 19 ..ltf3 ..IW.xf3 20 gxf3
4 70
.l:i.xb2 21 S b l .l:!.xbl 22 S xb l ..txc5 23 .l:i.xb7 
f6 with a roughly equal endgame (Kas- 
parov-R.Rodriguez, 
Moscow 
Interzonal 
1982);
b) 7.....tb4 8 Wc2, and Black is again at a 
cross-roads:
b l) 8 ...dxc4 9 ..\W.xf6 tt:lxf6 10 tt:lxc4 VJ!ic7 11 
a3 .ie7 12 ..te2 0-0 13 b4 b6!? (13.....td7 14 
0-0 b6 15 ..tf3 - Game No.125 in Volume I 
of My Great Predecessors) 14 0-0 ..tb7 15 
..tf3 (Ribli-Smyslov, Las Palmas Interzonal
1982) or 12 g3 0-0 13 ..tg2 ..td7 14 b4 b6 15 
0-0 Bac8 (l5 ... a5?! 16 tZ:le5! - Game No.106 
in Volume I of My Great Predecessors) 16 
S fc l J:l,fd8 17 S a b l (Kasparov-Averbakh, 
Kislovodsk 1982), everywhere with a small 
advantage for White;
b2) 8...0-0 9 a3 (9 -;. h4 - Game No.104 in 
Volume I of My Great Predecessors) 9 ...dxc4! 
10 j_xf6 tt:lxf6 11 tt:Jxc4 ..txc3+ 12 'ixc3 (12 
bxc3 is more interesting, as, for example, in 
Timman-Kasparov, 6th match game, Pra­
gue 1998) 12...'ixc3+ 13 bxc3 c5 14 .ie 2 
1/2-1/2 (7th game), or 9 .ie2 e5 (9. ..c5 is also 
not bad) 10 ..txf6 (White would at least 
have something to hope for after 10 dxe5 or 
10 0-0) 10...tZ:lxf6 11 dxe5 tZ:le4 with equality 
(Grunfeld-Keres, Warsaw Olympiad 1935)
12 cxd5 tt:lxc3 13 bxc3 ..\W.xc3 14 S c l ..\W.xe5
15 dxc6 bxc6 1/2-1/2 (13th game). And al­
though the result of this last game of the 
match was not associated with the open­
ing, after 7 tZ:ld2 it is hard for White to 
achieve any appreciable gains.
7...tt:lxdS 8 Wd2 .ib 4
After 8 ...tZ:l7b6 9 ..ltd3!? (the insipid 9 
tt:lxd5 I'Wxd2+ 10 tt:lxd2 exd5 11 ..td3 a5 led 
to equality in Karpov-Kasparov, 47th match 
game, Moscow 1984/85) 9 ... tt:lxc3 10 bxc3 
tt:ld5 (or 10. . .tt:la4 11 0-0 'ixc3 12 #e2) 11 
0-0! (11 .Mcl tt:lxc3 12 0-0 ..\W.b4 - Game 
No.17 in Volume II of My Great Predecessors)
11...'iVxc3 12 'ie 2  White has an enduring

Challenger
initiative for the pawn: 12. ...id6 13 tt:Jd2i 
(Vaganian-Tone, Biel Interzonal 1985) or
12...j_e7 13 $.xe7 ttJxe7 14 ttJe5i (Po- 
lugayevsky-Seirawan, Biel Interzonal 1985).
Such a decision was not in the spirit of 
Smyslov, who himself aimed for the rapid 
development of his forces. Incidentally,
9 ... iL.b4 (instead of 9 ...ctJxc3) 10 Sc1 f6 11 
..ih4 tt:Jxc3 12 bxc3 Jta3 13 l:l.b1 is also 
favourable for White (Vaganian-Smyslov, 
Montpellier Candidates Tournament 1985).
9 fic l
We made all these moves, including the 
next one, in a matter of minutes.
9...es?!
An unsuccessful attempt to improve 
Black's play compared with the 3rd game, 
in which after 9 . 0-0 10 ..id3 (10 a3 i?)
10...e5 11 o-o exd4 (11...h6i 12 ..ih4 Se8 is 
sounder, Alekhine-Bogoljubow, 13th match 
game, Berlin 1929) 12 exd4 f6 13 : h4 Sd8
14 a3 ..1xc3 15 bxc3 tt:Jf8 (15...i'xa3?! 16 c4 
is dangerous for Black) 16 ..tg3! ..ie6 (if 
16. ..iL.g4, then 17 j_e4i l:e8 18 c4 is strong)
17 l:rfe1 f
 18 c4 (18 'iVb2i?) 18...'ir'xd2 19 
tt:Jxd2 tt:Jb6 20 ctJb3 ttJa4 (20. ...Ct:Je6!? 21 c5 
tiJd5 22 tiJa5 tiJdf4i) 21 ..tf1 (21 Se7i?)
21....1..d7?i (21...b6i) 22 tt:Ja5i White gained 
an enduring advantage and converted it 
into a win.
Nowadays Black more often plays 9...h6
10 i.h 4  c5 11 a3 jl_xc3 12 bxc3 b6 13 c4 (13 
j_d3 j_a6, maintaining equality) 13...®xd2+ 
14 tt:Jxd2 ctJ5f6 (Bareev-Fressinet, Cannes 
2002) or 14..ttJe7 (Dreev-Grischuk, Poik- 
ovsky 2005), with a slightly inferior but 
acceptable endgame.
10 a3!? (13)
From the 3rd game I already knew the 
nuances associated with a2-a3, and so 
without particular difficulty I was able to 
find this continuation, an unpleasant one 
for Black: here it gains in strength. 10 ..id3 
was also good, whereas after 10 dxe5 tiJc5 
Black's idea would have been fully justified.
10...Ji.d6?! (24)
It transpires that if 10. ...ixc3 11 bxc3 e4 
there is the reply 12 c4i 'ixa3 (12...'ir'xd2+
13 tt:Jxd2 is even worse for Black) 13 cxd5 
exf3 14 dxc6 bxc6 15 gxf3 (15 ..if4!?) with a 
clear positional advantage.
Of course, Black can win a pawn, but in 
the event of 11...exd4 12 cxd4 'ixa3 13 e4 
or 11...i'xa3 12 e4 tiJ5f6(b6) 13 .^ d3 White's 
initiative more than compensates for the 
minimal material deficit. 11...h6! 12 Ji.h4 
'ixa3 is better, although here too after 13 
e4 (nothing is given by 13 ..id3 exd4 14 
cxd4 'ifb4i, San Segundo-Nakamura, San 
Sebastian 
2009) 
13 ...tiJ5f6 
14 j_d3 
or
471

Garry Kasparov on Garry Kasparov: Part One
13. ..lt:lf4 14 i  g3 g5 15 h4 White has fine 
play for the pawn.
11 dxeS (3)
In the event of 11 lt:lxd5 'ixd2+ 12 'it>xd2 
cxd5 13 dxe5 lt:lxe5 14lt:lxe5 .txe5 15 .tb5+ 
i  d7 Black has a sound position: 16 l:!.c5 f6!
17 .th4 (17 i.f4  b6) 17 ....; xb5 18 Sxb5 
o-o-o with equality. But White finds an 
original way of relieving the central tension 
to his advantage.
11...lt:lxeS (2) 12 lt:lxeS .txeS
13 b4! .txc3 (5)
13 . ..'YWxa3? would have been suicidal: 14 
lt:Jxd5 cxd5 15 .tb5+ 'it>f8 16 o-o (16....te6 17 
f4 ' ■
 d6 18 f5 ..l¥.xb4 19 'id 4  and wins).
14 Wxc3!
Taking play into a significantly better 
endgame. 14 fixc3 lt:lxb4?! 15 e4! (not 15 
l:!.c5? lt:ld3+!) would have led to interesting 
complications, for example:
a) 
15. ..lt:Ja6 (15...lt:la2? 16 Sc2 #'xd2+ 17 
'it>xd2 .te6 18 .tc4, and the knight cannot 
escape) 16 ..ltxa6 bxa6 17 Sxc6 'ixd2+ 18 
'it>xd2 or 17 o-o h6 (17...o-o 18 f
 !) 18 i.e3! 
(18 'Y!d6?! hxg5 19 'Y!xc6+? 'it>e7 is bad for 
White, while after 19 Sc5 'Y!b6 20 Se5+ 
.te6 21 Sxe6+ he has only perpetual check)
18...0-0 19 .txh6! Sd8 20 'i¥g5 'YWxg5 21 
.txg5, condemning Black to a depressing 
struggle for a draw;
b) 
15 ...f6, and after 16 .txf6 gxf6 17 axb4 
'i¥xb4 18 .tc4 •' d7 (18. ..Ib1+?! is unfa­
vourable in view of 19 Sc1 'i¥xe4+ 20 'it>f1!)
19 o-o o-o-o Black's defences hold, but the 
cool-headed 16 .te3! lt:la6 17 .tc4 ti:Jc7 18 
..l¥.f4! leaves White with a strong initiative .
However, it is unclear how real White's 
advantage is if Black simply retreats his 
queen - 14...'ib6 with the sequel 15 Hc1 h6
16 ..lth4 o-o 17 .tc4 .te6 18 o-o (18 e4?! 
Sfe8!) 18 ...Sfe8 or 15 Sc5 h6 16 .th4 o-o 17 
.td3 a5 18 Sxa5 :!.xa5 19 bxa5 'i¥b3 20 0-0 
'i¥xa3.
14. ..lt:Jxc3 15 bxaS Ci:Je4
16 ..l¥.f4 (3)
At first sight, for the moment nothing 
terrible for Black is anticipated, but the 
advantages of White's position are long­
term: two active bishops (whereas the black 
knight has no comfortable post), and a 
pawn majority in the centre; meanwhile 
the doubled pawns on the a-file have 
enabled the b-file to be opened, and now a 
frontal attack can be made on the b7-pawn, 
the defence of which is awkward, since the 
b8-square is controlled by the bishop on f4.
16...0-0 (21) 17 f3 (3) 17 ...lt:lf6 18 e4 Se8 
(10)
The attempt to carry out the freeing ad­
vance ...b7-b6 ends in failure: 18. ...td7 19
472

Challenger
'<t>f2 b6 20 ..ia6! ..ic8 (20...c5?i 21 .it.b7 l:!ad8
22 ..ic7 and wins) 21 ..ie2 c5 (21. ...id7 22 
::Ihd1) 22 ..id6i (my earlier move 22 ; c7 is 
not so 
clear after 22... ■-» e6i) 
22...l:!.d8 
(22 ....l:i.e8?! 23 e5!) 23 ..ic7 with a big advan­
tage.
19 'lt>f2 (2)
A curious moment.
19...a6 (10)
A kind of positional capitulation: Black 
once and for all removes the impending 
threat of a5-a6, but now he will be con­
demned to passive waiting. However, in the 
variation 19...ii'.d7 20 S b l b6 21 .ia 6 i .ic8
22 ..ie2 his prospects were also very 
gloomy.
20 .ie2 (20)
It was tempting to hinder the develop­
ment of Black's queenside - 20 .l:!.b1 .!:!.e7 21 
..id6?!, but then with the exchange sacrifice
21... 
Sxe4! 22 fxe4 cuxe4+ and ... cuxd6 he 
would have gained chances of a draw.
20.....1.6 (2) 21 Sb1 (2) 21...Se7 (with the 
idea of ... 3ae8 and ...i.c8, securely defend­
ing the b7-pawn) 22 Sh d l (2)
22 
..id6 Sd7 23 ii'.c5 would have slightly 
disrupted Black's plans, but after 23 ...Se8 
24 .l:1b2 'flc7 all the same the bishop would 
have reached c8: 25 ..id6 Sd7 26 ..if4 (26 
e5?! cud5 is 
unfavourable for White)
26....1:1de7 etc.
22...1:!.ae8 (4) 23 Sb2 (9)
The start of a long-term strategic plan. 
After the exchange of one pair of rooks it is 
important to retain control of the d-file. 
Black will be forced also to aim for the 
exchange of the second pair of rooks, but 
during this time White will advance his 
kingside pawns as far as possible, in order 
to win the coming ending with two bishops 
against bishop and knight. In the end I 
managed to carry this out, and I would 
venture to assert that the starting position 
is won even against the best defence by 
Black (subsequently there were moments 
when he could have made things more 
difficult for his opponent).
23... . ' c8 (4) 24 Sbd2 (13) 24...Sd7 (8) 25 
l:!.xd7 (4) 2S ...cuxd7 26 g4 cuc5 (12)
Black should have included 26...h6 27 h4 
and only then played 27...cuc5, in order 
after g4-g5 to reduce the power of White's 
pawn phalanx by the exchange ...hxg5.
27 .ie3 (2) 27. ..CUd7 (8)
The exchange of rooks by 27...cue6 28 f4 
Sd8 29 f5 l:txdl 30 ..ixd l would not have 
prevented White from quickly achieving 
absolute domination.
It is easier to suggest than to decide on 
the sharp 27. ..CUb3i? 28 i.b6 c5 (28... 1 e6 is
473

Garry Kasparov on Garry Kasparov: Part One
insufficient: 29 f4 f6 30 f5 .tf7 31 .l:!.d7) 29 
.tc4 .te6, when after 30 .txe6 fxe6 31 .l:!.d7 
Sc8! 32 .t o  c4 33 .te5 c3 34 Ixg7+ f
 35 
Ix h 7  Ic 5  36 Ixb 7  c2 37 .tb2(f4) c l 'i  38 
i.x c l tt:Jxc1 39 h4 .l:!.c2+ 40 'it>e3 e5 41 f4 .l:!.h2 
Black would retain drawing chances. And 
after 30 .txb3!? .txb3 31 Hd7 c4 32 ..l:!.xb7 c3 
33 i.e3! .td1 34 flb6 ..l:!.a8 35 Hc6 c2 36 g5 
'it>f8 the opposite-colour bishops would still 
have retained some hopes.
28 gS! (9)
Now one can talk of a decisive positional 
advantage for White: the pawn offensive 
on the kingside is bound to bring him 
victory.
28. ..tt:JeS (2)
28. . ...l:!.e5?! is incorrect in view of 29 f4!, 
when 
neither 
29...fixa5? 
30 .tg4 nor
29 ...Hxe4? 30 i.g 4  He7 31 i.c5! is possible.
29 i.d 4
Care is essential: the hasty 29 4g3?! 
would have allowed Black to activate his 
pieces by 29. ...te6 with the idea of 30 Hb1 
.tc4! 31 .td1 fie7. But nowadays I would 
have played 29 h4! immediately, since in 
the event of 29....te6 30 ..l:!.b1 the bishop 
would have to return again to c8.
29...tt:g6 (4) 30 'it>g3 (2) 30...ctJf8 (5) 31 h4 
(7)
The thorough - indeed, in the style of
Smyslov himself! - preparation of the pawn 
storm would have been more methodically 
concluded by 31 .tc3!. However, here 
several ways lead to the goal.
31....1:!.d8 (2) 32 f4 .i. e6 (6)
The exchange of rooks - 32 . ..ctJe6 33 .tb6 
..l:!.xd1 34 .txd1 would not have helped 
Black, since his last piece capable of any 
activity would have disappeared, and after
34...g6 35 . t g4 .t d7 36 f5 the invasion of 
the white king would have decided.
33 i.c3! (14)
More accurate than 33 f5?! i.b 3 34 fld2 
c5! 35 .tc3 Sxd2 36 : xd2 ctJd7, when Black 
activates his game somewhat.
33 ....Mxd1 34 i.xd 1  tt:d7 (2)
It was not possible to prevent f4-f5 
(34. ..g6 35 i.c2).
35 fs 
c4 36 hs (3)
Another fighting unit has joined the at­
tack. 36 4 f4  f6!? 37 e5! fxe5+ 38 i.xe5 is 
also strong - after 38. ..tt:xe5 39 'it>xe5 the 
activity of White's king enables him to win 
the bishop endgame: 39 . ...td3 40 .tb3+ 4f8
41 .te6 &e7 42 i.c8 &d8 43 .txb7 & O  44 
f6! etc.
36... h6 (2)
If 36. ..f6? there is the decisive 37 h6! tt:c5 
38 . t c2 with the creation of connected 
passed pawns. But after the move in the
474

Challenger
game (and it was not possible to avoid it) 
Black has yet another weakness - the h6- 
pawn.
37 gxh6 gxh6 38 eSl tt:\cS (2) 39 f
 .tdS (2) 
40.tc2
40 ...f6?! (4)
The last move before the time control, 
made with the flag about to fall. 40....tc4 
was more resilient, but Smyslov, realising 
that in any event White will find a way of 
converting his enormous positional advan­
tage, immediately fixed the pawn position, 
hoping to set up a fortress. Alas, this was an 
illusion...
41 e6 (4) 41...&g7 42 .ib 4  (4)
42 .id 4  tt:\b3 43 e7 4f7 44 ' xf6! etc. was 
rather more forceful.
42...tt:lb3 (2) 43 4e3 (now Black is para­
lysed) 43 ...cS (3)
The helplessness of a knight in the battle 
against a passed rook's pawn is illustrated 
by the amusing variation 4 3 ..i.c4  44 .ic3 
.td5 45 .te4! tt:\c5 
46 .txd5 cxd5 47 &d4
tt:le4 48 i.b 4  tt:lg3 
49 4xd5 tt:Jxf5 50 &c5
tt:lg3 51 'it>b6 tt:lxh5 
52 &xb7 tt:lf4 53 4xa6
tt:Jxe6 54 ^b6 etc.
44 .ic3
Here the game was adjourned. 44...tt:lc1
45 A a4 or 44...c4 45 i.e 4  .tc6 46 .ixc6  bxc6 
47 &e4 (zugzwang) was hopeless for Black.
44...'it>f8 (50)
After agonising thought Smyslov sealed 
this move, but he resigned without bother­
ing to resume the game (1-0): White wins 
by both 45 .ixb3 .ixb3 46 .txf6 and 45 .ie 4  
i.xe 4 46 4xe4 'i;e7 47 'i;d5.
This game, like the 3rd, once again dem­
onstrated the superiority of two bishops in 
an open position. It essentially deprived 
Smyslov's supporters of their last hopes - 
the score was now 6-3.
But Vasily Vasilievich fought to the end. I 
also continued playing at full strength and I 
very much wanted to discover whether the 
predictions of the 'Kiev prophet' would be 
fully realised.
In the lOth game (cf. Game No.91, note 
to Black's 12th move), exploiting my oppo­
nent's uncertain play in a sharp endgame, I 
seized the initiative and gained good win­
ning chances. But on the 38th move, as 
though bewitched by the pre-match fore­
cast, I suddenly offered a draw. Naturally, 
the surprised Smyslov agreed.
But in the 11th game with Black he un­
expectedly engaged me in a ‘last and 
decisive' battle in the Chigorin Defence. 
This opening was clearly not in accordance 
with his style, and White developed a
475

Garry Kasparov on Garry Kasparov: Part One
powerful attack, based on the power of two 
bishops (during the match my opponent 
afforded me this advantage too often). By 
the 20th move it seemed that a crushing 
defeat was inevitable and that I would at 
last disgrace the prophet, but mysticism 
again triumphed: after my mistake on the 
22nd move Smyslov found an unantici­
pated resource and literally by a miracle he 
gained a draw - 7-4! I was very upset that I 
did not make the decisive move, which 
everyone saw apart from me, and on the 
advice of Dr. Gasanov I took my second 
time-out, in order to relax a little, pull 
myself together, and get away from chess 
concerns.
Now came the 12th game, the last genu­
inely fighting game of the match. The 
events in it took a fascinating course. 
Smyslov was full of resolve to score at least 
one win, not even suspecting that the 
prognosis was not good for him. ..
Game 91 
V.Smyslov-G.Kasparov
Final Candidates Match, 
12th game, Vilnius 7.04.1982 
Queen's Gambit D34
1 d4 ds 2 i2Jf3 cs 3 c4 e6 4 cxdS exds S g3 
tt:Jf6 6 ..lg2 ..te7 7 o-o o-o 8 tt:Jc3 tt:Jc6 9 ..ltgs 
cxd4 10 tt:Jxd4 h6 11 ..lte3 Se8 12 a3
Korchnoi’s novelty from the 2nd game of 
our match. Against me Beliavsky played 
both 12 'ia 4  and 12 #c2 (cf. Game No. 79), 
while a little later Karpov played 12 'ib3 
(Game Nos. 11, 13 in Kasparov vs. Karpov 
1975-1985).
12...ke6
Again, as in the 2nd, 8th and 10th 
games, the players made the first twelve 
moves at blitz speed.
Against Korchnoi I was able to demon­
strate th e viability of Black’s position after 
13 'ib3 'id 7 14 tt:Jxe6 fxe6 15 :tad l ii.d6! 16 
.!tcl \t>h8 17 'i'a4 'lf!le7 18 e3 a6 19 Wh4 
Sac8.
But in the Vilnius match an original sur­
prise awaited me, testifying to the serious­
ness of Smyslov's opening preparation - 13 
\t>h1!?. In the 2nd game after 13...ild7?! 14 
tt:Jxe6 fxe6 15 f4! :ted8 16 il.g1 :.ac8 17 'ia 4  
\t>h8 18 .:!.ad1 'ie8  19 e4 White gained the 
initiative. 
But 
then 
I 
improved 
with
13 ... ..ltg4! 14 f3 (14 h3 t d7!) 14...il.h5 with 
the sequel 15 ..lg1 'id7! 16 'ia 4  ..tc5 17 
Sad1 ..lb6 18 &lfe1 ii.g6! (8th game) or 15 
tt:Jxc6 bxc6 16 tt:Ja4 'ic8! 17 .: d4 'lWe6 18 
.Mcl tt:Jd7 (10th game), in both cases achiev­
ing comfortable play.
13 tt:Jxe6!?
Another novelty - and an important 
moment, which was hardly remarked on by 
the commentators. After failing to gain an 
advantage in the 8th and 10th games, 
Smyslov became disillusioned with his 
patent move 13 'it>hl.
13. ..fxe6
Black's central pawn pair is threatened 
with an attack by e2-e4 or f2-f4-f5. White's 
next few moves serve as a preparation for 
these operations.
476

Challenger
14 Wa4 Sc8 (37) 15 Sad1 (2) 15 ...'it>h8 (14)
In general a useful prophylactic move, 
but for the moment there was no particular 
need for it, and the immediate 15 . .. a6!? was 
worth playing, with the idea of 16 4 h l 
tt:Ja5.
White needs to hurry: 18 .tg l?! ltJc4 19 
'YWb3 .tc5! (disclosing the weakness of the 
e3-square). Now, however, the situation 
becomes critical: one more move, and 
Black’s defences in the centre will collapse, 
so time is precious for him as well.
16'it>h1 ( 10)
It only remains for White to play f2-f4 
and .tg1, and he will achieve a favourable 
position similar to that in the 2nd game. 
But here Black's pieces are better placed for 
creating counterplay.
16...a6 (4)
The immediate 16...CDa5! was more accu­
rate, since after 17 .txa7 CDC4 White would 
have been in danger of losing his bishop: 18 
'ib3 b6 19 e4 'VIiO 20 tt:Jb5 'iYb7! or 18 'ilrb5 
b6 19 CDa4 CDd7 20 e4 'f!lc7 21 exd5 'i¥xa7 22 
dxe6 tt:Jf6, and it is only a question of com­
pensation for the piece. And in the event of
17 f4 tt:Jc4 Black gains an important tempo 
and the entire rhythm of White’s attack is 
disrupted (18 . c1 Wb6!).
17 f4! (9) 17 ...tt:JaS (16)
If 17...'ia5, then 18 'ic2! is unpleasant, 
for example: 18...CDg4 19 .tg1 j  f6 20 f5 d4
21 CDe4 tt:Je7 22 'i'd2! *'xd2 23 fixd2 tt:Jxf5
24 tt:Jxf6 gxf6 25 .i.xb7 with the better 
endgame.
18 fS! (46)
18 ... bS (13)
I praised this move in both Informator 
and The Test of Time, but now I think that it 
is not without its dangers, since it drives 
the queen to the main part of the battle­
field and helps White to carry out his plan. 
However, Black did not have an easy choice:
a) 18. ..l:i.c4?! 19 'ifc2 e5 20 'f!id2! (20 .i.g1 
d4 21 e3 .txa3! with equality) 20. ..d4 21 
.i.xh6, and after 21. ..gxh6? 22 'f!ixh6+ \t>g8
23 g4! White's attack is indeed irresistible.
21. .. dxc3? is also bad in view of 22 ..ixg7+ 
4xg7 23 'ig5+ and Il.xd8, while the two 
relatively best defences leave White with an 
enduring initiative: 21 ....litf8 22 CDe4 tt:Jxe4 
(22 ...gxh6? 23 'Wixh6+ lDh7 24 b4 CDc6 25 f6 
.txf6 26 "iVh5! and wins) 23 .txe4 J:lc8 24 
l:c1, or 21...tt:Jg4 22 CDd5! tt:Jxh6 23 f6 .txf6 
(23....i.f8?! 24 'Wig5!) 24 tt:Jxf6 Sf8 25 tLld5 
l:txfl+ 26 l:txfl Sc6 27 'id 3  etc.;
b) 18. . .ltJc4 19 
^ c1, and previously I 
thought that 'Black cannot avoid the break­
up of his centre': 19...tt:Jg4? 20 fxe6 tt:Jge3 21 
.i.xe3 tt:Jxe3 22 tt:Jxd5 etc. 19...exf5 20 tt:Jxd5
477

Garry Kasparov on Garry Kasparov: Part One
or 19...tt:Jb6 20 '§'h4(b3) is also insufficient, 
but the sacrifice of the d-pawn by 19...'id6i
20 fxe6 b5 would still maintain equality: 21 
1!t'b3 (21 Wc2 'ixe6 22 Wg6 tt:Je5) 21...d4 22 
tt:Je4 tt:Jxe4 23 ..ixe4 'i'xe6 24 i.f5  'ic6+ 2 5 
'iWf3 l:.f8, 22 Sf4 \\'Vxe6 23 %l:dxd4 i.c5 24 
Sd3 tt:Jg4, 22 ..if4 Wxe6 23 .:lxd4 ..ic5 24 
fld3 tt:Jg4 25 tt:Je4 'if5  i, or 22 e3 d3 23 tt:Jd5 
tt:Jxd5 24 .:i.xd3 Sf8i 25 Jitfdl Wxe6 26 ..ixd5 
Wg4 etc.
19 W h4! (6)
Now the retribution for the frivolous be­
haviour of the black army, which has aban­
doned its king to the mercy of fate, seems 
inevitable. In fact everything is more com­
plicated...
19. ..tt:Jg8 (2)
I was proud of this manoeuvre: 'Using 
Capablanca's principle “the minimum force 
in defence", Black succeeds very quickly in 
creating effective threats.' Alas, after the 
opponent's strongest reply it would have 
been much harder to do this than in the 
game. . .
I condemned the natural move 19...tLlc4!? 
because 
of 20 
..ixh6i 
tt:Jh7 
21 
^ i5  
(19. ..tLlh7!? 20 \\'Vh5 tt:Jc4 21 ..ixh6i comes to 
the same thing) 21...gxh6 22 fxe6 tt:Je3(?) 23 
!l.f7 'with mate in a few moves'. But in this 
line 
Black 
has 
an 
effective 
defence:
22 ...i.d6i 23 'ixh 6  'ig5! 24 'Wh3 tt:Je3 25 
tt:Jxd5 tt:Jxf1 26 i.e 4  \\'Vg7 27 Sxf1 Sf8i, and 
the compensation for the rook does not 
promise White anything more than dy­
namic equality.
20 Wh3? (5)
Played, apparently, on general grounds: 
the sacrifice on h6 may work at some point, 
and at h3 the queen is more comfortably 
placed. But here Smyslov missed his last 
winning chance in the match - 20 'ifg4! 
tt:Jc4 21 i..c1 i.g5i 22 fxe6.
My opponent's second, Viktor Kupreichik, 
maintained that after 22 . ..i.xc1(?) 23 1:i.xd5i 
f t 6  24 l:i.d7(?) i.g5i 25 Sxg7 the game 
should have ended in a draw, but this idea 
is refuted by 25...tt:Je5!. On the other hand, 
there was an instant win by 24 1lf7i i.g5 25 
!!.xg5 hxg5 (25...tt:Jf6 26 Sxf6i) 26 'f'ih5+ 
tt:Jh6 27 Wg6i tt:Jxf7 28 ..ie4i (Alatortsev) or
27...tt:Jf5 28 'ilfxf5 tt:Jd6 29 \\'Vg6i and ..ie4. 
Also, things are obviously bad for Black 
after 23...tLld6 (instead of 23. . .f t 6) 24 tt:e4 
!!.c6 2 5 !1fd1 or 23...tLle3 24 Sxd8 Scxd8 2 5 
'iWf4 ..id 2 26 ..ie4(h3).
The only possibility of resisting was
22 ...tt:Jf6i (instead of 22 ...i.xc1?) 23 ..ixg5 
tt:Jxg4 24 i.xd8 Scxd8 25 Jlxd5 Jitb8i fol­
lowed by ...tt:Jge3 and ...Jitxe6. In this dy­
namic endgame Black would have had
478

Challenger
quite good compensation for the pawn and 
real drawing chances.
20...tt:JC4 (2) 21 : cl (3) 21....: ■
 gS! (2) 22 fxe6 
(12) 22 ... A x c l 23 S x c l (12)
The intermediate stroke 23 Sxd5 is no 
longer so strong, if only in view of 2 3 ...^ 6 , 
when since 24 .l:xc1?! tt:xb2 25 Sd2 tt:a4 is 
advantageous to Black, White has to save 
himself with the help of tactics - 24 .l:td7! 
..txb2 25 Sxg7! '#xe6 26 1lff7 Vi'xf7 27 Sxf7 
tt:d6.
23...tt:e3 (4)
24 tt:xds! (3)
Smyslov was obviously counting on this 
move - the only chance of regaining his lost 
initiative. For the exchange White will have 
two pawns and prospects of an attack on 
the light squares.
24...tt:xfl! (3)
24. ...l':!.xc1 25 2xc1 tt:Jxd5 26 Sd 1 Wf6! (of 
course, 
not 
my 
previous 
suggestion
26...tt:e3? 
27 l:xd8 2xd8 
28 ig 1  or
26...tt:Jgf6? 27 e4!) 27 ..txd5 ®xb2 was also 
acceptable, but this variation seemed more 
dangerous to me in view of the rather 
insecure position of my king and the strong 
passed pawn on e6.
25 S x fl Sf8  (3)
25...'i'g 5 was also not bad. White's activ­
ity is sufficient only for equality: Black has
the exchange for ‘one and a half' pawns, all 
his pieces are in play, and his knight is 
about to occupy the blockading post at e7.
26 tt:f4?! (8)
It would appear that Smyslov was still 
dreaming of victory - only this can explain 
his desire to avoid the exchange of rooks. 
But the rook on f1 has no future! Previously 
I recommended 26 ..te4(?!), but after 
26 ...tt:e7! Black has somewhat the better 
chances: 27 tt:xe7 (27 tt:f4 #d4!) 27 ...'ixe7
28 : f5 g6! 29 i.xg6 Sxf1+ 30 'ix f l 'W!Vxe6.
Therefore White should have played 26 
11xf8 'ixf8  27 ..tf3, retaining compensation 
for the exchange, sufficient for equality.
26...tt:e7 27 'iVg4? (9)
A serious mistake, with time-trouble 
imminent. White could hope for counter­
play only by retaining his strong knight on 
f4. Therefore he had to play 27 ^h5 (with 
the idea of h2-h4, 'ig 4  and h4-h5) 27...'iY'd4
28 ‘^ 4  (28 b4!?) 28...'ifc5! 29 ..tb7 (29 
Wilxe7? 11xf4!) 29 . Sc7 30 ..tf3 when the 
position is slightly better for Black, but 
almost equal.
Smyslov wanted to advance h2-h4-h5 
without the loss of a tempo, but Black's 
unexpected reply conclusively tips the 
scales in his favour.
27...gs! (13)
479

Carry Kasparov on Carry Kasparov: Part One
In the event of 27 ...'Wid2 28 h4 'iVxb2 29 
'it>h2 White could still have held on. In my 
choice of move I also took account of the 
opponent’s time-trouble, endeavouring to 
set him the most difficult problems, even at 
the risk of a counterattack. True, the out­
wardly dangerous move ...g7-g5 has more 
virtues than risks.
28 'ilr'h3 (8)
Smyslov was pinning his hopes on this 
reply. After 28 ttJd3 £xfl+  29 .t x f l 'iVd5+ 30 
e4 ^ 3  White has chronic problems: 31 h4 
l:lf8! 32 .te2 gxh4 33 'i'xh4 'i'xe6 etc.
28. ..Bf6! (nevertheless forcing the retreat of 
the knight) 29 ttJd3 Sxf1+ 30 ..txf1 4g7!
30...'i'f8!? and ...'il'f6! was also not bad, 
but the king move is stronger. Black has 
achieved 
everything 
he 
could 
have 
dreamed of, and now he is ready to break 
through with his rook into the opponent's 
position.
31 Wkg4 (2) 31 ...'Wid5+ (3)
The goal would also have been achieved 
by 31. .l:tc4 32 e4 \'Wd4 33 l2Jb4 .Uc1 34 'i'e2 
l:tb1 35 ttJd3 ttJc6 36 h4 'i'f6 etc.
32 e4 (the knight on d3 loses its support, 
but 32 ii.g2? was not possible on account of
32. ..Mc1+! with mate) 32 ...'i'd4 33 h4l:tf8 (2)
The immediate 33.'i'e3 would have led 
to White's complete paralysis, but I decided
to set a little trap.
34 .te2 iVe3 35 4g2 (the attempted pawn 
exchange 35 hxg5 was fatal because of the 
cunning 35 ...h5!) 3S...l2Jg6
36 hS?
It is hard to offer White any good advice, 
but even so 36 hxg5 (36 e7 Se8!) 36. . .hxg5
37 e7! was more resilient. Now 37. . .l2Jxe7?!
38 l2Jf4! leads to unexpected complications:
38...'ixe4+ 39 f
 'i'c2+ 40 &h3 Sh8+ 41 
ttJh5+ 'it>f8 42 'ifd4 Sh7 43 'i'f6+ &e8 44 g4
- the battle is still continuing!
However, after 37 ...Se8! 38 'i'f3 'i'd2 39 
l2Jc5 .Mxe7 40 'i'c3+ 'iVxc3 41 bxc3 fia7 
White cannot hold out.
36. ..l2Je7
The alternative was 36 ...l2Je5! 37 l2Jxe5 
l:tf2+ 38 'ith3 'i'c1! (38...If4? 39 e7! with a 
draw) 39 ii.d1 'i'd2, when the curtain 
comes down.
37 b4 'it>h7 (5)
Or 37...l2Jc6!?, but all the same White is 
practically in zugzwang.
38 'it>h2 Ed8 39 eS Sxd3 40 .txd3+ 'i'xd3 
0-1
In the 13th game the 'planned' draw was 
agreed on the 16th move (cf. Came No.90, 
note to White's 7th move), and this mysti­
cal match concluded ahead of schedule
480

Challenger
with the predicted score 81/ 2-41/ 2.
The basis of my win was successful play 
with Black. I now knew that in matches a 
player's mood directly depends on this: if 
with Black all is going well, you can calmly 
try to exploit the advantage of the white 
pieces. On the whole I was better in compli­
cated situations, but I gained the greatest 
satisfaction from two endgames, where I 
managed - against none other than Smys- 
lovi - to convert a comparatively small 
positional advantage.
Yes, I did not always win the won posi­
tions, but in general this was a successful 
match for me. Not once did I have a really 
bad position, although there were prob­
lems in the 2nd and 12th games. And I was 
very happy that I did not lose a single game: 
after all, the next match, the main one with 
Karpov, was to be played not only to six 
wins, but also to six defeats...
‘Return Match of the Century’
Four-round match USSR v. Rest of the World 
(London, 24-29 June 1984) - 21-19 (5-5; 6-4; 
51/ 2-41/ 2; 41/ 2-51/ 2). Board results: 1. Karpov- 
Andersson - 21/ 2-11/ 2; 2. Kasparov-Timman - 
21/ 2-11/2 etc.
To celebrate my victory in the final Can­
didates match against Smyslov, a reception 
was held in the Spartak Sports Society 
Chess Club in Moscow with the participa­
tion of Petrosian and Tal. When someone in 
the audience asked me: 'What do you think 
of Fischer?', I replied: 'This question would 
be better answered by his opponents, the 
living legends who are present here!' On 
hearing these words, the dozing Tal (who 
was slightly sedated) raised his head and 
muttered: 'Barely living legends...' Petrosian 
threw him an angry glance, but then pic­
turesquely registered his acceptance, gave
in and burst out laughing... Although he 
was already seriously ill, he nevertheless 
agreed to help me prepare for the forth­
coming world championship match with 
Karpov in the autumn, and we even met on 
a couple of occasions.
Petrosian was dreaming of playing that 
summer in the USSR v. Rest of the World 
match, and was preparing to travel with 
the team, refusing to believe that his illness 
was incurable. But, alas, his days were 
numbered, and on 13th August Tigran 
Vartanovich passed away. The games and 
lengthy 
conversations with 
the 
Great 
Master were enormously beneficial to me, 
and much of his valuable experience came 
in useful in the fight for the world crown. 
His deep philosophical approach to every­
thing associated with chess helped in 
developing staunchness of spirit, and in 
holding out in the most difficult situations.
At the end of June 1984 both Karpov and
I had to interrupt our preparations for a 
week and head off to London for the long- 
awaited second USSR v. Rest of the World 
match. The first, I should remind you, called 
the 'Match of the Century', took place in 
1970 and was won by the USSR team - 
201/2-191/2. 
Not surprisingly, before the 
London meeting the world press began 
talking about the 'Return Match of the 
Century'. Over the intervening 14 years the 
team line-ups (each had ten main players 
and two reserves) had changed almost 
beyond recognition - of the previous com­
batants there remained only Korchnoi (who 
had switched teams), Larsen, Polugayevsky, 
Smyslov and Tal.
Our first three boards were well known: 
Karpov, Kasparov and Polugayevsky. But 
our opponents, with the aim of improving 
their results, cunningly changed their 
board order: Korchnoi was sent to torment
481

Garry Kasparov on Garry Kasparov: Part One
Polugayevsky, the impregnable Andersson 
was to ‘man the gate' against Karpov, and 
the 
experienced Timman 
was pitched 
against the 'excitable' Kasparov. This idea 
only partially justified itself: Korchnoi did 
indeed defeat Polugayevsky (+1=3, includ­
ing a draw with the reserve Tukmakov), but 
Karpov and I beat our opponents by the 
same score. However, the best result was 
achieved by Beliavsky: by twice beating 
Seirawan on board 6 and scoring 11/2 out of
2 against the reserve Larsen, he notched up 
31/2 out of 4! As a result, revenge was not 
gained.the Soviet team also won this 
match - 21-19.
I enjoyed an obvious advantage in my 
mini-match with Timman - I was con­
stantly pressing, but in the first three 
games I did not manage to win. Before the 
4th and last round our team was ahead by 
'plus three' and was already close to victory 
in the match, but I wanted to make a wor­
thy contribution to the overall aggregate 
and also to keep up with Karpov!
Game 92 
G.Kasparov-J.Timman
'Return Match of the Century', 
4th round, London 28.06.1984 
Queen’s Gambit D55
1 d4 lt:Jf6 2 c4 e6 3 tt:f3 dS 4 tt:c3 .fLe7 5 .fLgS
0-0 6 e3 (6) 6...h6 (6 ...tt:bd7 - Game No.33) 7 
.txf6 (7 .fLh4 - Game Nos. 20, 41) 7 ... .txf6 8 
#c2
Instead of the approved 8 ..,d2 (Game 
No.54), I chose a fresh and, for me, semi- 
experimental continuation with my favour­
ite queenside castling, which had been 
tried in the recent game Lerner-Georgadze 
(Nikolaev 1983). After a brief analysis it 
seemed quite promising to me.
8...cS (the main reply; 8...tt:la6!? 9 Sd1 c5 - 
Game No.56 in Kasparov vs. Karpov 1975­
1985) 9 dxcS 'WiaS (8)
It soon 
transpired that the 
simple
9...dxc4! is better, as in the 27th game of my 
first match with Karpov (Game No.31 in 
Kasparov vs. Karpov 1975-1985).
10 cxdS exdS (3) 11 o-o-o!
The key idea of the new variation. Ac­
cording to Larsen, an isolated pawn should 
not be blockaded, but attacked and cap­
tured! 11 'iVd2 .fLe6 (Botvinnik-Bondarevsky, 
Leningrad 1941) or 11 S d l .fLe6 (Portisch- 
Ivkov, Budapest 1960) is far more modest.
11 ....te6? (12)
But this is already a serious mistake, af­
ter which Black is simply unable to get out 
of trouble. 11... .fLxc3! is correct, and after 12 
'Wixc3 one oftwo lines:
a) 
12...'ixc3+ 13 bxc3 .te6 14 lt:Jd4 l:.c8 
(14 . ..ctJd7 15 c6) 15 e4! with another diver­
gence:
a1) 
15 ...:txc5?, 
and 
in 
the 
Lerner-
Georgadze game, and also in the forgotten 
source 
game 
5zilagyi-Pogats 
(Budapest 
1952), after 16 tt:xe6?! fxe6 17 exd5 exd5 18 
Sxd5 .Mxc3+ 19 'lt'b2 Sc8 Black held this 
slightly inferior endgame. However, await­
ing Timman was 16 exd5!, when 16....fLxd5? 
is bad in view of 17 tt:b3! .fLxb3 18 l:,d8+
482

Challenger
'ih 7  19 axb3 with the inevitable win of the 
knight, or 16 ... .i- d7 17 c4, retaining the 
extra pawn (Yusupov-lnkiov, Sofia 1984);
a2) 15...dxe4 16 t2lxe6 fxe6 17 1L.c4 'it>f7
18 l:!.he1 tt:Ja6! 19 iL.xa6 bxa6 20 l:!.xe4 Sxc5
21 Sd7+ 'it>f6 22 'it>d2! (in correspondence 
games 22 'ic2  .l:.ac8 and 22 .l:.e3 .l:.f5 have 
been tried, in each case with equality)
22 ...Sac8 23 l:!.xa7 l:!.8c6 (23 ..J:!xc3 24l:!.xa6)
24 l:!.f4+ 'it>e5 25 l:!.f3 with an extra pawn, 
but Black can hope for a draw;
b) 
12 ...'#xa2 (this capture is nevertheless 
better than its poor reputation) 13 iL.d3 
tt:Jc6 (V2-V2, Nikolic-Ljubojevic, Wijk aan Zee 
1986), and here I was planning 14 'it>d2i 
with some advantage - subsequently this 
move brought White success in both over- 
the-board 
and correspondence tourna­
ments.
12 tt:JxdS
12 ...l:!.c8 (37)
12. ..iL.xd5 13 .l:.xd5 Wxa2 14 ..ic4 "i¥a1+ 
(14... xb2+? 15 'id1! and wins) 15 Wb1 
'i/Ua4 16 Wa2 is also advantageous to White 
(Sturua-Klovans, Lvov 1984).
13 'ib1!
The point of the entire plan: after 13 
t2lxf6? gxf6 Black’s counterplay could have 
become threatening. Nothing was given by
13 b4?! 't!Va3+ 14 'ib 1 ' xd5 15 .:xd5 t2lc6
(15 . .."i!Yxb4+ is also possible) 16 m 3 Wxb3+
17 axb3 t2lxb4 18 l:!.d7 l:!.d8!, quickly regain­
ing the pawn.
Here Timman again sank into thought: 
Black faces a difficult choice.
13...1L.xdS (22)
It turns out that 13. ...l:.xc5 14 b4i .l:.xc2 15 
t2lxf6+ gxf6 16 bxa5 is clearly in White's 
favour, for example: 16...l:!.c8 17 t2ld4 t2lc6
18 C2Jxe6 fxe6 19 iL.c4 or 16...Hxf2?! 17 Hd8+ 
'it>g7 18 t2ld4 - annotating the game in 
Informator, I gave this variation as winning, 
but nine years later it occurred in a grand­
master game! After 18. ..1L.xa2+ 19 Wa1 (19 
Wcl!?) 19...f5 20 iL.d3 White won without 
difficulty (van Wely-Geller, Tilburg 1993).
Attempts to develop the knight immedi­
ately are also unsatisfactory: 13. ..CLld7? 14 
b4! Wd8 15 iL.b5, 13. ..t2lc6?i 14 t2lxf6+ gxf6
15 a3, or 13...t2la6?i 14 iL.xa6 bxa6 15 'i/Ud2i 
Wxc5 16 t2lxf6+ gxf6 17 t2ld4 etc.
14 l:!.xds t2lc6 15 iL.c4? (4)
My eyes were dazzled by the mass of 
tempting possibilitiesi The natural move 15 
a3! seemed too cautious to me, but after
15 ...CLle7 16 fld7! Hxc5 17 m
3 Sac8 18 iL.d3 
White is a more than healthy pawn to the 
good.
15...CLlb4 (5)
Now 15...CLle7? 16 .:!.d7i :!.xc5 is catastro­
483

Garry Kasparov on Garry Kasparov: Part One
phic for Black in view of 17 tt:ld2.
16 'id2! (there was no reason to play 16 c6 
"iflc7 17 ^ 3  bxc6 18 Sd2 Sab8 with hopes 
of counterplay) l6..J:txcS 17 fixes "i'xcs 18 
.l:.cl "i!/b6? (1)
Returning the favour. 18..."i!/e7, my In­
formator 
recommendation, 
demanding 
accurate play of White, is also insufficient: 
19 a3! 'iVe4+ 20 'it>a1 a5 21 "ifld1! (21 ctJd4?! 
tt:lc6! with some compensation for the 
pawn), and if 21...fld8, then 22 'ia 4  b5 23 
i.xb s! (23 'iVxb5?? 'ic2!, and Black rejoices) 
23- ..i.xb2+ 24 'ixb2 ctJd3+ 25 'ib1 ctJb4+ 26 
Wa1 and wins.
But Black would have retained real 
chances of saving the game after 18...Wf5+!
19 'it>a1 Sd8! (an unexpected resource!) 20 
'ixb4! 'ic2 ! 21 gxf7+! 'it>h7! 22 Sb1 Sd1 23 
tt:ld2 l:txd2 or 22 i.g6+ "i!/xg6 23 a3 "i!/xg2, 
and although the material advantage is on 
White's side, he would have serious cause 
to regret that he did not play 15 a3!.
19 'iVd7! (24)
Apparently a move that simply suggests 
itself, but before it was made all the nu­
ances arising in the event of leaps by the 
black knight had to be taken into account.
19....l:.f8 (9)
19...tt:ld5? 20 i.b 3 or 19...ctJd3? 20 l:tc2 are 
weak alternatives. Apparently Timman had
been counting on 19...tt:lxa2!? - say, 20 
i.xf7+? 'it>f8 21 ctJd4 i.xd 4  22 exd4 Sd8 23 
Sc8 l:txc8 24 'iVxc8+ (after 24 gxa2?? 'ig6+ 
it is Black who gives mate!) 24. ..'it>xf7 25 
'it>xa2 'ixd 4  26 'i/Vxb7 'it>g8 with drawing 
chances in the queen endgame. But here he 
noticed that after 20 l:tc2! the knight has no 
good move: 20. ..tt:lb4 21 tt:le5! i.xe5 22 
i.xf7+ 'it>h7 23 Sc8 Sxc8 24 'iVxc8 h5 25 f4! 
and wins, or 20...ctJc3+ 21 'it>c1 ctJe4 22 
'ixf7+! (but not my earlier variation 22 
i.xf7+ 'it>h8 23 tt:le5? in view of 23. ..tt:ld6!) 
22. ..'ih8 23 'id 5 tt:lc5 24 i.e2 with an 
obvious advantage.
20 "i!lbs! (5) 20. .."ifld6 (6)
It is hard to recommend the endgame 
after 20. .."i!/xb5 21 i.b 5  l:td8 22 a3 as being 
the lesser evil.
21 e4 (7)
'An accurate move, creating the threat of 
e4-e5', I commented in the magazine 64. 
But the modern computer considers the 
crude 21 'il'xb7! to be more accurate:
21...Sb8 (21...'ih8 22 #e4!) 22 '#xf7+ 'it>h8
23 b3 and wins.
21 ... tt:lc6 (if 21 ...'iVe7, then 22 e5 i.g 5 23 
tt:lxg5 hxg5 24 e6!) 22 i.d s?!
Again 22 "i-Yxb7! was more forceful:
22 ...l:!.b8 23 'iVxf7+ 'it>h8 24 b3 or 22 ...tt:le5 23 
'il'd5!? etc.
484

Challenger
22. ..a6? (7)
Giving up a second pawn is equivalent to 
capitulation. 22 ...'id7?! 23 gxc6 bxc6 24 
'Wixc6 or 22 ...Sb8 23 'ilNb3! 'Wic7 24 h4 with 
the threat of g2-g4-g5 was also bad for 
Black.
However, he should have tried to save 
the game with the help of opposite-colour 
bishops by 22...tbd4! (22. ..ti'le5 23 ti'le1!) 23 
ti'lxd4 g xd4 24 Ad1 'YlNb6 25 'ixb 6 g xb6 or
23 iYxb7 ti'lxf3 24 gxf3 'Wixh2 25 'Wixa7 'Wie5 
26 fic2 h5 with counterplay. After this I was 
intending to play 23 'id 3! 'ifb6 (23 ... ti'lxf3?
24 gxf7+!) 24 e5 ti'lxf3 25 exf6 ti'le5 26 'if5 , 
considering White's advantage after the 
forced 26 ...gxf6 to be quite convincing. But 
here there would still have been work to do!
23 Wxb7 (7) 23. ..tt:Je5 (it is easy to see that 
there is no way of saving the game: 23 ...ti'lb4
24 'Wic7 or 23 ... ti'le7 24 gb3! etc.) 24 Sc8 (9)
24....l:!.xc8 25 Wxc8+ ih 7  26 Wc2! (2)
With the cunning idea 26 . ..ti'lxf3? 27 
e5+!.
26. ..4g8 (6) 27 ti'ld2 (6) 27...g5 (f2-f4 was 
threatened, but now the white knight 
heads for f5) 28 a3 (3) 28...‘4>g7 (2)
29 ti'lf1 (9) 29...'ib6 30 ti'lg3 (2) 30...»g6 31 
'ita2 (2) 31...h5 32 Wc8 (2) 32...h4 (7) 33 
'i!Vg8+ (3) 33... i g7 34 ti'lh5 (6) 1-0 
Times: 1.45-2.27.
It was pleasant for me to draw level with 
Karpov. My win was even the more impres­
sive looking one, since at that time and 
until the end of the 1980s Timman was the 
strongest 
of the 
‘indigenous' western 
players.
Immediately after the ‘Return Match of 
the Century' I was invited to take part in a 
fascinating event - the first simultaneous 
display in history, where the moves were 
transmitted via the cosmos by satellite. The 
idea of such a simul' arose literally in 
passing, and everything was prepared 
within 48 hours. Play was on ten boards. I 
was in London, along with the five best 
English junior players, selected by the 
British Chess Federation. A further five 
opponents - participants in the recent USA 
Junior Championship, among them future 
grandmasters, 12-year-old Ilya Gurevich 
and 16-year-old Patrick Wolff - played in 
New York. I defeated them 5-0, but the 
English players put up far more tenacious 
resistance.
I remember there being a pretty mating 
finish in the game with a future grandmas­
ter, 17-year-old Stuart Conquest.
Game 93 
G.Kasparov-S.Conquest
Simultaneous Display, 
London 30.06.1984 
Slav Defence D16
1 d4 d5 2 c4 c6 3 ti'lf3 ti'lf6 4 ti'lc3 dxc4 5 a4 
g g 4 6 ti'le5 gh5 7 f3 (the alternative is 7 g3)
7...ti'lfd7 8 ti'lxc4 e5 9 ti'le4
I was only very superficially acquainted 
with this variation, but I knew that the 
knight move was the main one (although 9 
; e3 is also not bad, K.Grigorian-Vasyukov, 
42nd USSR Championship, Leningrad 1974).
485

Garry Kasparov on Garry Kasparov: Part One
9.....1b4+ 10 .td 2 'ie7 11 t xb4
The most popular line. 11 dxe5 0-0 12 
Sc1 or 12 f4 leads to double-edged play 
with slightly the better chances for White.
1 1..:ilVxb4+ 12 Wd2 'iJ/xd2+ 13 'it>xd2 exd4
14 li:Jed6+ '>t>e7
15 it:Jxb7
This is not bad - what a pawn to capture! 
But 15 it:Jf5+!? is more timely: 15 ...it>f6 
(15...'it>d8 16 li:Jxd4 is no better, Bagirov- 
Podgaets, Tbilisi 1973) 16 it:Jxd4 .l:!.d8 17 e4 
it:Jc5 18 'it>e3 .l:!.xd4 19 'it>xd4 li:Jb3+ 20 '>t>c3 
li:Jxa1 21 .te2 it:Jd7 22 Sxa1, and Black is 
unable to equalise:
a) 22...li:Jc5 (Polugayevsky-Hubner, Til­
burg 1985) 23 g4! .tg6 24 h4 (Polugayevsky) 
with an unpleasant initiative;
b) 22...&e7 23 b4 (23 it:Ja5!? Hb8 24 .ta6!)
23. ..f6 24 .l:!.d1 li:Jb6 (24. ...l:!.b8 25 li:Je3!?) 25 
li:Ja5 tt:Jxa4+?! (25...fib8 26 .ta6!? - Kramnik)
26 'it>b3 li:Jb6 27 li:Jxb7 (Kramnik-Damljano- 
vic, Moscow Olympiad 1994). In this game, 
which I witnessed with my own eyes, White 
won easily, and the soon the entire varia­
tion almost disappeared from tournament 
play.
1 S...it:Ja6 16 it:JbaS?!
A dubious venture: by rushing to bring 
back his knight, White only loses time. The 
modest 16 e3! was more appropriate:
16. ..dxe3+ (16. . .li:Jdc5?! 17 li:Jxc5 li:Jxc5 18 
li:Ja5 is advantageous to White, Adorjan- 
Flear, Szirak 1986) 17 tt:Jxe3 with a small 
advantage.
16...1.:Jb4 (now Black has an excellent game)
17 .l:!.a3 li:JcS
17...'it>f6 was also not bad, when a possi­
ble continuation is 18 h4 it:Jc5 19 g4 .tg6 20 
g5+ '>t>e7 21 h5 .tf5 with equality.
18 e3 dxe3+ (a temporary pawn sacrifice 
was also possible - 18. .. ihd8!? 19 exd4 'it>f8, 
hiding the king) 19 S xe 3+ 'it>f6 20 g4 fiad8+
21 'it>e2 .tg6 22 h4
In this dynamic middlegame-type posi­
tion Black has to concern himself with his 
advanced king. But here my opponent 
clearly overestimated his chances.
22...hS?
Of course, Black should have given a 
bishop check - 22 ....td3+, and after 23 'it>f2 
.txf1 24 fixf1 She8 25 Sxe8 .!:!.xe8 26 b3 the 
balance would have been maintained.
22...h6 was also acceptable. No sooner had 
Conquest placed his pawn on h5, than I saw 
a fitting refutation of Black's aggression.
23 gS+ <>t>fS
24 it:Jb7!!
Apparently Black was attracted by the 
counter-attacking variation 24 Se5+? 'it>f4
25 Sxc5 it:Jd3 26 Sxc6 She8+, in which an
486

Challenger
active role is played by his king. But after 
the sudden diversionary knight sacrifice he 
himself ends up in a mating net!
24...l:!.d4
After 24 . tt:Jxb7 White wins with the 
problem-like 25 l:te4! (with the mating 
threats tt:e3 and ..ih3) 25 . ...ih7 26 i.h3+ 
'ig6 27 tt:le5 matei
25 ' i 2 l  (again a spectacular move: the 
white king joins the attack) 2S..J:txc4 
(25 . .. 'if4  26 tt:lxc5) 26 'it>g3l Sxh4
26. .J:te4 27 fxe4+ tt:Jxe4+ 28 'it>f3 was also 
hopeless, for example: 28. ..tt:d2+ 29 'it>e2! 
tt:Jxfl 30 l:txfl+ 'it'g4 31 tt:ld6 i.d3+ 32 l:txd3 
tt:Jxd3 33 tt:Jxf7!, or 28... We5 29 tt:Jc5 tt:Jc2 30 
Sxe4+ '■ xe4+ 31 tt:lxe4 tt:ld4+ 3 2 We3 tt:Jf5+ 
33 'id 2i 'it>xe4 34 ..id3+, and Black never­
theless loses a piece (34. ..'it>e5 35 Sel+ 'if4
36 l:!.f1+ etc.).
27 l:!.xh4 tt:lxb7? (a blunder, but 27../i:Jd5 28 
i.h3+ 'ixg5 29 l:f.e5+ 'it>f6 30 Sxd5 cxd5 31 
tt:Jxc5 was also depressing) 28 .t!xb4 1-0
Altogether I won seven games and three 
ended in a draw, including the game with 
the youngest participant, the 12-year-old 
schoolboy and future top English grand­
master Mickey Adams, being unable to 
breach him in the Caro-Kann (incidentally, 
four years later in a simul’ against young 
stars in Cannes I also dropped one and a 
half points: the more grown-up Adams beat 
me, while our Misha Ulybin gained a draw).
After the simul' we jointly commented 
on the games - and this despite the fact 
that we (I have in mind my opponents 
across the ocean) were thousands of kilo­
metres apart! For those times this was an 
extraordinary event, and as a farewell I 
fervently declared in English: 'Scientific 
progress should above all serve the aims of 
peace and mutual understanding between 
the nations of our planet!'
From London I set off to Barcelona, where 
for the second successive year I was pre­
sented with an elegant little statue - the 
chess 'Oscar' for 1983, and then I rapidly 
returned home and continued preparing 
for my first match for the world crown.
First Match with Karpov: 1984/85
The Karpov-Kasparov match for the world 
championship (Moscow, 9th September - 
15th February 1985) was played to the first 
to win six games, draws not counting, but 
after 48 games, with the score standing at 
+5-3(=40), it was terminated 'without a 
final result’.
The dramatic course of my unlimited 
match with Anatoly Karpov and the who­
dunit-like story of its termination are 
covered in detail in Kasparov vs. Karpov 
1975-1985, and so here I will mention only 
the most memorable moments of the battle 
and will give two of my best games.
A match for the crown is fundamentally 
different to any Candidates match, even the 
most difficult and intense. In particular 
because here the pretender is opposed by 
the world champion himself - a fighter, 
who is far more skilled in play at the high­
est level, with a completely different resis­
tance threshold. In order to overcome him, 
you must regularly make moves of the 
highest quality, and this demands chess 
and psychological preparation of a far more 
serious nature. My experience, acquired in 
the qualifying cycle, although extremely 
useful, proved to be insufficient. The level 
of the problems which Karpov set me in our 
first match, and I had to set him, exceeded 
by an order of magnitude that which came 
before.
My group of constant chess helpers con­
sisted of four people: Nikitin, Shakarov,
487

Garry Kasparov on Garry Kasparov: Part One
Vladimirov and Timoshchenko. A fifth - the 
Lvov grandmaster lossif Dorfman - ap­
peared only at the start of the main match. 
In addition, the Hungarian grandmaster 
Andras Adorjan also participated in the last 
pre-match training session. Later he was 
also at the match for several weeks, during 
its most unpleasant period. After it Andras 
stopped coming to our training sessions (he 
did not fit into the team), but he helped me 
both in the second match with Karpov 
(1985), and my short matches with Anders- 
son, Timman (1985) and Miles (1986). It was 
he who gave me the idea of taking up the 
Grunfeld Defence, in which he was a great 
expert. Andras liked very much analysing 
'his' openings and in them he would find 
new, sometimes unexpected ideas.
Nikitin: 'This was a small force to carry 
out the great amount of  work planned, but 
no one else came to help us: they were afraid 
of incurring the wrath ofthe existing cham­
pion and his patrons. And the list of players 
enlisted to help Karpov prepare, apart from 
his official seconds Balashov and Zaitsev, 
was initially simply frightening: Geller, 
Polugayevsky, 
Makarychev, 
Georgadze,
Mikhalchishin, 
Vaganian, 
Ubilava 
and
Podgaets (in the second match there was 
also Salov and Zhelyandinov). Plus young 
army masters, serving in the so-called sports 
company and carrying out the donkey work 
of compiling selections of games.'
The first stage of this marathon match 
was distinguished by my nervousness and 
my numerous mistakes. This applied even 
to my favourite dynamic positions, where 
previously I felt very confident, but now I 
was making bad oversights. 
Surprises 
during a game made me feel uncomfort­
able and undermined my fighting spirit. In 
the 3rd game, after encountering an excel­
lent preparation by the opponent to my
new move, I became rattled and my re­
sponse was not nearly at the standard of a 
world 
championship 
match. 
Emotions 
overcame cold rationality, which is so 
necessary for such matches. After this 
failure, negative feelings developed in my 
sub-conscious, leading to a lowering in the 
standard of my play, and to a loss of com­
pleteness and logic.
But Karpov played in his customary cool­
headed manner, endeavouring to calculate 
variations accurately and fully exploit each 
of my errors. The stage from the 6th to the 
9th games proved disastrous for me: three 
defeats, and all with tragic, crude, at times 
inexplicable mistakes.
Game 94 
G.Kasparov-A.Karpov
World Championship Match, 
6th game, Moscow 26/2709.1984
One of the critical moments of the entire 
match. Here it would have done no harm 
for me to remember that in my childhood I 
liked arbitrarily to divide the chess board 
into right and left halves, and see what the 
balance of forces was in each of them. In 
the given instance all Black's pieces are
488

Challenger
bunched together on the queenside, having 
left their lone king to its fate. The evalua­
tion of the position is obvious: White has 
every chance of building up an irresistible 
attack.
25 Wd4?
To this day I simply can't understand 
why I went in for the exchange of queens, 
instead of playing in my style - 25 ^ i5 ! 
(not the only strong queen move, but the 
most resolute!), when 25...t2lxd5 26 J:e4 
'id 6 27 Sd4 is bad for Black, as is 25 . ..'if8
26 ..th3 Sc7 27 .l:i.e3 tt:Jxa2 28 ..txg7! 'ixg7
29 J:e8+ J. f8 30 d6! or 25...ctJxa2 26 'ie5! 
Wf8 (26. ..f6 27 'ie6+ Wh8 28 J:e4 - 28 
..txf6!? - 28. ..'id6 29 f
 with crushing 
threats) 27 ..te4! (threatening #f5) 27...Wh8
28 ^ i5  'ig 8 29 i f5! .l:i.d8 (otherwise J:e4- 
h4) 30 'ig5! .l:!.f8 (30 ....l:!.xd5? 31 #xg7+!) 31 
'id2!. A fantastic position, which could well 
have rivalled the finish to the 16th game of 
the second match (1985). White gains a 
decisive material advantage: 30...ctJb4 31 
..tc3, or 30. . ...tb4 31 'ixa2 ..txe1 32 'ixa6.
It is clear that 25 'ih 5 ! would have 
brought me a swift and spectacular win, 
and with it the score 1-1. The entire match 
would have turned out differently! But how
- that I do not know...
25...'ixd4 26 tt:Jxd4 tt:Jxa2 27 tt:Jc6?
Some kind of black-out... 27 ctJf5! sug­
gested itself, with very strong threats. 
Botvinnik, who was following the game, 
said: 'Now Kasparov will certainly play his 
knight to f5 - this is completely in his style.' 
But the terrible thing is that this more than 
natural move (attacking the g7-pawn and 
threatening d5-d6), which was heatedly 
discussed in the press centre, was one that I 
hardly even considered! Although, no way 
for Black to save the game is apparent - in 
all variations it is the powerful passed d- 
pawn that decides matters. But now, as one
commentator said, 'the remainder of the 
game was torture for White'.
27.....tc5! 28 ..th3?! (28 t2le7+! ..txe7 29 
J:xe7 would have retained the initiative 
and chances of confusing my opponent, 
who was in time-trouble) 28....l:i.a8 29 ..td4 
..txd4 30 tt:Jxd4 'it>f8! (neutralising the swift- 
moving passed pawn) 31 d6 tt:Jc3!
32 tt:Jc6?
And this is already the decisive mistake. 
'White should have forced a draw - 32 1 g2 
.l:i.d8 (32. .J:e8?! 33 2a1) 33 i.c6  i.c8  34 
tt:Jxb5.' (Yusupov)
32 .....tb7 33 ..tg2
After 33 i d7 g6 34 l:!.e3 White would 
lose his passed pawn - 34...b4 35 tt:Jxb4 
ctJe4, after which the a-pawn can be 
stopped only at the cost of a piece.
33 ...Be8! 34 t2le5 (or 34 J:a1 ;. xc6 35 t xc6 
J:e6!, winning a pawn) 34. ..f61 35 d7 .l:!.d8 36 
..txb7 fxe5
And after mistakes by both sides Black 
nevertheless won on the 71st move (0-1). 
One of the most nightmarish games in my 
career!
After the first six games the champion's 
enormous match experience enabled him 
to work out a method of playing for a win: 
essentially Karpov simply waited for my
489

Garry Kasparov on Garry Kasparov: Part One
next 'gift' and provoked me into mistakes, 
by creating positions in which my impul­
siveness and unpreparedness for play at 
the highest level would increase their 
probability.
In the 7th game the champion 'served 
from the other side' - he played 1 d4. There 
was no great surprise in this, but when you 
are in disarray you act over-sensitively to 
any innovation by the opponent. I wasted 
time hesitating, despite the decision taken 
beforehand to play the Tarrasch Defence. 
The consequence of my uncertainty became 
severe time-trouble...
Came 95 
A.Karpov-G.Kasparov
World Championship Match, 
7th game, Moscow 28.09.1984
3S. .. .U.c2?
A terrible time-trouble lapse in a practi­
cally equal position: I made the second 
move of a variation, having mentally al­
ready exchanged the queens! The obvious
35 ...'iVxd3 36 .iJ.xd3 l:i.c2! 37 a4 g5 38 ..id2 
Wf7 39 i.b 4  ctJe6 40 Sd7+ Wg6 would have 
given an easy draw.
'As he was making the move 35 ...flc2,
Garry winced when he suddenly saw the 
white queen on the board. Without taking 
his hand off the rook, he tried in vain to 
find another, more appropriate square. But, 
on failing to find one, he let go of the 
“upstart", and violently bashed the clock 
button.' (Nikitin)
36 'iUe3! Sc8 37 'fJ/e7 bs?
I 
was already thoroughly dispirited, and 
with my flag hanging I was unable to find
37..."VJif7 38 j}'xf7+ 'it>xf7 39 l:i.xh5 g5 40 ..id6 
(Averbakh) 40... ctJe6i with good saving 
chances thanks to the active rook: 41 l:th7+ 
tbg7 42 g4 .l:!.c6 43 ..ib4 fi.c2 etc.
38 l:td8 Sxd8 39 'i'xd8 Wf7 40 i.d6 gS 41 
Wa8 ®g7 42 Wxa6
This last move was sealed. Without re­
suming the game, Black resigned (1-0).
The three defeats at the start of the 
match killed my fighting spirit, and I 
needed time to think about what had 
happened and regain my composure, even 
if only a little . ..
In the 9th game after some hesitation I 
decided to employ the Tarrasch Defence 
again, since the opening outcome of the 
7th game had been quite acceptable for 
Black. But Karpov was excellently prepared 
and he was able to emerge from the open­
ing with a slight advantage. The game was 
adjourned in an almost equal endgame, 
but with my sealed move I made the de­
fence more difficult, and soon after the 
resumption I made a serious mistake.
Came 96 
A.Karpov-G.Kasparov
World Championship Match, 
9th game, Moscow 05/06.10.1984
All the attention of the two sides is fo­
490

Challenger
cused on the kingside - the only part of the 
board where the white king may be able to 
break through. Is Black able to prevent this?
46...gxh4?
In expectation of the automatic reply 47 
gxh4 (the basis of our analysis), after which 
White cannot break through: 47 ... 
g6 48 
'lt>g3 'lt>e6 49 tt:Jg2 'it>d6 50 t2Jf4 3- f7 51 t2Jd3 
.i.e6 52 tt:Jc5 ..tc8 with a draw.
In view of Black's subsequent problems, 
other ways of defending should have been 
sought - for example, 46. ..'lt>e6!. This was 
deemed to be the most accurate reply: now 
47 hxg5 fxg5 48 f4 fails to 48 ...g4 with a 
draw. But there are also other tries:
a) 47 g4 hxg4 48 hxgS (to Dvoretsky's 
recommendation 48 tt:Jxg4 gxh4 49 'lt>g2 
there is the satisfactory reply 49. ..gf5 50 
t2Je3 jLg6 51 'it>h3 jLh5 52 f4 ge2 53 'it>xh4 
gf3) 48... gxf3! 49 gxf6 (49 'lt>xf3 fxg5 50 
'lt>g4 'it>f6 51 tt:Jxd5+ 'it>g6 with a draw - 
Nunn) 49 ...g_e4! 50 t2Jg4 'it>f7 51 'lt>g3 'it>e6 
52 tt:Je5 'it>xf6 and Black loses his a6-pawn, 
but gains a draw with the help of 
zugzwang, or 52 'it>f4 'it>f7 53 'ie5 g g6! 54 
'lt>xd5 gh5 55 tt:Jf2 'it>xf6 with a draw 
(Dvoretsky);
b) 47 'it>g2 g d3 48 g4 hxg4 (the waiting 
move 48. .. : g6 will also do) 49 fxg4 ge4+ 50 
'lt>g3 'it>f7! (but not 50. ..gxh4+? 51 'it>xh4) 51
h5 'ie6! 52 lDd1 jLh7 53 t2Jc3 jLc2 54 'it>f3 
'it>d6 55 'it>e3 'lt>e6 56 'it>d2 jLh7, when the 
white king cannot break through, and on 
its own the knight cannot win the game: 57 
a4 bxa4 58 tt:Jxa4 f5 etc.
Thus 46 ...'lt>e6 would have given Black a 
simpler draw.
47 t2Jg2!! (14)
This unexpected and brilliant move, 
which we overlooked in our home analysis, 
left me in a state of shock and my resis­
tance almost collapsed. I intuitively sensed 
that now Black's position was hopeless ...
47...hxg3+ (14) 48 'lt>xg3 (White quickly 
picks up the h5-pawn and breaks through 
with his king) 48...'it>e6
As was shown by Marin, it was no better 
to play 48....i.g6 49 t2Jf4 gf7 50 'it>h4 'lt>e7 51 
tt:Jxh5 'it>e6 (51...g xh5 52 'it>xh5 and wins) 52 
tDg7+ cj;e7 53 'lt>g4, when after 53...'id6 54 
tt:Jh5 Black loses his f-pawn and with it the 
game, while 53 ...g g6 54 tt:Jh5 jLc2 55 t2Jf4 
'it>d6 56 'lt>h5 gd1 57 'lt>g6 'ie7! leads to a 
position from the game (where 58 lDh5! etc. 
is decisive).
49 tt:Jf4+ cj;}f5 50 tt:Jxh5 'it>e6 (forced, in view 
of the threat of tDg7-e8-c7) 51 t2Jf4+ 'lt>d6 52 
'lt>g4 g c2 53 'it>h5 g d l 54 'lt>g6 'lt>e7!
Of course, not 54. ..jLxf3? 55 'it>xf6, win­
ning the d5-pawn and the game.
491

Garry Kasparov on Garry Kasparov: Part One
55lt:Jxd5+?
A blunder: the d5-pawn was merely hin­
dering Black! 55 lt:Jh5!, which the commen­
tators also overlooked at the time, is far 
stronger. Now 55....tc2+ is insufficient: 56 
'it>g7 'it>e6 57 lt:Jxf6 A b 1 (57..'it>f5 58 lt:Jxd5 - 
Dvoretsky) 58 lt:Jg4 'it>f5 59 'it>f7 'if4  60 'it>e6 
'it>xf3 61 lt:Jf6 'it>e3 62 'it>xd5 and wins 
(Marin).
Black must play 55. ...txf3 56 lt:Jxf6 .te4+! 
(56... 'it>e6 is worse: 57 lt:Je8 'it>d7 58 lt:Jg7 'it>e7
59 'it>f5 'it>d6 60 'it>f6 and wins) 57 'it>g5 .td3! 
(57. ...tg2 58 'it>f5, driving back the king and 
winning the d5-pawn), but a joint analysis 
by Marin and Dvoretsky (2005) demon­
strates a pretty win for White after 58 lt:Jg4! 
.t f l! 59 lt:Je5 .th3 60 'it>g6! 'it>e6 61 lt:Jc6 'it>d6
62 lt:Ja5 'it>e7 63 lt:Jb3 .td7 64 lt:Jc5 Ac8 65 
'it>g7! .tf5 66 lt:Jxa6 .td3 67 lt:Jb8 .tc2 68 
lt:Jc6+! 'it>e6 69 'it>f8! .tg6 70 ctJa7 ; d3 71 
'it>e8 .te2 72 lt:Jc6! 'it>d6 73 lt:Je7! 'lti'e6 74 'it>d8 
'1t>d6 (74....tf1 75 lt:Jc6) 75 lt:Jf5+ 'it>e6 76 lt:Je3 
'it>d6 77 'it>c8 'it>c6 78 'it>b8, when the king 
breaks through to the b5-pawn, after which 
a3-a4 proves decisive.
And if Black defends against the raid 
along the 8th rank - 68 ...Wd7 69 lt:Je5+ 'lti'e7, 
White converts his extra pawn by 70 C2Jg4 
and lt:Je3, and then 'he cannot be prevented 
from bringing back his king and, after 
playing his knight to c3 at a convenient 
moment, advancing a3-a4' (Dvoretsky).
But this was established only twenty 
years after the match, under the watchful 
eye of a computer...
55...'it>e6
Immediately after the game I regretted 
that I had not played 55 ...'it>d6!?. Soviet 
commentators 
diplomatically 
remarked 
that after 56 lt:Jxf6 .txf3 'the win is still not 
so simple', which translated into modern 
language means ‘the position is a dead 
draw': 57 'it>f5 .tg2 58 'it>f4 .th3 59 'lti'e3 f
60 lt:Je4+ 'it>d5 61 lt:Jc5 .tc8 62 'it>d3 .tf5+ 
and ...i.c8. And 56 lt:Jc3 i.xf3  57 'it>xf6 
i.g2(c6) would have reduced the game to a 
drawn position discovered by the analysts.
56 lt:Jc7+
56...'it>d7?
Submissively giving up a second pawn. 
Alas, mentally I was already reconciled to 
defeat and I did not suspect how difficult 
things were for White! 56 ...'it>d6 was far 
stronger, with the idea of 57 lt:Jxa6 .txf3 58 
'it>xf6 'it>d5 (Averbakh) 59 ctJc7 'lti'xd4 60 
lt:Jxb5+ Wc4 with a draw, or 57 lt:Je8+ We7 
(but not 57. ..'it>d5? 58 f4!) 58 lt:Jxf6 Axf3 59 
'it>f5 'it>d6 60 'it>f4 .tg2 61 'lti'e3 Ah3 - with 
the same draw as in the previous note. But 
the most surprising thing is that, as a deep 
analysis shows, even though two pawns 
down Black is not lost!
57 tt:Jxa6 .txf3 58 'lti'xf6 'it>d6 59 Wf5 'it>d5 60 
'it>f4 .t h l 61 'it>e3 'lti'c4 62 lt:Jc5! (16) 62....tc 6 
62 ....tg2 (Geller) 63 lt:Jd3 .th1(b7) was 
also suitable.
63 ctJd3 .tg2
'There was the interesting idea 63....te8
64 ctJe5+ 'it>d5 with the hope of holding out 
two pawns down.' (Averbakh)
64 lt:Je5+ (13) 64...'it>c3
64...Wd5!? (Averbakh) came into consid­
eration, for example: 65 lt:Jg4 .th3 66 lt:Jh6
492

Challenger
.ie 6  or 65 Cbd7 i. h1 66 'it>d3 
e4+ 67 'it>c3 
.if3  68 a4 bxa4 69 tt:Jb6+ 'it>c6 70 tt:Jxa4 
' h5(g4), and the two extra pawns do not 
bring success (as shown by the Tablebase).
65 tt:Jg6 'it>c4 66 lLle7
66.....tb7? (17)
Only this is the decisive mistake: now 
Black loses because of zugzwang. During 
the game many observers suggested that
66.....th1! would have been more tenacious, 
and here a win has still not yet been found:
a) 67 tLlf5 (67 d5? .ixd5 with a draw)
67...'it>d5! 68 lLlg3 (68 'it>f4 .ie4! - Marin) 
68. .. g2 69 '>t>d3!? - to this move by Dvoret­
sky there is Muller's reply 69... ; f3!? 70 tt:Jf1 
.ie4+ 71 'it>c3 •. f3 72 tbe3+ 'it>e4 73 lZJc4! 
'it>d5! 74 lZJb2 'it>c6 75 a4 bxa4 76 tt:Jxa4 
.ih5(g4), with the same draw as in the note 
to Black's 64th move;
b) 67 tt:Jc8 'it>d5 68 'it>d3 .ie4+ 69 'it>c3 'it>c6 
(Timman), and my attempt 70 lLle7+ 'it>d7 
71 lLlg8 'it>e6 72 tt:Jh6 Ji.f3 73 \t>d3 .ith1 74 
lLlg4 (with the idea of 74...Ji.g2? 75 lLlf2! 
.if3  76 lZJe4 or 75 ... }. f1+ 76 'it>e3 and lLld3- 
f4, winning) was parried by Dvoretsky with 
74. ....tf3! 75 lZJe3 'it>d6 or 75 tt:Jf2 \t>d5.
67 tt:JfS ..tg2?!
'And again 67. ..'>t>d5 would have set 
White more problems' (Averbakh). After 68 
'it>d3 'it>e6! to succeed White needs to trans­
fer his knight to c3, and this aim is achieved 
only by the paradoxical move 69 lLlg7+!!, 
found in 2005 by Muller (obviously at the 
board it would have been very hard, if at all 
possible, to find such a move), for example:
69...'it>d6 70 tt:Je8+! 'iti>d7 (70. ..'iti>e7 71 tt:Jc7 
..tc6 72 d5) 71 tt:Jf6+ 'it>e6 72 tt:Je4 ..tc6 73 
lLlc3, or 69...'>t>d7 70 tt:Jh5 .Jtg2 (70...'it>d6 71 
tt:Jf6 and lLle4-c3) 71 lLlf4! .if1+ 72 'iti>e4 'iti>d6 
73 'iti>e3! .Jtc4 74lLle2 'it>e6 75 lLlc3 and wins.
68 tt:Jd6+ 'it>b3 69 lLlxbS 'it>a4 70 lLld6! 1-0
After 70...'iti>xa3 71 b5 the bishop has to 
be given up for this pawn. Times: 3.25-3.55.
Thus the score had increased to 4-0 in 
Karpov's favour. For me it came as a great 
shock to lose four games out of nine, with­
out a single win Oust imagine: during the 
two preceding years I had only lost three 
games, and here I had already lost four!). I 
was two steps away from a humiliating 
rout
It only remained, so to speak, for the 
champion to wrap up and dispatch his 
opponent, i.e. me. But here Karpov violated 
an undisputable law of the struggle - the 
opponent must be finished off. Having 
decided that I myself would ripen and drop 
off, like a mature fruit, he relaxed the 
pressure. Intoxicated by success, Karpov set 
himself a high objective: to win by a 6-0 
whitewash and disable a dangerous rival 
for a long time. This was no longer a con­
test only with me, but also with the shadow 
of the legendary Bobby Fischer, who in his 
time won by the same score (without any 
draws!) in his Candidates matches with 
Taimanov and Larsen.
The decision not to take risks played into 
my hands. To last out for as long as possi­
ble, I needed to regain my composure and 
urgently change tactics. From here on I 
began playing extremely cautiously, en­
493

Garry Kasparov on Garry Kasparov: Part One
deavouring to exclude even the slightest 
risk. There followed a record series of seven­
teen draws! This came to an end in the 27th 
game, in which I lost a drawn endgame. The 
extreme tension of the two and half 
months' struggle nevertheless made itself 
felt: I relaxed prematurely in a simple 
position, which on another day I would 
have held without difficulty.
The score became 5-0 (with 22 draws) 
and I found myself right on the brink. Those 
were difficult days! It seemed to be all over
- but here the most interesting part began. 
Unexpectedly, the 27th game became a 
turning-point, and not a 'killer' as many 
imagined it 
would. 
Who 
could have 
thought that there were a further 21 games 
to come, and that Karpov would not gain 
another win?!
The crunch was to come in the 31st 
game. All the indications were that it was 
destined to be decisive. That was their plan. 
Karpov wore a new suit for the occasion 
and he came on to the stage looking smart 
and fresh - he was obviously aiming for a 
win. His entire entourage also turned out in 
their Sunday best. From the very start of the 
game the press centre was full, many TV 
cameras were in operation and in the 
auditorium there was a special tension in 
the air - the expectation of something 
significant was felt. In a secluded corner 
behind the stage a laurel wreath, prepared 
by the USSR Chess Federation, was awaiting 
its owner. Everything was ready for the 
ceremony planned for that evening. Only 
one thing remained - to win the game.
And the first half of it went well for Kar­
pov. He gained an advantage and was even 
able to win a pawn. But then something 
extraordinary happened: when the situa­
tion became sharper, he simply panicked. 
Generally speaking, I was the one who
should have panicked, but in fact I was 
completely calm. To make sure I even took 
off my jacket.
Game 97 
A.Karpov-G.Kasparov
World Championship Match, 
31st game, Moscow 07.12.1984
22 'id3?
The critical moment of the game. Karpov 
decides simply to capture the pawn, but the 
energetic 22 'Llf3! would have set Black far 
more difficult problems: 22. ..'Llc5 (22. ...txf3
23 'ifxf3 is also depressing) 23 'Llxc5 .txc5
24 'Lle5 gaS 25 'Lld3 tt:le4 26 .te5 or 25 f3 
'Llh5 26 .tf2 'Llf4 27 B c l with unpleasant 
pressure, although it is rather early to be 
talking about the inevitability of White 
winning.
22.„gc6!
Thanks to the poor position of the knight 
on a4 and his activity in the centre, Black 
gains quite good compensation for the 
pawn. '22...'Llc5 23 'Wixd4 fld8? did not work 
because of 24 'iWxd8+! .txd8 25 l:txd8+ '>th7
26 gb8! iVa8 27 tt:lb6, and the black queen 
cannot escape from the dungeon.' (Lilien- 
th al)
494

Challenger
23 ..ib3 tt:Je4
Here I gained something of a new lease 
of life and calmed down. I remembered an 
old game with Alburt (Game No.28), where 
White was also a pawn up, but everything 
was spoiled by his knight being stuck on a4 
and hopelessly inferior in strength to 
Black's bishop.
24 'iWxd4
24...'iWb7
This move was not commented upon: 
Black is a pawn down, and it would seem 
that he should avoid the exchange of 
queens, 
doing 
everything 
possible 
to 
sharpen the play. But here was a conven­
ient opportunity to exploit the 'hanging' 
state of the white pieces: 24. ..1i'xd4!? (a 
computer recommendation) 25 fixd4 fie8!? 
(an ambush!) and ....i6 , with activity 
giving a quite easy draw.
However, at that moment I sensed some 
uncertainty on the part of Karpov. Possibly 
he saw that his advantage was extremely 
shaky, and less that it had seemed a few 
moves earlier. The feeling that victory was 
slipping away upset his composure...
25 .i.ds
'A timely simplifying manoeuvre' (Aver­
bakh). Was there a worthy alternative? 
There was no point in making an escape
square for the king - 25 h3 in view of
25 ...tt:Jxg3 26 fxg3 jLxa4 27 'iWxa4 l2Jc5 and 
...tt:Jxb3. And after 25 tt:Jc3 tt:Jdc5 Black has 
good play for the pawn: 26 ..id5 jLf6! 27 
..ixc6 (27 Wc4 tt:Jxc3) 27. ..'ixb2 28 'ilfxe4 
tt:Jxe4 29 tt:Jxe4 Bd8, and after also captur­
ing the a-pawn the black queen will be 
rather stronger than the three minor 
pieces, or 26 ..ic2 tt:Jxg3 (26....i.f6!? 27 'iWc4 
.l:Ie8) 27 hxg3 1i'xb2 28 tt:Jd5 'iWb7 29 tt:Jxe7+ 
Wxe7 with equality.
2S...t2Jdf6 26 
xc6 'iWxc6 27 b3 (the knight 
is defended, but it is still out of play)
27 .. .1e8
27....l:d8!? was perhaps more accurate, 
driving the queen into the corner - 28 'iWa1, 
and only then 28. ...l:Ie8 (in addition, 28. ...l:Ic8 
or 28...tt:Jd2 is interesting).
28 'iWd3?!
For the second time in this game the 
queen ends up 'in the wrong place at the 
wrong time' (Karpov must have rather 
unhappy memories of 'iVd3). Now the 
position does indeed become sharp. All the 
commentators 
recommended 
28 
'iWc4!, 
which would still have left White as the 
stronger side:
a) 
28. ..'iWb7 - possibly this is what I would 
have played, continuing to maintain the 
tension. But then Karpov could have cre­
495

Garry Kasparov on Garry Kasparov: Part One
ated problems for Black with 29 tt'lf3, for 
example: 29...Sc8 30 Wd3 'i'Vb5 31 Wih1, 
intending to question Black's compensation 
for the pawn, although the position is still 
full of life;
b) 
28...'il'xc4 29 bxc4 l:tc8. Apparently it 
was this endgame that my opponent 
wanted to avoid, as he was afraid of its 
drawing tendencies: 30 :td4 tt'lg5i 31 tt'lb6 
l:tc6 32 tt'ld5 'it>f8 33 tt'lxe7 cj;xe7 34 tt'ld3 
tt'le6 35 l:!.h4 g5 36 Sxh6 Itxc4, or 30 tt'lb6 
l:tc5! (but not 30. ...ti.c6 31 tt'ld5 'it>f8 32 tt'lxe7 
<tlxe7 33 .Uc1i) 31 tt'ld3 Sc6 32 tt'ld5 tt'lxd5 33 
cxd5 Bc2 34 :te1 tt'lxg3 35 Sxe7 :td2 36 
hxg3 l:txd3, and in both cases Black should 
be able to hold the position.
2S...h5!
Potential tension is created on the king­
side, and after the probable exchange 
...tt'lxg3 and hxg3 the black knight can be 
established at g4. It was evident that Kar­
pov had become nervous. And while he was 
feverishly seeking a simple way of solving 
the problems which had suddenly arisen 
(but there no longer was such a way), I took 
off my jacket and with a confident air I 
began strolling around the stage.
29 l\i'c4
Too late! In the event of 29 tt'lf3 tt'lg4 
Black also has good counterplay - the white
king is under the fire ofhis pieces, and the 
knight on a4 is a long way away, for exam­
ple: 30 tt'le5 tt:xe5 31 ..1xe5 ..1h4 with clear 
compensation for the pawn (32 f4 ..if2+ 33 
<tlfl Jl.a7 34 cDb2 tt'lf2 35 'ilr'd7 'i'a8 36 Sd 2 
lDg4).
29...iVb7 30 tt:f3 litc8 31 We2 CDg4 32 iDe5 
CDxg3 3 3 hxg3
33 .. .'WibS! (now Black has absolutely noth­
ing to fear) 34 CDc4 (or 34 Wxb5 axb5 35 
CDxg4 hxg4 36 CDb6 :tc2 with equality)
34....1f6 3 5 tt'la b6 lite8
Here I offered a draw, and Karpov, with 
just three minutes left for five moves, 
accepted it with a strange sigh of relief 
(Vz-Vz). In another situation I could have 
played on - say, if 36 ' i f l  there is the 
unpleasant 36... h4 (although White is not 
in any great danger). 36 'i!Vd2 is safer:
36... 
..1e7! 37 CDd5 ..ic5 38 CDde3 iDxe3 39 
tt'lxe3 kxe3 40 fxe3 Wg5 with equality. 
Times: 2.28-2.22.
This draw was a great moral victory for 
me. It was not just that the conclusion of 
the match, planned for that day, had been 
frustrated; the main thing was that it 
marked a psychological turning-point. I 
realised that if I were to continue solving 
difficult problems as I had in this game,
496

Challenger
events in the match would take a different 
turn. After all, Karpov's earlier wins had 
been gained largely thanks to the blunders 
which had littered my play from the start. 
But as soon as I began resisting tenaciously, 
seeking only the slightest of counter­
chances, Karpov was unable to do anything 
with me.
The initiative had passed to me, and it 
was not surprising that I won the next 
game. This was my first win in the 94 days 
of the match and my first ever win against 
Karpov, beginning with our duel in a simul­
taneous display ten years earlier (Game 
No.11).
Came 98 
G.Kasparov-A.Karpov
World Championship Match, 
32nd game, Moscow 12.12.1984 
Queen's Indian Defence E12
1 d4 C2Jf6 2 c4 e6 3 ctJf3 b6
If Karpov had been in a peaceable mood 
that day and had been feeling a lack of 
strength, he would probably have chosen a 
solid set-up in the classical Queen's Gambit.
4 C2Jc3 ..tb7 5 a3 dS 6 cxds ttJxdS 7 Wc2
In the variation with 7 e3 (Game Nos. 43,
52, 85) 7...ctJd7 (10th game), we had not in 
fact found any promising ideas for White, 
and so I made the other approved move.
Here Karpov thought for a long time. In 
the usual line - 7 ... c5 8 e4 lLlxc3 9 bxc3, 
where I had gained memorable wins over 
Murey and Gheorghiu (Game Nos. 73, 75), 
at that time White had reached an impasse 
because of 9 ...lLld7 10 .id3 'it'7! (Kasparov- 
Sosonko, Lucerne Olympiad 1982). Par- 
tisch's improvement 10 .if4 ! appeared later 
(cf. Game No.73, note to Black's 9th move).
But I was intending 8 dxcS! ..ixc5 9 ..ig5
- my attention had been attracted by the 
recent game Vyzhmanavin-Novikov (Tash­
kent 1984), where after 9 ...'iVc7 (a recom­
mendation by Plaskett; earlier White had 
been successful against 9 ...i.e7 and 9.f6)
10 2c1 f6 11 ttJxd5 ..lixd5 12 e4! White 
seized the initiative. From 1985 the line
9 ... 'ic8  10 2c1 came to the fore (here I also 
made my contribution: 10...h6 11 .ih 4  a5
12 ctJa4 ctJd7 13 e4!, Kasparov-van der Wiel, 
Amsterdam 1988).
We were also prepared for 7...^xc3, with 
the idea after 8 bxc3 c5 9 e4 lLld7 of never­
theless obtaining the position which White 
has avoided. After the planned 8 'iVxc3 
Adorjan upheld 8...h6!?, not allowing 9 ..lig5 
and intending to meet 9 ..if4 with 9.....td6. At 
the time we did not take this ‘loss of time' 
seriously, but later it transpired that Adorjan 
was right! As often happens after significant 
games in world championship matches, the 
7 'i'c2 variation again came to the fore, and 
in the line 7.lLlxc3 8 'ixc3 the main move 
became 8...h6.
Perhaps at the board Karpov remem­
bered the game with 7...c5 8 dxcS! - at any 
event, he tried to reach the desired position 
with the help of another, rare move.
7...ctJd7?! (34)
An invitation to 8 e4 lLlxc3 9 bxc3 c5 10
497

Garry Kasparov on Garry Kasparov: Part One
i.d 3  ‘#c7! (cf. above). But here the situation 
is worse for Black than after 7 e3 lLld7: the 
bishop at c l is not shut in by the pawn on 
e3, and White has an advantageous oppor­
tunity to avoid the usual plan.
8 tt:Jxds! (17) S...exds
8....txd5?! is worse. Later for some reason 
Karpov played this against Gelfand (Mos­
cow 1992), and after 9 e4 .tb7 10 .tb5! c6
11 .txc6 2c8 12 d5! the outcome was 
di smal for Black. White's position appealed 
to me even a tempo down: in the 3rd game 
of my match with Korchnoi (London 1983) I 
chose the rare variation 7 'ifa4+ lt:Jd7 8 
lt:Jxd5, planning after 8....txd5 (Korchnoi 
replied 8...exd5) the queen retreat 9 'i¥c2!? 
with the idea of 9.c5 10 e4. True, here after
10....tb7 11 i e3 cxd4 lt:Jxd4 a6 or 11 .tf4  
cxd4 12 l:td1 'Wic8 (Azmaiparashvili-Pono- 
mariov, Cap d'Agde (rapid) 2003) Black is 
alright.
9 i.gS!
This sortie causes Black definite discom­
fort, forcing him to make a difficult choice.
9...f6?!
A weakening, which objectively deserves 
to be criticised (as does 9... .te7?! 10 i.xe7 
rt1xe7 or 9 ...lLlf6?! 10 ; xf6 gxf6), but at the 
board it was not easy to realise that the 
best defence was the ugly move 9...'ifc8.
After the obvious 10 g3 .td6 11 .th3 there 
is an unpleasant pin on the knight at d7, for 
example: 11...0-0 12 .tf4!? (the simple 12 
'Wif5 lLlb8 13 'ixc8 is also possible, but this 
is probably insufficient) 12... i.x f4  13 gxf4 
(threatening tt:Je5) 13... 1id8 14 :ig1 with the 
initiative.
Here Black has to defend, whereas Kar­
pov wanted active counterplay. From this 
point of view, 9... f6 looks better, since it 
enables Black to gain time. But its draw­
backs proved to be more significant...
10 f
 cS
11 g3!
Karpov obviously did not like this move. 
Apparently he was hoping for the routine
11 e3, when after 11...c4 or 11...b!c8 12 'YWa4 
c4 he could have created counterplay. Now, 
however, the threat of .th3 reminds Black 
of the weakness of the light squares in his 
position.
11... g6
A symmetrical reply with the idea of 12 
.i.h3 f5 and ....tg7. But the g6-pawn is a 
new target for the development of White's 
initiative. However, it is hard to offer Black 
good advice. 11...g5 12 i.e3 or 11..J:tc8 12 
.th3 cxd4 13 'i¥d1 is unattractive. 11...li'e7 
is more resourceful, with the idea of 12 
..lih3 g5 13 i.e3 #e4!, forcing the exchange
498

Challenger
of queens, but 12 h4! retains a clear advan­
tage: 12...'ie4 13 'id 2 i cxd4 14 .'. g2. It 
would appear that 11.....te7 12 i.h 3  'Et>f7 13 
o-o l'Llf8 is more tenacious, but then White 
has the unpleasant 14 dxc5! bxc5 15 b4.
12 h4!
Such moves always gave me great pleas­
ure. White immediately attacks the vulner­
able points in the opponent's position.
12...We7
Possibly Karpov considered this defence 
adequate, since now nothing is given by 13 
h5 because of 13. ..g5 14 ..te3 'ie4. But...
13 .ig2 (opposing the advance of the black 
queen to e4) 13 ...s g7 14 hS
'Black's position has the drawback that it 
is hard for him to find an appropriate place 
for his king. In addition the d5- and g6- 
pawns can become a convenient target for 
the white pieces.' (Vasyukov)
14...fS?!
Karpov did not play ...g7-g6 and .....tg7 in 
order to make the ugly move 14...g5, creat­
ing a ‘hole' on f5. But that would have been 
the lesser evil! If 15 h6 it is dangerous to 
reply 15. ..gxf4?! 16 hxg7 'ixg 7 17 l'Llh4! 
with a powerful attack (pointed out at the 
time by the match commentators), for 
example: 17 ...fxg3 18 l'Llf5 gxf2+ 19 'it>xf2 
#f8 20 b4! c4 21 'id 2 and Wf4 - despite his
two extra pawns, Black is completely help­
less. However, after 15. ....tf8 16 -= e3 'ie 6  he 
is quite capable of defending.
Perhaps Karpov did not like 15 .i.e3 2c8
16 'if5 , but after 16...h6 or 16 . ..'ie4 it is not 
so clear just how catastrophic is the weak­
ness of the f5-square and the light squares 
in Black's position in general, and there is 
still all to play for.
The move 14. ..f5 is logical in its own way, 
and it appears that Black has real chances 
of avoiding the worst. White cannot keep 
his king at e1 for ever! And when he castles, 
Black too will be able to castle without risk. 
However, things do not come to this...
15 Wd2
1S. . . f  (13)
Again Karpov had a difficult choice. He 
would have liked to play 15. ..l'Llf6 16 h6 i.f8  
with the idea of 17 i.g5?! l'Lle4! (Vasyukov), 
but White has the stronger 17 l'Llg5 l'Lle4 18 
.: xe4! fxe4 19 .ie5 2g8 20 Wf4 (Averbakh) 
or 17 dxc5 bxc5 18 o-o l'Lle4 19 'ia5 , and in 
both cases Black has problems with his 
king.
The attempt to block the position by
15 ... c4 runs into 16 2c1! (with the threat of 
Hc3-e3) 16... l'Llf6 17 h6 .;f8 18 l'Lle5!, and if
18... l'Lle4 White advantageously replies 19 
i.xe4! fxe4 20 f3.
499

Garry Kasparov on Garry Kasparov: Part One
After these continuations it would possi­
bly have been more difficult for White to 
increase his advantage. 15...i.f6, covering 
the weak dark squares, looks sensible and 
solid, but on f6 the bishop takes this square 
away from the knight, which can no longer 
go to e4! Karpov clearly underestimated 
White's following response.
16 l:!.cl!
With the unusual threat of l!c3-e3. What 
can Black do with his king? With the white 
rook on h1, he really doesn't want to castle 
kingside...
I6...fic8 17 .l:!.c3 Sc6
The only defence is a mirror manoeuvre!
18 l:!.e3 (14)
The computer chooses 18 ^ fl!?, but 
many 
commentators 
pointed out the 
‘exceptional strength' of the move 18 .tg5, 
disclosing the weakness now of the dark 
squares in the opponent's position: 18...0-0 
(18. ..cxd4? 19 .l:xc6 i.xc6 20 hxg6) 19 hxg6 
hxg6 20 .i. xf6 .l:cxf6 (20...liJxf6 21 tt:Je5) 21 
tt:Jg5 with an irresistible attack, or 18. ..Bg8
19 hxg6 hxg6 20 .l:e3 .l:e6 21 i.xf6  tt:Jxf6 22 
l:xe6 'iVxe6 23 'i!Vf4, 'and the white queen is 
ready for a decisive invasion' (Dorfman).
But the rook move should hardly be criti­
cised, since it leads almost by force to a won 
ending for White.
18. ..l:!.e6
I think that this is a unique instance, 
where in one game three successive sym­
metrical moves were made: .l:c1 - .l:c8, .l:c3 
-l:c 6 , and .=.e3 - l:.e6.
19 l:!.xe6 'fixe6 20 tt:JgS 'ile7
The exchange 20...i.xg5 21 .txg5 would 
have led to a catastrophic weakening of the 
dark squares. But as it is, Black's defences 
are about to crack - it only remains for 
White to find a decisive strengthening of 
his position.
21 dxcs!
I was afraid of squandering my advan­
tage in the endgame after 21 hxg6? hxg6
22 l:!.xh8+ .txh8 23 dxc5 'fixc5 (if 23....tf6? a 
little combination is decisive: 24 .txd5! 
.txd5 25 'iVxd5 .txg5 26 c6) 24 tt:Je6 'i'a5 25 
tt:lc7+ (little is also achieved with 25 'iVxa5 
bxa5 26 .tc1 tt:Jf6) 25...<;t>d8 26 'Wixa5 bxa5
27 tt:Jxd5. and at the board 27...i.xb2(?) 
seemed unclear to me, although after 28 
i.g5+ 'it>c8 29 l2Je7+ 
30 i.xb 7 (30 i.f4+ 
l:!.d8!) 30...<;t>xb7 31 tt:Jxg6 i.xa3 32 tt:lh4 a4
33 'lt>d1 White has a won position: the a- 
pawn does not promote. But my intuition 
did not betray me - the accurate 27 ...tt:Jb6! 
would have given a draw: 28 i.c7+  'it>d7 29 
i.xb6 .txd5 30 .txd5 axb6, 28 i.g5+ 'it>e8 29 
tt:lc7+ 'it>d7 30 i.xb 7 <;t>xc7 31 i.a 6  i.xb2, or
500

Challenger
28 i2lxb6 ..txg2 29 i2lc4 ' d5! etc.
21 
dxc5 is clearly stronger. It is another 
matter that it gave Black an opportunity for 
a tactical counter-stroke, which unsettled 
me.
21. ..i2lxc5
Here after 21...'ixc5?! 22 i2le6 'ia 5  23 b4! 
'ixa3 24 0-0 Wb2 (24...'ic3 25 'Yia2!) 25 
i2lc7+ 'ie7  26 ttJxdS or 25. ..'id8 26 ife3 
White would have won. 21...h6 22 i2lf3 g5
23 
d6 was also bad for Black.
22 hxg6 d4
The only practical chance - ‘a resourceful 
attempt to change the unfavourable devel­
opment of events' (Averbakh). 22...hxg6 is 
bad: 23 Bxh8+ ..txh8 24 .txd5 .i.xd5 25 
'ixd5, and 25. ....Itxb2 is not possible be­
cause of 26 'ic6+.
23 g7?(10)
Confusion. White could have increased 
his advantage by the simple moves 23 
..txb7 'tixb7 24 f3 hxg6 25 l:xh8+ ..ltxh8 26 
b4 ltJd7 27 'ia2  ltJf8 28 ltJe6! (Dorfman) - 
after 28 ...ifd7 29 lLlc7+ Wd8 30 'ig8 ..tg7 31 
ltJb5! 'ixb 5 32 'ixg7 tLld7 33 'it'xd4 or
31...d3 32 ..tc7+ 'ic8 33 ifc4 d2+ 34 '>t>d1 
'ie6 35 'ilc2 he would have obtained a 
technically won endgame.
Another tempting possibility began with 
the showy 23 ltJf7!? 
xg2 24 l:!.h2 and it
would have also led to the goal: 24. ..hxg6 25 
ltJxh8 g5 26 ltJg6 'ie 4  27 ..te5 f
 28 
ltJh8+!, or 24..JH8 25 Sxh7 'ie6  26 ltJd6+ 
Wd8 27 l'Llb5! ..te5 28 ..txe5 'ifxe5 29 tt:Jxd4 
(29 'ixd4+ is also good enough) 29 ...'ic8 30 
b4 l:rd8 31 g7! .td5 32 'ifc3 ..tg8 33 Sh4, 
regaining the piece and winning.
Alas, at that moment I became excited, I 
was unable to calculate the variations 
accurately, and I decided at least to retain a 
positional advantage, for which by 32 g7 I 
broke up Black's pawn chain.
23.....txg7 (23...'ilxg7!?) 24 .txb7 'ixb7 25 
f3
25 
0-0!? would also have retained a small 
plus. My error on the 23rd move sharply 
changed the character of the position, and 
effectively I had to begin all over again. In 
the new phase of the game Black's pieces 
are active, but his pawns are weak. And I 
judged that psychologically this would be 
unpleasant for Karpov.
25...Wd5! (10)
An excellent, dynamic move: not wishing 
to go totally on to the defensive, Black 
sacrifices a pawn - his pieces occupy splen­
did positions! I n the event of 25. ..h6 26 lLlh3 
and ltJf2 White could have set about proc­
essing the opponent's pawn weaknesses, 
and with quite good chances of success.
501

Garry Kasparov on Garry Kasparov: Part One
2 6 l:x h 7 (11)
If 26 b4 or 26 'it>f2, Black, ofcourse, would 
have replied 26...h6!.
26. ..l:xh7 27 ctJxh7 'ib3?
'A mistake in time-trouble. As many 
commentators pointed out, after 27...d3! 
White could hardly have hoped to win' 
(Averbakh). And indeed, this would have led 
to simplification and a draw: 28 b4 'ib3! 
(the simplest; 28. ..lt:Je6 29 ..ie3! would still 
have left White some chances) 29 'Wie3+ 
lt:Je6 30 'Wixd3 'Wixd3 31 exd3 lt:Jxf4 32 gxf4 
bs!, and Black picks up the a3-pawn, while 
the knight on h7 makes a pitiful impres­
sion.
28 ..id6!
Karpov made his previous move confi­
dently, and it was clear to me that he had 
missed my reply. It unexpectedly transpires 
that White can launch an attack - 29 'Wig5 
isthreatened.
28...lt:Je6
Now the game transposes into a queen 
ending. In the event of 28...'it>d7 29 .txc5 
bxcs 30 'iVf4 'i/Ve6 31 ct:Jg5 White is a pawn 
up with winning chances. But 28...d3 would 
now have lost to 29 .txc5 bxc5 30 #e3+ 
'it>f7 (30. ..'it>d7 31 'Wixc5) 31 lt:Jg5+ Wg6 32 
lt:Je6! 
(not 
32 
lt:Jh3?! 
..ixb2) 
32...d2+
(32 . ...ih6 33 f4) 33 'it>xd2 'Wixe3+ 34 'lt>xe3
.txb2 35 a4 or 33...'Wixb2+ 34 'it>e1 'Wic3+ 35 
'it>f2 i!Vxe3+ 36 'it>xe3 ..te5 37 ctJxc5 .txg3 38 
'it>d4 etc.
29 ct:JgS .th 6 30 Af4 .txg s 31 ; xgs lt:JxgS
32 'ix g s 'ix b 2 33 'ix fs
33. 
..'icl+ ?!
For eight moves Karpov now had less 
than five minutes (against ten for me), and 
this aggravated his problems. In severe 
time-trouble he reckoned that with checks 
he would drive the white king away from 
the e2-pawn and then, after capturing on 
a3, simply restore material equality. But 
this plan proved to have a flaw...
The immediate 33...'Wixa3 was stronger - 
after 34 'Wie4+ 'it>f7 35 'Wixd4 Black's defence 
is difficult, but he can possibly hold on: 
after 35. ..'Wic1+ 36 'it>f2 'iVc6 he only needs to 
push his lone a-pawn, whereas White has 
to advance two pawns (exposing his king in 
the process). For example: 37 f4 a5 38 g4 a4 
(threatening ...'ic5 with the exchange of 
queens) 39 'it'g3 (or in the event of 38 e4 a4
- 39 'it>f3) 39 ... a3 40 g5 a2 41 f5 'ViVc5 42 g6+ 
'it>g8 with equality. Most probably after
33 ...'Wixa3 the game would have ended in a 
draw.
34 'it>f2 'ie3+ 35 f
 'ic l+  36 'it>g2 'i'xa3 37 
'ihS+!
Not 37 'Wie4+?! 'Wie7 with equality. Karpov
502

Challenger
missed this cunning 'side' check when he 
played 33. ..'i*'c1+. Black nevertheless re­
mains a pawn down, and in a worse situa­
tion.
37...'it>d7
It is not easy to decide where to place the 
king, especially with your flag hanging in 
the 32nd game! Black would have had 
fewer saving chances if he had kept his king 
in the vicinity of the enemy pawns:
37...'it>f8?! 38 "ifh8+ f
 39 'irfxd4 a5 (after 
39. ..'ifa2 40 Wf2 'ife6 41 g4 a5, in contrast 
to the 33 . ..'it'xa3 variation, Black's queen is 
still on e6, and he has to lose a tempo on 
...#c6, which changes the evaluation in 
White's favour) 40 "ixb6 iY'b4 41 'ifc7+ 'ie6 
42 'ir'c6+ 'ie7 43 g4 a4 44 g5 or 40...a4 41 g4 
'ie7 42 'it>f2 a3 43 g5! and wins.
38 #g4+ 'it>c6 (3 8...'>t>c7!?) 39 'ifxd4
39 
'ie4+ 'ic7 (39...'ib5, the move previ­
ously suggested by me, is bad because of 40 
g4! 'ic5 41 f4) 40 'ifxd4 a5! 41 g4 "ird6! 42 
'ig7+ 'id 7 would have come to roughly the 
same thing.
39. ..bs?!
39...a5! was more accurate: 40 g4 'i!Yc5 41 
'if6+ (41 "iYa4+ 'id6 42 'ie8 ’tg 5 ) 41..'it'd6
42 'i!Vf5 'iVd5, basing the defence on the fact 
that White is not satisfied with the transi­
tion into a queen endgame.
40 g4 b4?!
With his last move before the time con­
trol Black loses a real hope of saving the 
game, which would still have remained 
after 40...'ife7!.
It would not have been easy for me to 
find the correct reply. In such cases the 
hand itself is drawn to the e2-pawn: since 
e2-e4 was not played on the 1st move, why 
not seal e2-e4 on the 41st move?! But after
41 e4 a5 42 'id5+ Wb6 43 f4 the three 
connected passed pawns might not have 
won against the two, seeing as White has
exposed his king. Better chances of a dis­
tant win are offered by 41 ^ 2 !, in order 
then to advance not the e-pawn, but the g- 
pawn.
41 gS
The sealed move. In our home analysis 
we initially planned 41. ..b3 42 ii'e4+! 'id6
43 'ie8?!, overlooking 43...'i'a2!, which after
44 g6 b2 45 g7 b 1 'i 46 g8'iV 'ikxg8 47 ii'xg8 
leads to a position with two pawns against 
one, but the black king stands opposite the 
white pawns, creating serious problems for 
White in the conversion of his advantage. 
Therefore 43 'irfg6+! 'ie7 44 'irff6+ 'id7 45 
'if5+ rtle7 46 g6 #b2 47 'i!t'f7+ 'id 6 48 'i*'f4+ 
is correct, when Black is unable to save the 
game.
42 
g6 b2 43 g7 'i*'a2 44 'i*'e4+ rtlc5 45 
'ie7+ 'ib6 46 "ikd8+ Wb7 47 g8ii' ii'xg8 48 
'i!Yxg8 b1'i!V 49 'it'd5+ is not so clear. In this 
endgame with two against one, consider­
able resourcefulness would have been 
demanded of White. It is easier for Black to 
play: he gives checks and advances his a- 
pawn, hoping in the event of the exchange 
of the newly-created queens for an ending 
now with a lone white pawn. Here the play 
could have continued for a long time, and 
the game would probably have been ad­
journed for a second time.
503

Garry Kasparov on Garry Kasparov: Part One
By the laws of match play Karpov was 
obliged to resume the game, but appar­
ently he did not want to waste the rem­
nants of his strength, or to resign in public. 
And the following day he took what in my 
opinion was an incorrect decision, testify­
ing to his psychological weakness at that 
moment: he resigned the game without 
resuming (1-0). Times: 2.34-2.29.
5-1i We were jubilant: by scoring a conso­
lation goal, I had avoided a complete rout! 
The situation in the match changed radi­
cally: the loss in the 32nd game dispelled 
Karpov's dreams of repeating Fischer's feats, 
and now there was no longer any point in 
the champion avoiding risks. But he was 
unable to retune to playing more freely and 
riskily. Karpov needed a deep readjustment, 
but for this he no longer had the mental 
strength. He continued waiting for a 'gift', 
but by that time I had managed to perfect 
sound opening variations, and the blunders 
which plagued me at the start of the match 
had practically disappeared.
Eight draws followed. If after the 9th 
game someone had said to Karpov, that 
even after the New Year he would still be 
defending his title, sitting at the same 
table, that person would certainly have 
been labelled a madman!
A critical game for the entire match was 
the 41st, in which against 1 e4 I took the risk 
of employing one of my opponent's weap­
ons - the Petroff Defence. The opening 
experiment concluded in a perfectly good 
endgame for me, in which I could have 
drawn without any particular trouble. But 
here I again committed a 'fatal mistake' (the 
only one between the 28th 
and 48th 
games!), and Karpov could have concluded 
the match, had he not missed a winning 
move.
Game 99 
A.Karpov-G.Kasparov
World Championship Match, 
41st game, Moscow 14/15.01.1985
33 l:'txdl?
An historic mistake! After spending half 
of his 16-minute reserve of time, Karpov 
missed an unexpected chance to win the 
game and the match. While he was consid­
ering his move, in the press centre Dorfman 
drew attention to the pretty intermediate 
move 33 a6!. An express analysis gave the 
following results:
a) 33. ...ia4  (33 ....l:!.d4 34 .ie8+ and 35 a7)
34 a7 .i.c6 35 l:te6 Jl.ds 36 .l;i.d6;
b) 33 .....ib3 34 'Llxb3 Sa4 (34...,l;txb3 35 
a7) 35 'Llc5 Ha5 36 Se4! cJI>f7 (36. ..Sxc5 37 
a7) 37 Sxf4+ ..if6 38 Sa4 Sxa4 39 'Llxa4 
..id4 40 'Llc3!;
c) 33 . ...l:!.b8 34 l:xd1 ' a3 35 ttJb7!, and in 
all variations White wins.
Why, after thinking over his 33rd move 
for eight minutes, did Karpov not play this? 
In an interview after the match he ex­
plained: 'Being in time-trouble, I was un­
able to calculate fully the consequences of 
the piece sacrifice (33 a6!).' Possibly he 
decided 33 .:xd1 was also winning, but...
504

Challenger
33 ...i.d4
'Now the struggle flares up with re­
newed strength.' (Taimanov)
34 ctJe6 j_a7 3S Sd7
As the commentators remarked, 35 
lLlxg7!? :i:Ib2 36 lLlf5 .i.xf2+ 37 'it>f1 came 
into consideration. In my opinion, this was 
somewhat stronger: here it is more difficult 
for Black to gain a draw - he has more 
opportunities to go wrong. True, after
37...h5 and ... S a 2 (and if 38 fla 1, then 
38. .. " a7) he should nevertheless be able to 
holdthe position.
35...1..bl+ 36 ®h2 .i.xf2 37 lLlxf4 fia l 38 
lLle6 fixaS
'Black's task is simpler after 38 ... g5! 39 
Sg7+ (39 Sd5 j_e 1) 39...Wh8 40 Sg6 'it>h7 41 
lLlf8+ 'it>h8 42 a6 (or 42 J:xh 6+ Wg7 43 .l:g6+ 
'it>xf8 
44 S f 6+ 
'it>g7 
45 
S x f2 
Sxa5)
42...j_g1+! 43 'it>g3 Ea3+ 44 'it>g41'1.a4+! with 
an inevitable draw.' (Dorfman)
I saw this idea, but in severe time-trouble 
I did not calculate as far as all the checks, 
beginning with 42 ...j_g1+!. Besides, after 
capturing the a5-pawn I assumed that the 
resulting ending with two pawns against 
one on the same wing was objectively 
drawn.
39 Ir.xg7+ ®h8 40 Sf7 j_e3 41 Wg3 .td 2
The sealed move.
I didn't like Black's position, but after 
lengthy home analysis my trainers and I 
found a clear way to draw. On the day 
when the game was resumed, the Hall of 
Columns was packed with Karpov's sup­
porters, who were hoping to see his sixth 
win. But once again they were to be disap­
pointed... On the 71st move Karpov offered 
a draw (Vz-VZ). He looked very tired and 
depressed.
The outcome of this game had an enor­
mous effect on the psychological state of 
the two players. Karpov's belief in overall 
victory was obviously shaken, although his 
choice of opening variations in games 43­
47 indicates a desire to increase the risk 
and seize his chance in double-edged play. 
He sensed that his opponent had not sim­
ply seized the initiative, but was now not 
inferior to him in technical positions - in 
that aspect of the game where until re­
cently Karpov had been sure of his superior­
ity. Now he could not achieve the desired 
result by using purely technical means 
alone.
There followed a further six draws, in 
which several times I had an advantage and 
excellent winning chances. But I was suc­
cessful only in the 47th game - 5-2! After 
this it was announced that the match 
would move from the Hall of Columns to 
the Sport Hotel. And for recuperation 
Karpov gained a whole week (two 'techni­
cal' time-outs on 1st and 4th February) - a 
luxury which was totally unavailable to me 
at the start of the match, when I so needed 
a respite. Moreover, after this the champion 
also took another time-out on his own 
account (6th February), and so the next 
game took place only nine days later.
It was precisely during those days that 
FIDE and the Soviet Chess Federation began
505

Garry Kasparov on Garry Kasparov: Part One
actively seeking a pretext for terminating 
the match ahead of schedule, and as a 
result the 48th game was destined to draw 
a line under our five-month duel.
Game 100 
G.Kasparov-A.Karpov
World Championship Match, 
48th game, Moscow 08/09.02.1985 
Petroff Defence C42
1 e4 es 2 tt:f3 tt:f6
On this occasion Karpov's objective was 
merely to hold out (after all, it would be far 
more convenient to terminate the match 
with a score of 5-2, rather than 5-3), and so 
he avoided 2 ... tt:c6 (44th and 46th games) 
and chose one of the most solid openings.
3 tt:xes d6 4 tt:f3 tt:xe4 5 d4 ds 6 .td3 tt:c6 7 
0-0 .te7 (7. ..tg4 8 c4! - Game No.67 in 
Kasparov vs. Karpov 1975-1985; Game No.6 
in Kasparov vs. Karpov 1986-87) 8 c4!
After the 41st game this eclipsed 8 I:e1 
(Game No.50).
8...tt:f6
Realising that in the event of 8...tt:b4 I 
would use his own prescription from the 
41st game - 9 .i.e2! (Game No.45 in Kas­
parov vs. Karpov 1975-1985), Karpov made
another, less critical move, which had been 
known since the mid-19th century.
9 tt:c3
At that time this line was not yet deeply 
developed, and it was only on the threshold 
of the 21st century that the immediate 9 h3 
was deemed to be more accurate.
9 ...0-0
9 ... .te6!? is interesting: 10 c5 (10 cxd5 
tt:xd5 is equal, Karpov-Larsen, Bugojno 
1980; Milos-Karpov, Buenos Aires 2001)
10....tg4! 11 .tb5 o-o 12 .txc6 bxc6 13 h3 
.txf3 14 'ixf3 l:!.e8 with good prospects of 
equalising (an example: 5hirov-Gelfand, 
Astana 2001).
10 h3
'An important prophylactic move, pre­
venting the pin on the knight and setting 
Black a problem: how can he now success­
fully complete his development?' (Tai- 
manov)
10...dxc4
A new attempt to develop the queen's 
bishop, avoiding the bind after 10. ...te6 11 
c5. But the usual continuation has re­
mained more popular: 10...tt:b4 11 .te2 
dxc4 12 .txc4 c6 13 Se1 tt:bd5 - the main 
tabiya of the 8...tt:f6 variation, where White 
plays 14 .tg5 .te6 15 1fb3 or immediately
14 ^ 3  tt:b6 15 .td3 
e6 16 'i'c2. At any 
event, White remains the active side, and in 
neutralising his initiative it is not easy for 
Black to avoid creating real weaknesses in 
his position. It was perhaps for this reason 
that Karpov chose a different, more dy­
namic way of developing, aimed at coun­
terplay.
11 i.xc4  tt:as 12 :. d3 .te6
Black is planning either to carry out the 
freeing ... c7-c5, or to occupy the d5-point (in 
this case his knight on a5 will return to c6).
13 He1
'A flexible move. After 13 .te3 tt:c4 14
506

Challenger
iVc2 t2Jxe3 15 fxe3 White has an active 
position, but the two black bishops may 
become dangerous.' (Tal)
13 ...t2Jc6
The most natural reply - Karpov has also 
played this in the 21st Century. If 13. ..c5, 
then 14 dxc5 ..ixc5 15 ..ig5 seemed quite 
promising to me, but a pawn sacrifice is 
also interesting - 14 tbg5i? cxd4 15 l2lxe6 
fxe6 16 t2Je4 with quite good compensa­
tion.
14 a3
Preventing ...'2lb4. If 14 J. g5 h6 15 ..ih4 
tLJd5 16 ..ig3 ..id6 with equality (Leitao- 
Karpov, Sao Paulo (rapid) 2004).
14...a6
If 14. ..Wd7 or 14. ..l:i.e8 the pin 15 ..ib5 is 
unpleasant, while after 14. ..Wd6 15 ..ie3 
cud5 16 'i:Vc2 (Gelfand-Adams, Wijk aan Zee 
1994), it is not easy for Black to blockade 
the d4-pawn completely, and as long as it is 
potentially mobile, White retains the initia­
tive.
15 ..if4!? (18)
After some thought I found an interest­
ing plan, based on tactical nuances.
In my view, 15 j_c2, which was tried 
many years later in three games of the 
rapid match Shirov-Karpov (Bastia 2003), is 
no better. The second of them went
15. ..Wd7 16 Wd3 fifd8 17 ..ig5?, when Black 
could have captured the pawn - 17...t2Jxd4. 
It was correct to play 17 ..ie3 g6 (threaten­
ing .....if5 with the exchange ofbishops) 18 
Wd2!? ..if5 19 ..ib3 with a slight initiative.
15.Jtd 7
'15. ..l2ld5, 
aiming 
for 
simplification, 
came into consideration' (Yusupov). How­
ever, 'after 16 ..ig3 Black would not have 
got out of his difficulties' (Taimanov): if
16...i.f6 White has the promising 17 CUe4! 
i.xd 4  18 ltJeg5 ..ixb 2 (18...'2lf6 19 l:xe6) 19 
l:i.b1, while the attempt to provoke further 
exchanges - 16. ....td6 17 ..ih4 i.e 7 does not 
succeed because 
of 
18 
..ixe7 
l2lcxe7 
(18. ..t2Jdxe7 19 l:xe6! fxe6 20 tLJg5 is dan­
gerous for Black) 19 tLJg5 with the unex­
pected win of a pawn: 19. ....if5 20 cuxd5 
cuxd5 21 ..ixf5 'i:Vxg5 22 l:e5! Wd8 23 
j_xh7+ 'lt>xh7 24 ^ 5 + .
Therefore Karpov made a natural move, 
continuing his development. I think that 
my reply greatly surprised him.
16 tLJeS!
Not an altogether usual decision - after 
all, by exchanging all the knights it would 
appear that White reduces the tension. On 
the other hand he gets rid of his isolated 
pawn and thanks to the activity of his 
pieces he acquires new prospects.
507

Garry Kasparov on Garry Kasparov: Part One
l 6../t:JxeS
16...'i'xd4? is b ad :1 7  ltJxc6 Vi'xf4 18 
ltJxe7+ 'it>h8. It appears that the knight at e7 
is in danger, but after 19 .2.c2 c6 20 #c1 
(the simplest) White remains with a mate­
rial advantage.
17 dxes ltJdS 18 ltJxdS .txds 19 flc 2
The point of White's idea: he completes 
his development with gain of tempo, pro­
voking a weakening of the opponent's 
kingside. The character of the position has 
unexpectedly changed. I think that this is 
what distinguishes the game - the numer­
ous positional metamorphoses. Both play­
ers constantly had to weigh up the pluses 
and minuses of various different configura­
tions.
19...g6
'If 19 ... h6?! Kasparov could have played
20 .l:.ac1! c6 21 Me3, when it is difficult for 
Black to defend his kingside.' (Yusupov). Or
20 ...c5 21 'iVe2, and it is not easy for Black to 
parry the threat of .tb1 and 'i'c2. It is 
dangerous to play 21...%Xfd8 22 .2.b1 .tf8 23 
l:c3! etc.
Nevertheless, there is a defence: 21... #e6
22 .tb1 c4 23 l:tcd1 (23 'ic2  'ig6! or 23 .l:.c3 
f5! is no better) 23....li!.ad8 24 
e3 (by mov­
ing the bishop off an undefended square, 
White 
intensifies the threat of 'iVc2)
24 ... ..tc6 (Black has to sacrifice a pawn - the 
exchange sacrifice 24 ...'1c6 25 'ic2  g6 26 
..txh6 ..itxg2 27 .txf8 Sxf8 gives White an 
advantage after 28 Se3) 25 'ic2  g6 26 
..txh6 Bxd1 27 :U.xd1 %Xd8. However, it is 
doubtful 
whether Black 
had anything 
better than the endgame from the note to 
the next move.
I think that Karpov did not look for a 
variational refutation of 19 ... h6 - he was 
sickened by the very thought that in this 
case White would be able to set up the 
attacking queen and bishop battery on the 
b1-h7 diagonal. Making such a dangerous 
move would be difficult not only in an 
important game from a match for the 
world crown, and besides, after 19...g6 
Black's defences look solid... But now con­
crete tactical play begins.
20 .:ad1
20...C6
I was rather expecting 20.. . Wc6 21 #xc6 
with somewhat the better ending for White
- 21...bxc6 22 z:ld2 .:.fd8 23 Sc1 or 21....2.xc6
22 ..tc4! (Taimanov) 22. . ..2.c5 (22. ..J:lad8 23 
e6) 23 b4!? &b6 24 a g5, when Black would 
have faced an unpleasant defence.
Karpov made the strategically risky move 
20. ..c6 without thinking, having probably 
planned it beforehand. Of course, he saw
508

Challenger
White's following reaction, but he reckoned 
that his position would be safe enough and 
not without counter-chances. Karpov's play 
is logical in its way: as at the start of the 
match, he does not want to reconcile him­
self to an unpromising endgame and he 
chooses a continuation which, though risky, 
leaves Black possibilities of counterplay. 
However, White's threats turned out to be 
more serious than my opponent assumed.
21 ..ih6 Sfd8
22 e6! fxe6
'22. ....txe6 23 .txg6 or 22...'ie8 23 'iVc3 f6
24 f4! was bad for Black.' (Averbakh)
23 ..ixg6
Another metamorphosis - and another 
critical position, in which Black has to 
resolve the question regarding the advis­
ability of exchanging the dark-square 
bishops.
23.....if8?
‘In the press centre 23....tf6!? was stud­
ied, retaining the bishop in order to cover 
the a1-h8 diagonal.' (Averbakh). And in­
deed, this would have been much stronger! 
After 24 ..ie4 '<t>h8! Black would not have 
allowed the rapid switching of the rook to 
g3, he would have been the first to occupy 
the g-file, and thanks to his powerful 
bishop on d5 he could have hoped for
counterplay, partly compensating for his 
pawn weaknesses. For example: 25 Sd2 
l:Ig8 26 l:.de2 'Wif7 27 f
 Sad8 28 i.g3 i.d 4
29 'i!thl e5 30 i.h 2 lig5 31 f3, and although 
White is a little better (in some he cases he 
is threatening to exchange on d5 with 
pressure on the e-file), it is clear that his 
advantage is insignificant.
However, to decide definitely at the 
board that 
23 ....tf6 
is 
stronger 
than
23 ...i.f8 is possible only with a clear head, 
without it coming on the back of five 
months of tiring struggle (although it is not 
certain that 23 .....if6 would have been 
made also at the start of the match).
24 ..ixf8 Sxf8
This position seemed perfectly defensible 
to Karpov. He assumed that, with his pow­
erful bishop on d5, Black would place his 
rooks on g7 and f8 and would feel com­
paratively safe.
25 ..ie4 1:1f7
'25. ..l:tf4 26 lie3 ^h8 was better' (Tai- 
manov). With the possible sequel 27 Sd el 
.i:!.g8 28 g3 'ig7, although the position 
would still have remained favourable for 
White: 29 i.xd5! exd5 30 lie7 Sf7 31 l1xf7 
'iVxf7 32 'ic3+ 'ifg7 33 J:.e5!, planning 'ith2, 
f2-f4, g3-g4 and so on.
26 1:1e3 Sg7
509

Garry Kasparov on Garry Kasparov: Part One
27 Sdd3!
'An unusual attack with the heavy 
pieces, making use of the 3rd rank' (Tal). I 
regard it as a great creative achievement on 
my part. I was able to set up an unusual 
rook pendulum and to break up Black's 
position, by combining threats on the g- 
and e-files (even if this involved the ex­
change on d5, ridding Black of his weak e6- 
pawn).
27. ...l:tf8
The natural reply. Little is changed by
27...flic7 28 jL,xd5 exd5 29 Sg3 or 27 ...'Jjf7
28 .l:tf3 We7 (28...Sxg2+? 29 'it>fl! and wins)
29 Hde3, when if White does not find a way 
to achieve a direct attack on the king, he 
can build up his positional advantage on 
the queenside (say, 29... Se8 30 Wc3 
31 
b4 etc.), and Black faces the prospect of a 
difficult ending.
28 flg3! 'it>h8 (.t xh7+ was threatened) 29 
Wc3 flff7
29- .Sf4 was no better. Now the showy 30 
l:g5?! (with the idea of 30. ..Sxe4? 31 Sdg3!) 
merely hinders the attack in view of 
30. ..kiff7 31 Se3 'it>g8.
The correct continuation is 30 jL,xd5! 
exd5 31 't!Ve5 (a very unpleasant pin)
31...Sf8 32 Sdf3 Sfg8 33 b4! We8 34 'YWd4, 
and Black loses immediately after 34...'t!Ve4?
35 Wxg7+ or 34. ..h6? 35 g_f6! 'ih7 36 'lih4, 
so he is forced to wait - 34. ..'i'd7, but then
35 h4 We8 36 'if l, and White should win.
30 l:.de3
Probing the main defect in Black's posi­
tion - the weakness of his e6-pawn. 30 h4!? 
was more energetic, with the idea of
30. ..'ig8 31 h5 or 30...Wc7 31 Sde3!.
30...'ig8
After 30. ..Wd6? 31 ..ixd5 cxd5 (31...exd5? 
32 Se8+; 31...'tj'xd5? 32 Sd3) 32 Sxg7 Sxg7 
White has a pleasant choice between a rook 
ending (33 Wc8+ Sg8 34 'ft'xe6 'i'xe6 35 
11xe6) and a queen ending (33 Sg3 'W/c7 34 
11xg7 Wxg7 35 't!Vc8+ 't!Vg8 36 'i'xb7) with an 
extra pawn.
31 Wes
31. ..Wc7
The correct decision from a practical 
point of view. Recognising the futility of 
passive defence (for example, 31...'ic8 32 
b4 Wf8 33 a4!? 'i'd8 34 a5 etc.), Karpov 
gives up a pawn, but simplifies the position 
in the hope, after the slightest inaccuracy 
by his opponent, of obtaining saving coun­
terplay in a rook endgame.
32 fixg7+ J:txg7 33 jL,xdS 'i'xes 34 jL,xe6+ 
Wxe6 35 .l:!.xe6
'The game has transposed into a won 
ending for White: subsequently he will
510

Challenger
create a pair of passed pawns on the king­
side, and Black has no way of opposing 
this.' (Averbakh)
35 ...Hd7 (Black stakes his claim for coun­
terplay) 36 b4
I felt that the win was close and that I 
could win 'as I pleased': three pawns 
against one on the kingside should ensure 
White's success. But perhaps I should have 
preferred 36 Be2 (Averbakh) or 36 g4!? 'itf7
37 .Me3, 'opening a route for the king to the 
centre' (Taimanov).
36...'itf7 37 l:e3 :.d1+ (if 37....l:!.d5, then 38 
g4 a5 39 bxa5 :.xa5 40 Bb3 is good) 38 'ith2 
.l:!.c1! 39 g4 bs
Karpov 
has 
nevertheless 
found 
a 
counter-chance: Black prepares ... c6-c5.
40 f4
In Taimanov's opinion, '40 Be5 Bc3 41 
'itg2 came into consideration, with the idea 
of 41...Sxa3 42 :.c5.' But after 41...c5! the 
position becomes unclear and White is in 
danger of throwing away the win, both in 
the rook ending - 42 bxc5 fixa3, and in the 
queen ending - 42 :.xc5 .l:!.xc5 43 bxc5 a5 44 
f 4 b4 45 axb4 axb4 46 c6 'ite8 47 f5 b3 48 c7 
'itd7 49 f6 b2 50 f7 b1'i' 51 f8'i' 'itxc7 etc.
A sensible alternative to the move in the 
game was 40 'ig3 c5 41 bxc5 Sxc5 42 'itf4 
Sc2 43 f3! :.h2 44 Wg3 Bb2 45 h4 a5, and 
here White decides matters with either 46 
Be5 a4 47 :.f5+! 'ig7 48 Bc5, or 46 'itf4 b4 
47 axb4 .l:.xb4+ 48 .:e4 .l:!.b3 49 .l:!.a4 .l:!.b5 50 
'it>e4.
40...cs 41 bxcs (the sealed move) 41....l:!.xcs
Home analysis enabled me to find the 
best way, in my view, for White to convert 
his advantage. Only in one place (on the 
53rd move) was there a dual solution, but it 
is not certain that the winning path re­
jected by me was simpler and clearer.
The 
adjournment 
session 
proceeded 
'without any excesses' and the game con­
cluded quite logically, 
although 
some 
Soviet chess experts hastened to report to 
the authorities that because of extreme 
fatigue both players had supposedly made 
serious mistakes.
42 .l:!.d3!
'An important subtlety. By the threat of
43 .Md7+ White draws the enemy king away 
from the kingside.' (Averbakh)
42 ...'ite7 43 'itg3 as 44 'it>f3!
Play on the kingside alone does not pro­
duce a win: 44 'ith4 b4 45 axb4 axb4 46 f5 
Bb5! 47 .Mb3 'itf6 48 'ith5 .l:!.b8 49 'ith6 Bb7
50 h4 'it>e5, or, in a different modification,
44 g5 b4 45 axb4 axb4 46 'itg4 Bb5!, also 
forcing 47 .l:!.b3 and gaining a draw after
47...'ite6 48 h4 'itf7 49 f5 'itg7 50 h5 .Mb7.
44...b4 (there is nothing else) 45 axb4 axb4
46 'ite4 (in pursuit of the b4-pawn) 46....l:!.bs
47 Hb3 .l:!,b8 48 'it>ds 'itf6
'Black would also have lost in the event 
of 48...h5 49 'itc5 hxg4 50 hxg4 .l:!.g8 51 g5 
'ite6 52 .Mxb4' (Averbakh). For example:
52...\tf5 53 'itd6 l:e8 54 'itd7 .l:!.e1 55 Sd4!, 
reducing matters to a theoretically won 
position 
discovered by Cheron 
(1926), 
which is analysed in detail in books on the 
endgame (for example, in Comprehensive 
Chess Endings by the same Averbakh).
Karpov quite reasonably assumed that in
511

Garry Kasparov on Garry Kasparov: Part One
their adjournment analysis the opponent's 
team would have studied this possibility 
(which was in fact so; moreover, I cannot 
say that the win here for White is really very 
difficult), and therefore he decided to avoid 
Cheron's position, in order to set me non­
standard problems - the best hope from 
the practical point of view.
49 'it>c5 !'te8 50 l:!xb4 l:!e3 51 h4 l:!h3
The blockade by 51 . ..h5 52 l:!b6+ 'it>g7 53 
g5 Bf3 54 l:!.f6 Sh3 did not work on account 
of 55 f5 !i.xh4 56 Sh 6 Sg4 57 f6+! (only not 
57 Bxh5? B g l - this is a draw).
52 h5 lth4
This is the point of Karpov's idea: this 
position is not in the books. I stopped to 
think...
53 f5
Many criticised this move, reckoning that 
the goal would have been quickly reached 
by 53 g5+ 'it>f5 54 h6 Sh 1 55 'it>d6 Se 1 56 
l:tb8! 'it>xf4 57 g6! hxg6 58 h7 S h 1 59 h8' i  
Sxh 8 60 .i:!xh8 g5 61 ^d5 (Averbakh), or
55...Ba1 56 'it>e7 lia 6! 57 'vt>f7 lig 6 58 Id 4  
'it>g4! 59 &e7! lia 6 60 S d 6! etc.
I have to admit that at the board I did not 
notice this idea (with 56 Sb 8!), since I was 
completely focused on 53 f5 and I had seen 
a clear winning plan using a by-passing 
king manoeuvre. Here the win for White is
merely a matter of time. It may be more 
complicated than 53 g5+, but the game 
concluded quite quickly.
53....1:thl 54 'it>d5 ld l+  55 ld 4  B e l 56 &d6 
In reply to the activation of the black
rook, White has activated his king.
56...1:te8
If 56... l'1g1 White advances his king and 
his h-pawn, and then carries out the same 
manoeuvre: 57 Wd7 ^f7 58 Wd8 1Ig2 59 h6! 
'it>f8 60 
(Taimanov) 60. ..Sc2+ 61 'it>d6, 
and since the black king has stepped back, 
if 61....l:i.g2 there is 62 'it>e6, and if 6l...S e 2 - 
62 g5, or 60. ..Wf7 61 Sd 7+ 'it>g8 62 1Ig7+ 
'it>h8 63 .l:e7! ^g8 64 'it>d6! 1Ixg4 65 <;t>e6, 
winning.
Karpov again took a practical decision - 
he cut off the white king from the 8th rank 
and played his rook to g8 for an attack on 
the g4-pawn. But this too proved insuffi­
cient.
57 'id7 Sg8 58 h6! f
 59 Sc4 'it>f6 60 l'1e4 
(Black is forced to allow the rook to go to 
g7) 60...'it>f7 61 'it>d6 Wf6 62 l'1e6+ f
(62...'it>g5 63 f6) 63 Se7+ f
64 l:tg7! Sd8+ 65 <t>c5 l'1d5+ (the last chance, 
but the rook quickly runs out of checks) 66 
'ic4  .l:td4+ 67 &c3 1-0
After 67...Sa4 68 ^d3 the king goes to 
g3. Times: 3.53-3.23.
512

Challenger
5-3! After this there followed another 
week-long break: at first (11th February) I 
claimed a time-out, and then (13th Febru­
ary) 
FIDE 
President 
Campomanes 
an­
nounced one, in order to make his 'move' 
the next day.
My third win was the culmination of the 
entire encounter. I think that the 48th 
game was not only my best over the five 
months' play, but was also in general the 
best in the match. It was full of instructive 
moments, of clashes between attack and 
defence. In all its phases there was a tense, 
interesting struggle, without blunders such 
as those that were the cause of my defeats. 
It is hard to find a move by Karpov which 
definitely deserves a question mark, and it 
is well known that the quality of a win is 
best judged by the standard of play by the 
loser and the number of interesting ideas 
demonstrated by the winner (by these 
criteria the second best game was the 
32nd).
It would appear that after the 48th game 
Karpov was completely devastated and not 
ready to continue the match. Both the 
result and the course of the game itself put 
the champion and his circle in a very pes­
simistic mood. It was not so much a ques­
tion of his physical fatigue, but rather the
psychological disaster. The score had now 
become 5-3 (it was once 5-0!), but the main 
thing was that Karpov had completely lost 
the match initiative. He was experiencing 
increasingly perceptible opening problems, 
while the last game had shown that his 
young opponent had already learned much 
and was capable of outplaying the cham­
pion in positional style. Continuing to play 
was fraught with the most unpleasant 
consequences for Karpov.
Later I became convinced that the deci­
sion to stop the match was carried out not 
so much because of any risk to the cham­
pion's health, but rather in view of his 
psychological exhaustion, confusion, and 
fear of continuing. No other way of retain­
ing his title was now apparent: had Karpov 
also lost a fourth game, the only way to 
complete the match would have been in 
accordance with the regulations. And the 
powers which at that time controlled Soviet 
sport, including chess, decided not to take 
the risk..
On 15th February the unprecedented 
'49th game’ of Campomanes took place: the 
FIDE 
President 
terminated the 
match 
'without a final result' and announced that 
a new match would begin on 1st Septem­
ber 1985 with the score 0-0.
513

Index of Openings
Alekhine Defence
King’s Indian Defence
B04 
129
E60
126
83
50B
17E
46
E73
383
Bogo-lndian Defence
47E
134, 300, 342
45 3
rH
rHE
67E
373
E77
2 76
Caro-Kann Defence
E80
56,67
B17 
144
E81
414
4
91B
38E
263
E
00
444
Catalan Opening
o
E
30, 358
164
40
UJ
29E
213
English Opening
E99
94
A ll 
242
Modern Benoni
A30 
254, 288, 305
A64
393
A38 
226
A67
390
GrUnfeld Defence
D85 
191,248
D86 
31,366
King's Indian Attack
A08 
42
Nimzo-lndian Defence
E42 
198
Old Indian Defence
A54 
318
514

Index of Openings
Petroff Defence
Ruy Lopez
C42 
258, 506
C61
102
C83
177
Philidor Defence
C84
18
C41 
173
C97
63,156
Queen's Gambit Accepted
Semi-Slav Defence
D22 
310
D44
333.339,422
Queen's Gambit Declined
Sicilian Defence
D30 
453
B39
60
D34 
325,405,476
B40
34
D36 
71
B43
148
D38 
297
B56
33
D52 
470
B67
121
D55 
285. 482
B85
26, 85
D58 
89,208,410
B89
21
D61 
166
B92
50
B97
79
Queen’s Indian Defence
E12 
162, 219, 269,315,350,371,
Slav Defence
378, 436,497
D14
183
532
71E
D15
182
932
81E
D16
485
Queen’s Pawn Opening
A41 
113
A48 
107
515

Index of Opponents
Bold type indicates the player was Black
Akesson
219
Karpov
5o, 258, 488, 490, 490,
Alburt
134, 383
494, 497, 504, 506
Andersson
315
Kavalek
358
Arnason
85
Kengis
21
Beliavsky
263, 405, 410, 414
Korchnoi
56, 393, 453, 461
Browne
162
Kupreichik
182
Chiburdanidze
213
Kuzmin
156
Christiansen
373
Lanka
60, 74
Conquest
485
Larsen
318,357, 442
Csom
198
Ligterink
239
Dolmatov
183
Lputian
67
Donchenko
63
Lutikov
113
Dorfman
339
Magerramov
26, 89
Dur
285
Marjanovic
235
Gavrikov
325
Marovic
166
Gazarian
31
Muratkuliev
18
Geller
144
Murey
371
Georgadze
173
Nikolaevsky
126
Gheorghiu
378
Nunn
390
Giardelli
242
Palatnik
129
Gligoric
350
Panchenko
121
Hubner
305
Pavlenko
46
Kantsler
42
Petrosian
269, 310, 354, 433
516

Index of Opponents
Pigusov
71
Speelman
288
Polugayevsky
148
Sunye Neto
294
Portisch
436
Tal
422
Pribyl
191
Tempone
226
Privorotsky
34
Timman
482
Roizman
102
Timoshchenko
333
Romanishin
248
Torre
203
Sarkisov
30. 33
Tukmakov
342
Sax
366
Vaisser
276
Seirawan
430
Yermolinsky
38
Shereshevsky
107
Yuferov
94
Smyslov
254. 470, 476
Yusupov
177, 330
Sosonko
297
Zaid
79
Spassky
300, 444
Zaitsev
208
517

Index of Games
Alburt.L-Kasparov.G, All-Union Qualifying Tournament, Daugavpils 1978................................134
Alburt.L-Kasparov.G, World Chess Olympiad, Lucerne 1982..............................................................383
Arnason.J-Kasparov.G, World Cadet Championship, Cagnes-sur-Mer 1977 ................................85
Beliavsky.A-Kasparov.G, Grandmaster Tournament, Moscow 1981.............................................263
Beliavsky.A-Kasparov.G, Quarter-Final Candidates Match, 2nd game, Moscow 1983.........405
Beliavsky.A-Kasparov.G, Quarter-Final Candidates Match, 8th game, Moscow 1983...........414
Christiansen.L-Kasparov.G, Interzonal Tournament, Moscow, 1982.............................................373
Gazarian.V-Weinstein.G, Baku 1974.................................................................................................................31
Geller.Ye-Kasparov.G, 46th USSR Championship, Tbilisi 1978......................................................... 144
Giardelli.S-Kasparov.G, World Chess Olympiad, Malta 1980.............................................................242
HUbner.R-Kasparov.G, Tilburg 1981...............................................................................................................305
Karpov.A-Kasparov.G, Tournament of Pioneers Palaces, Leningrad 1975 ....................................50
Karpov.A-Kasparov.G, World Championship Match, 7th game, Moscow 1984......................490
Karpov.A-Kasparov.G, World Championship Match, 9th game, Moscow 1984......................490
Karpov.A-Kasparov.G, World Championship Match, 31st game, Moscow 1984.....................494
Karpov.A-Kasparov.G, World Championship Match, 41st game, Moscow 1985.......................504
Kasparov.G-Akesson.R, World Junior Championship, Dortmund 1980.......................................219
Kasparov.G-Andersson.U, Tilburg 1981.......................................................................................................315
Kasparov.G-Beliavsky.A, Quarter-Final Candidates Match, 5th game, Moscow 1983 ........410
Kasparov.G-Browne.W, Banja Luka 1979................................................................................................... 162
Kasparov.G-Chiburdanidze.M, USSR Central Chess Club Tournament, Baku 1980............... 213
Kasparov.G-Conquest.S, Simultaneous Display, London 1984.........................................................485
Kasparov.G-Csom.l, USSR Central Chess Club Tournament, Baku 1980......................................198
Kasparov.G-Dolmatov.S, 47th USSR Championship, Minsk 1979...................................................183
Kasparov.G-Donchenko.A, Khalilbeyli Memorial Tournament, Baku 1976................................... 63
Kasparov.G-Dorfman.l, 49th USSR Championship, Frunze 1981....................................................339
518

Index of Games
Kasparov.G-DUr.A, Student World Team Championship, Graz 1981..............................................285
Kasparov.G-Gavrikov.V, 49th USSR Championship, Frunze 1981....................................................325
Kasparov.G-Georgadze.T, 47th USSR Championship, Minsk 1979...................................................173
Kasparov.G-Gheorghiu.F, Interzonal Tournament, Moscow, 1982.................................................378
Kasparov.G-Giigoric.S, Bugojno 1982..........................................................................................................3 50
Kasparov.G-Karpov.A, Match-Tournament of USSR Teams, Moscow 1981.................................258
Kasparov.G-Karpov.A, World Championship Match, 6th game, Moscow 1984........................488
Kasparov.G-Karpov.A, World Championship Match, 32nd game, Moscow 1984....................497
Kasparov.G-Karpov.A, World Championship Match, 48th game, Moscow 1985........................506
Kasparov.G-Korchnoi.V, Semi-Final Candidates Match, 7th game, London 1983.................... 461
Kasparov.G-Kupreichik.V, 47th USSR Championship, Minsk 1979..................................................182
Kasparov.G-Kuzmin.G, 46th USSR Championship, Tbilisi 1978..........................................................156
Kasparov.G-Lanka.Z, USSR Junior Championship, Tbilisi 1976.............................................................60
Kasparov.G-Larsen.B, Bugojno 1982.............................................................................................................. 357
Kasparov.G-Larsen.B, Tilburg 1981.................................................................................................................318
Kasparov.G-Ligterink.G, World Chess Olympiad, Malta 1980...........................................................239
Kasparov.G-Lutikov.A, Sokolsky Memorial Tournament, Minsk 1978...........................................113
Kasparov.G-Marjanovic.S, World Chess Olympiad, Malta 1980........................................................235
Kasparov.G-Marovic.D, Banja Luka 1979......................................................................................................166
Kasparov.G-Murey.J, Interzonal Tournament, Moscow, 1982............................................................371
Kasparov.G-Nunn.J, World Chess Olympiad, Lucerne 1982................................................................ 390
Kasparov.G-Palatnik.S, All-Union Qualifying Tournament, Daugavpils 1978............................129
Kasparov.G-Panchenko.A, All-Union Qualifying Tournament, Daugavpils 1978..................... 121
Kasparov.G-Petrosian.T, Grandmaster Tournament, Moscow 1981..............................................269
Kasparov.G-Petrosian.T, Tilburg 1981........................................................................................................... 310
Kasparov.G-Petrosian.T, Bugojno 1982.........................................................................................................354
Kasparov.G-Petrosian.T, Niksic 1983............................................................................................................. 433
Kasparov.G-Pigusov.E, USSR Junior Championship, Riga 1977............................................................71
Kasparov.G-Polugayevsky.L, 46th USSR Championship, Tbilisi 1978............................................ 148
Kasparov.G-Portisch.L, Niksic 1983................................................................................................................436
Kasparov.G-Pribyi.J, European Team Championship, Skara 1980................................................... 191
Kasparov.G-Roizman.A, Sokolsky Memorial Tournament, Minsk 1978.......................................102
Kasparov.G-Romanishin.O, Match-Tournament of USSR Teams, Moscow 1981.....................248
Kasparov.G-Sax.G, Interzonal Tournament, Moscow, 1982................................................................366
Kasparov.G-Smyslov.V, Final Candidates Match, 9th game, Vilnius 1982..................................470
Kasparov.G-Sosonko.G, Tilburg 1981............................................................................................................297
Kasparov.G-Spassky.B, Tilburg 1981..............................................................................................................300
Kasparov.G-Spassky.B, Niksic 1983................................................................................................................444
Kasparov.G-Tal.M, USSR Spartakiad, Moscow 1983...............................................................................422
Kasparov.G-Timman.J, ‘Return Match of the Century', 4th round, London 1984.................... 482
Kasparov.G-Timoshchenko.G, 49th USSR Championship, Frunze 1981........................................333
Kasparov.G-Torre.E, USSR Central Chess Club Tournament, Baku 1980.......................................203
Kasparov.G-Yusupov.A, 47th USSR Championship, Minsk 1979...................................................... 177
519

Garry Kasparov on Garry Kasparov: Part One
Kasparov.G-Yusupov.A, 49th USSR Championship, Frunze 1981.....................................................330
Kasparov.G-Zaid.L, Qualifying Tournament, Leningrad 1977................................................................79
Kasparov.G-Zaitsev.l, USSR Central Chess Club Tournament, Baku 1980.................................... 208
Kavalek.L-Kasparov.G, Bugojno 1982.............................................................................................................358
Kengis.E-Weinstein.G, All-Union Youth Games, Vilnius 1973 ...............................................................21
Korchnoi.V-Kasparov.G, Tournament of Pioneers Palaces, Leningrad 1975...................................56
Korchnoi.V-Kasparov.G, World Chess Olympiad, Lucerne 1982.........................................................393
Korchnoi.V-Kasparov.G, Semi-Final Candidates Match, 6th game, London, 1983....................453
Lanka.Z-Kasparov.G, USSR Junior Championship, Riga 1977.................................................................74
Larsen.B-Kasparov.G, Niksic 1983.....................................................................................................................442
Lputian.S-Kasparov.G, Trans-Caucasian Youth Games, Tbilisi 1976...............................................6 7
Magerramov.E-Weinstein.G, Training Match, Baku 1973......................................................................26
Magerramov.E-Kasparov.G, Training Game, Baku 1977........................................................................ 89-
Nikolaevsky.Yu-Kasparov.G, All-Union Qualifying Tournament, Daugavpils 1978.................126
Pavlenko.O-Weinstein.G, 'City Cup' Final, Baku, October 1975...........................................................46
Sarkisov.R-Weinstein.G, City Spartakiad, Baku 1974................................................................................30
Sarkisov.R-Weinstein.G, Azerbaijan Spartakiad, Baku 1974..................................................................33
Seirawan.Y-Kasparov.G, Niksic 1983............................................................................................................. 430
Shereshevsky.M-Kasparov.G, Sokolsky Memorial Tournament, Minsk 1978............................ 107
Smyslov.V-Kasparov.G, Match-Tournament of USSR Teams, Moscow 1981............................. 254
Smyslov.V-Kasparov.G, Final Candidates Match, 12th game, Vilnius 1982................................ 476
Speelman.J-Kasparov.G, Student World Team Championship, Graz 1981................................. 288
Sunye Neto.J-Kasparov.G, Student World Team Championship, Graz 1981.............................. 294
Tempone.M-Kasparov.G, World Junior Championship, Dortmund 1980..................................... 226
Tukmakov.V-Kasparov.G, 49th USSR Championship, Frunze 1981................................................342
Vaisser.A-Kasparov.G, USSR Team Championship, Moscow 1981.................................................. 276
Weinstein.G-Kantsler.B, Spartak Junior Championship, Peterhof 1975..........................................42
Weinstein.G-Muratkuliev.S, Azerbaijan-Turkmenistan Match, Baku 1973 ...................................18
Weinstein.G-Privorotsky.O, Azerbaijan Spartakiad, Baku 1974...........................................................34
Weinstein.G-Yermolinsky.A, USSR Junior Championship, Vilnius 1975..........................................38
Yuferov.S-Kasparov.G, Sokolsky Memorial Tournament, Minsk 1978.............................................94
520