."lEnfe^ 


i/^ 


•W^' 


mm^m^'^' 


V^n^jV '  IVj 


^A"r^n^/»4^ 


||^^A;*.i»*3 


lo 


THE   HISTOKY 


OF 


^■^Vr. 


-c^i^ 


RUSSIAN    LITERATURE. 


THE   HISTORY 

OF 

RUSSIAN    LITERATURE, 

■  9 

WITH  A 

LEXICON  OF  RUSSIAN  AUTHORS, 


BY  DR.  FRIEDRICH  OTTO, 

// 

LECTDKEB  IN  THE  OCCIDENTAL  LANGUAGES  AND  LITERATURE  IN  THE 
ROYAL  UNIVERSITY  OF  EBLANGEN. 


TRANSLATED  FROM  THE  GERMAN,  UNDER  THE  SUPERINTENDENCE 

OF  THE  AUTHOR, 

BY  THE  LATE  GEORGE  COX,  M.  A. 

FELLOW  OF  NEW  COLLEGE,  OXFORD,  AND  STUDENT 
OF  THE  INNER  TEMPLE. 


OXFORD:  D.  A.  TALBOYS; 

AND   113,   FLEET  STREET,   LONDON. 

MDCCC  XXXIX. 


c      c         '      '        ' 


OXFORD  ;    PRINTED  BY  D.  A.  TALBOYS. 


GIFT  OF 

Bancroit 

UBRARY 


07  7  z 


TO  HIS  IMPERIAL  HIGHNESS 
THE  GRAND  DUKE 

ALEXANDER, 
HEREDITARY  PRINCE  OF  RUSSIA,    - 

THIS  TRANSLATION 

OF 

DR.  OTTO'S  HISTORY  OF  RUSSIAN  LITERATURE, 

IS,  BY  PERMISSION,  HUMBLY  DEDICATED, 

IN  GRATITUDE 

FOR  HIS  MUNIFICENT  PATRONAGE 

IN  HELPING  FORWARDS  ITS  PUBLICATION, 

BY  HIS  HIGHNESS'S 

DEVOTED  SERVANT, 

THE  EDITOR. 


TO  THE 
PRINCE  JOHN  GAGARIN," 

GENTLEMAN  OP  THE  BEDCHAMBER  TO  THE  EMPEROR  OF  RUSSIA, 

AND  ATTACHE  TO  THE  RUSSIAN  EMBASSY  AT  THE 

COURT  OF  LONDON. 

My  Dear  Prince, 

Some  agreeable  associations  connected 
with  a  winter  at  Munich,  and  a  voyage  down  the 
Rhine,  having  been  still  more  pleasantly  revived  in 
England,  it  is  natural  that  I  should  wish  to  per- 
petuate the  remembrance  of  them  by  any  memo- 
rial, however  humble,  which  I  may  be  able  to  con- 
tribute, in  relation  to  a  subject  on  which  you  have 
so  often  talked,  and  I  have  so  often  listened. 

I  have  been  enabled  by  your  conversation  to  ap- 
preciate in  some  degree  the  hidden  treasures  of  the 
literature  of  Russia ;  and  the  interest  taken  in  its 
diffusion  by  one  who  is  so  familiarly  acquainted  as 
yourself  with  European  languages  and  authors  in 
general,  ought  to  be  alone  a  sufficient  guarantee, 
that  it  possesses  no  inconsiderable  beauties  even  in 
comparison  with  the  productions  of  other  and  older 
lands.  It  is  your  zeal  in  promoting  every  means 
for  conveying  to  the  rest  of  Europe  a  more  inti- 

*  The  Editor,  out  of  a  pious  wish  to  leave  the  work  as  much  as  possi- 
ble in  its  original  state,  feels  it  his  duty  to  prefix  to  it  the  Dedication  to 
Prince  Gagarin. 


vm 


mate  knowledge  of  Russian  writers,  which  is  the 
best  apology  I  have  to  offer  for  requesting  your 
patronage  of  the  present  undertaking.  The  work 
is,  I  fear,  altogether  unworthy  of  the  name  with 
which  it  is  inscribed ;  but  that  name  will  be  too 
great  a  recommendation  to  its  unambitious  pages, 
to  allow  me  to  forego  so  flattering  an  occasion  of 
spreading  over  a  wider  surface  the  little  informa- 
tion it  may  be  found  to  contain. 

I  have  the  honour  to  be. 

My  Dear  Prince, 

Yours  very  faithfully, 

THE  TRANSLATOR. 

3,  Inner  Temple  Lane, 
November,  1837. 


TRANSLATOR'S  PREFACE. 


That  the  kingdoms  of  Europe  are  daily  becoming 
more  exposed  to  the  risk  of  being  subjugated  by 
the  barbarism  of  Russia,  is  the  constant  theme  of 
declamation  among  a  numerous  and  influential  party 
in  this  country.  It  will  be  evident,  however,  on  the 
slightest  reflection,  that  it  is  not  the  barbarism  of 
Russia  which  is  to  be  dreaded,  but  her  civilisation. 
Not  only  year  after  year  is  some  new  province 
added  to  the  formidable  acquisitions  of  the  imperial 
sceptre,  but  day  after  day  the  internal  resources  of 
the  people  are  becoming  more  and  more  developed, 
and  the  Russian  language  is  rendered  richer  in  its 
attractions  in  the  same  proportion  as  it  is  more 
widely  diffused  in  extent. 

The  policy  of  the  present  Emperor,  above  all,  is 
remarkable  for  the  zeal  with  which  he  encourages 
everything  nationally  Russian  among  his  subjects, 
and  especially  for  the  care  with  which  he  promotes 
the  use  and  cultivation  of  their  own  indigenous 
tongue.  French  is  no  longer,  as  in  the  days  of  a 
Catherine  and  an  Alexander,  the  court  language  at 
St.  Petersburg ;  and  except  in  immediate  commu- 
nication with  the  diplomatic  circles,  the  Russian 
has  been  reinstated  in  its  place.  The  government 
papers  have  lately  advocated,  in  long  leading  arti- 
cles, the  introduction  of  the  Russian  language  into 
all  the  schools  and  colleges  of  Courland  and  Li- 


X  TRANSLATOR'S  PREFACE. 

vonia,  to  the  exclusion  of  their  native  German ;  so 
that  a  ukase  to  that  effect,  if  not  yet  actually  is- 
sued, may  be  daily  expected  to  appear.  In  the 
month  of  September  in  the  current  year,  1837,  a 
large  sum  of  money  was  contributed  by  the  Rus- 
sian government  for  the  estabhshment  of  a  public 
library  at  Bialystock,  which  is  to  be  exclusively  ap- 
propriated to  Russian  books ;  and  not  even  those 
in  the  Polish  or  other  Sclavonic  languages  are  to 
be  admitted.  This,  moreover,  is  far  from  being  a 
solitary  instance  of  the  kind.  Again,  the  children 
of  the  Poles,  as  well  as  from  Circassia,  the  Crimea, 
and  the  Caucasus,  are  sent  to  Russian  schools  and 
universities  for  their  education  ;  and  on  their  return 
to  their  own  countries,  carry  thither  with  them  the 
language  which  they  have  thus  acquired  in  their 
youth.  The  splendid  pensions  given  to  literary 
men  in  Russia  by  former  Czars,  have  been  also  still 
further  increased  in  amount  and  number  by  the 
politic  munificence  of  Nicholas.  It  would  seem, 
therefore,  from  all  this,  that  a  language  which  pro- 
mises to  become  the  common  vernacular  dialect  as 
well  as  the  medium  of  literary  composition  to  a 
population  of  nearly  sixty  millions  of  souls,  ought 
not  to  be  an  object  of  indifference  to  the  rest  of 
Europe.  More  particularly  England,  who  may  in 
some  respects  be  regarded  as  the  great  political 
rival  of  Russia,  might  find  it  well  worth  her  while 
to  acquaint  herself  with  what  progress  has  been 
made  in  intelligence  and  refinement  by  a  nation 
which  she  vainly  affects  to  despise  as  rude  and  un- 
civilised, while  in  fact  she  has  little  real  knowledge 
upon   the   subject.      With  the  exception   of  Dr. 


TRANSLATOR'S  PREFACE.  xi 

Bowring's  Anthology,  which  contains  specimens 
rendered  from  the  Russian  poets  beautiful  enough, 
it  might  be  thought,  to  have  excited  others  to  fol- 
low in  his  steps,  little  or  nothing  has  been  done  in 
this  country  to  throw  a  light  upon  the  literary 
stores  and  resources  of  the  North.  That  in  the 
nineteenth  century,  throughout  the  whole  kingdom 
of  Great  Britain,  not  half  a  dozen  persons  are  to  be 
found  capable  of  perfectly  understanding  the  lan- 
guage spoken  and  written  in  the  largest  and  most 
politically  important  country  in  Europe,  may  al- 
most be  called  a  phenomenon  in  the  history  of  the 
civilised  world ;  and  yet  we  believe  that  we  may 
safely  affirm  this  to  be  the  fact.  Nor  is  this  igno- 
rance confined  to  our  fellow-countrymen  alone. 
It  was  happily  replied  the  other  day  by  a  Russian 
of  my  acquaintance,  to  a  person  who  had  compli- 
mented the  Russians  as  being  accomplished  lin- 
guists in  all  the  European  languages,  that  this  was 
less  a  virtue  than  a  necessity  on  the  part  of  his 
countrymen,  as,  go  where  they  will,  the  Russians 
never  find  any  one  capable  of  talking  to  them  in 
their  own  tongue. 

The  object  of  this  Translation  is  to  supply  in 
some  measure  the  deficiency  of  information  which 
exists  in  this  country  on  the  subject  of  Russian 
literature,  and  by  pointing  out  how  much  has  al- 
ready been  done,  and  how  much  more  is  Hkely  to 
be  done,  in  that  field,  to  stimulate  a  desire  to  be- 
come acquainted  with  the  language  in  which  'so 
many  excellent  works  have  been  written.  Ori- 
ginality is  the  great  desideratum  of  the  day,  and 
much  of  Russia's  poetry  is  not  less  new  or  less  beau- 


xii  TRANSLATOR'S  PREFACE. 

tiful  than  her  music.  There  is  the  same  sweetness, 
the  same  richness,  and  the  same  plaintive  melan- 
choly about  them  both. 

In  order  to  acquire  a  solid  acquaintance  with 
the  Russian  language,  the  learner  will  do  best  to 
begin  by  studying  the  Bible.  He  will  there  find 
the  original  church-language,  as  it  is  called,  which 
is  the  root  and  foundation  of  every  variety  of  the 
Sclavonic  dialects  ;  and  having  once  made  himself 
master  of  this,  he  will  find  afterwards  but  little  dif- 
ficulty in  acquiring  the  Polish,  the  Bohemian,  the 
Hungarian,  and  the  rest.  The  modern  Russian 
will  then  be  found  the  most  easy  to  learn  of  all : 
next  to  this  the  Polish,  and  then  the  Bohemian ; 
but  with  the  exception  of  the  Russian,  the  Polish 
is  perhaps  the  only  variety  of  the  Sclavonic  lan- 
guage which  repays  by  the  richness  of  its  literature 
the  labour  of  its  acquisition.  Without  beginning 
on  this  sound  and  systematic  plan,  I  am  told  that 
ten  years  may  be  uselessly  expended  in  endeavour- 
ing to  thread  the  mazy  labyrinth  of  the  Russian 
accidence  and  syntax. 

Nor  is  it  only  to  the  man  of  taste  and  lover  of 
elegant  letters,  that  the  Russian  language  ought 
now  to  become  an  object  of  study  ;  but  the  think- 
ing and  philosophic  mind  may  also  find  in  the  in- 
vestigation and  analysis  of  the  Sclavonic  languages, 
ample  food  for  the  most  interesting  meditations. 
The  one  great  and  important  end  of  the  study  of 
languages,  as  indeed  of  all  other  scientific  pursuits, 
is  and  ought  to  be  the  endeavour  to  throw  addi- 
tional light  upon  the  truth  of  Revelation.  If  the 
researches  of  the  geologist  tend  to  illustrate  Scrip- 


TRANSLATOR'S  PREFACE.  xiii 

ture,  and  the  dissections  of  the  anatomist  assist  ra- 
ther in  refuting  than  abetting  the  doctrines  of  ma- 
terialism in  their  results,  the  inquiries  of  the  philo- 
sophical linguist  may  surely  be  esteemed  as  not 
less  applicable  to  the  same  mighty  ends.  Whether 
the  whole  mass  of  mankind  are  descended  or  not 
from  one  original  stock  or  race,  is  a  question  of 
which  the  solution  appears  to  be  involved  in  the 
study  of  the  origin  of  languages.  The  materials 
which  are  supplied  by  the  Egyptian  hieroglyphics 
and  by  the  Sanscrit,  may  derive  no  little  confirma- 
tio'n  and  illustration  from  the  Sclavonic  dialects, 
and  their  curious  antiquities ;  and  it  is  as  much  on 
this  ground  as  on  any  other  that  I  am  anxious  to 
impress  upon  my  readers  the  advisableness  of  culti- 
vating a  knowledge  of  these  languages  in  England. 
So  much,  then,  for  the  objects  of  this  Translation. 
The  occasion  of  it  may  be  shortly  told,  as  follows. 
In  the  month  of  August  in  the  present  year,  I  first 
met  with  Dr.  Otto,  the  Author  of  the  work,  at  the 
baths  of  Ems.  He  was  so  flattering  as  to  think  me 
not  incompetent  to  translate  the  work  which  he 
had  then  just  published ;  and  finding  that  it  con- 
tained a  mass  of  information  upon  subjects  on  which 
I  am  not  aware  that  any  previous  book  has  issued 
from  the  press  in  this  country,  I  consented  to  exe- 
cute the  task  to  the  best  of  my  humble  capacity. 
In  much  of  it  I  enjoyed  the  advantage  of  his  per- 
sonal superintendence  and  revision,  and  for  the 
numerous  faults  that  may  probably  be  discovered 
in  the  remainder,  I  am  alone  responsible.  The 
arrangement  of  the  book  seems  to  me  exceedingly 
luminous,  and  one  of  its  chief  merits.     Display  has 


xiv  TRANSLATOR'S  PREFACE. 

in  no  place  been  the  author's  aim  ;  and  indeed  he 
appears  to  have  been  so  intent  upon  concentrating 
as  much  useful  information  as  possible  into  the 
narrowest  compass,  that  to  the  English  reader  he 
may  perhaps  run  the  risk  of  seeming  not  unfre- 
quently  dry.  He  has  been  many  years  occupied 
with  the  book,  which  he  has  himself  drawn  entirely 
from  Russian  sources ;  and  though  his  work  must 
be  acknowledged  to  be  far  from  complete,  the  great- 
est thanks  are  due  to  him  for  the  labour  and  time 
which  he  has  bestowed  upon  it.  He  showed  me  a 
list  of  nearly  twelve  hundred  names  of  Russian  au- 
thors not  contained  in  his  Biographical  Lexicon, 
which  he  either  considered  too  unimportant  to  in- 
sert, or  respecting  whom  he  was  unable  to  obtain 
such  full  and  necessary  information  as  he  required 
for  the  present  edition.  It  may  be  worth  while  to 
mention,  that  Bulgarin  is  now  engaged  at  St.  Pe- 
,  tersburg  on  a  large  and  general  historical  work  upon 
Russia,  which  has  for  some  time  been  advertised 
to  appear  in  nine  volumes.  Two  of  these  volumes 
are  to  be  devoted  to  an  account  of  the  literature 
and  literary  men  of  the  country ;  and  it  may  be 
expected  to  be  ready  for  publication  in  a  year  or 
two.  This  work  will  be  more  in  the  style  of  Men- 
zel's  book  upon  German  literature,  and  will  con- 
tain ample  criticisms  upon  the  living  writers  of  the 
present  day.  Bulgarin,  together  with  Gretsch,  from 
whom  Dr.  Otto  has  derived  a  considerable  part  of 
his  work,  is  now  left  at  the  head  of  the  authors  of 
Russia ;  a  post  which  the  lamented  death  of  Pusch- 
kin,  in  the  last  spring,  left  to  his  undisputed  pos- 
session.    Perhaps  on  some  subsequent  occasion,  if 


TRANSLATOR'S  PREFACE.  xv 

we  are  enabled  to  put  into  execution  a  long-since 
projected  journey  to  St.  Petersburg  and  Moscow, 
we  may  be  induced  to  lay  before  the  public  some 
further  particulars  on  these  subjects.  It  is  in  vain 
to  say  that  Russian  literature  is  a  topic  uninterest- 
ing to  the  English  :  the  obvious  answer  is,  that  if 
it  be  not  interesting  to  them,  it  ought  to  be  so ; 
and  that  sooner  or  later  the  time  must  arrive  when 
their  attention  must  be  directed  in  that  quarter. 
I  have  only,  in  conclusion,  to  request  indulgence 
towards  the  many  defects  which  will  be  found  in 
this  hastily  executed  Translation  ;  and  to  observe, 
that  T  do  not  wish  to  be  held  responsible  for  the 
political  bias  (if  any  be  discoverable)  which  may 
exist  in  this  book. 


AUTHOR'S  PREFACE. 


The  following  extract  from  an  article,  which  I  in- 
serted some  time  ago  in  a  periodical  %  may  be  aptly- 
introduced  in  this  place,  as  the  best  justification  of 
the  present  undertaking.  "  The  literature  of  the 
South  is  rendered  universally  familiar  to  us  through 
the  study  of  the  southern  languages.  It  is  other- 
wise however  with  the  literature  of  the  North,  and 
especfally  of  Russia,  of  which  even  our  men  of  let- 
ters, for  the  most  part,  know  nothing  more  than 
what  may  be  gleaned  from  the  common  Russian 
Miscellanies.  The  chief  ground  of  this  ignorance 
can  only  be  looked  for  in  our  very  limited  acquaint- 
an'ce  with  the  Sclavonic  languages ;  and  here  the 
same  reproach  attaches  to  the  Germans,  on  other 
points  so  studious  of  knowledge,  which  is  justly 
brought  against  the  French  and  Italians  in  regard 
to  the  literature  of  Germany.  Of  all  the  kingdoms 
of  the  North,  the  Russian  Empire,  marching  on 
with  giant  strides  towards  a  state  of  perfection,  ri- 
vets most  our  earnest  attention  ;  and  yet  its  lan- 
guage and  its  literature  continue  to  be  almost  en- 
tirely unknown.  Since  the  beginning  of  the  eigh-  ^ 
teenth  century,  we  find  intellectual  relations  ex- 
isting between  Russia  and  the  other  European 
communities  ;    and    a    strict    comparison    would 

*  See  the  Neue  Breslatier  Zeitung  for  September  17th,  1825. 

b 


xviii  AUTHOR'S  PREFACE. 

show,  that  at  this  period  German  literature  itself 
occupied  no  very  lofty  position.  Might  not  the 
Italians  and  French  just  as  well  plead  this  consi- 
deration as  their  excuse,  if  at  the  beginning  of  the 
nineteenth  century  they  chose  to  believe  that  Ger- 
man literature  had  nothing  very  great  to  exhibit  ? 
It  is  asserted  that  in  Russia  the  higher  classes  only 
can  make  any  pretensions  to  education  ;  but  it  is 
forgotten  that  in  every  country  the  great  mass  of 
the  people  resemble  each  other  in  this  particular, 
of  which  every  traveller  possessing  the  mere  rudi- 
ments of  any  language  may  convince  himself,  if,  in- 
stead of  taking  the  chief  towns  only  as  the  standard 
of  his  conclusions,  he  will  submit  to  pass  some  time 
also  with  this  view  in  the  country^.  Although 
the  Russians  as  yet  can  boast  no  Gothe  or  Shak- 
speare — even  supposing  that  these  writers  could 
be  equalled — yet  we  already  see  them,  since  the 
middle  of  last  century,  in  the  track  which,  by 
the  exercise  of  their  extraordinary  application  and 
ability,  must  sooner  or  later  bring  them  near  this 
point.     To  assure  himself  of  this,  let  any  one  read 

''  Gothe  says,  in  one  of  his  Epigrams, 

Oft  erklart  Ihr  euch  als  freiinde  des  Dichters,  Ihr  Gutter ! 
Gebt  ihm  auch  was  er  bedarf ! 

*        #         *,*         *        *        #         *         * 

Gebt  ihm  ferner  dazu  Sprachen,  die  alten  und  neu'n, 

Das  ich  der  Vijlker  Gewerb',  und  ih»  Geschichte  voinehrae. 

Often,  ye  Gods,  ye  declare  yourselves  the  friends  of  the  poet; 
Grant  to  him  therefore  what  he  most  requires. 

Grant  him  moreover,  languages,  both  old  and  new, 
That  I  may  become  acquainted  with  the  ways  of  the  people,  and 
their  history. 


AUTHOR'S  PREFACE.  xix 

An  Attempt  at  a  Short  History  of  Russian  Litera- 
ture, by  N.  Gretsch,  published  in  the  Russian  lan- 
guage at  St.  Petersburg,  A.  D.  1822,  in  which  are 
to  be  found  biographical  and  literary  notices  of 
nearly  three  hundred  Russian  authors ;  among 
whom,  in  the  department  of  belles  lettres  alone, 
some  of  the  chief  ornaments  of  the  glorious  reign 
of  Alexander  the  First  may  be  reckoned,  as  Ka- 
ramsin,  Dmitrijeff,  Murawjeff,  OserofF,  Schischkoff, 
Prodobadoff,  Lessnizkj,  DrossdofF,  ProtassofF,  Krii- 
lofF,  Shukofskj,  BatjuschkofF,  Wasemskj,  Scha- 
chofskoj,  Gnaditsch,  Wojejkoff,  Puschkin,  and  many 
others.  This  work,  written  by  the  Russian  im- 
perial councillor  of  state,  Nicolai  von  Gretsch,  a 
distinguished  philologist  and  grammarian,  has  been 
taken  as  the  foundation  of  the  present  undertaking; 
the  publication  of  which  is  intended  to  fill  up  a 
very  perceptible  void  in  our  literature.  For  since 
the  appearance  of  The  Russian  Library  from  1772" 
to  1789  {Die  Russische  Bibliothek,  etc.),  in  eleven 
volumes,  by  Bacmeister,  a  space  of  now  more  than 
forty  years,  we  possess  nothing  of  the  same  kind 
in  the  German  language  ;  StrahVs  work,  called 
Gelehrtes  Russland,  or  Learned  Russia,  being  de- 
voted exclusively  to  Russian  writers  of  the  eccle- 
siastical profession,  whose  numbers  have  been 
augmented  in  my  Lexicon  of  Russian  Authors  by 
numerous  articles,  under  the  heads  of  Alexejeff, 
Amwrossj-Protassoff,  Andrej  Liisloff,  Eugenj  Bol- 
chowitinoff  %  BusslajefF,  Wassilj,  Grigorj  (Diakon), 


<=  The  author  of  the  work  which  Professor  Strahl  has  followed  in  his 
Gelehrtes  Russland. 


XX  AUTHOR'S  PREFACE. 

Grigorowitsch  Wassilj,  Michael  Dessnizkj,  Filaret 
Drossdoff,  Sestrenzewitsch-Bogusch,  and  others. 
Besides  the  Russian  authors  mentioned  by  Herr 
von  Gretsch,  many  others  have  been  added  to  ren- 
der the  second  part  of  this  work  more  complete  ; 
especially  those  which  Alexander  BestuschefF  has 
enumerated  in  his  Review  of  Russian  Literature. 
Although  on  the  whole  I  have  adhered  to  the 
above-named  work  of  Herr  von  Gretsch,  it  appeared 
to  me  better  suited  to  my  particular  plan  to  divide 
the  History  of  Literature  into  two  parts  ;  of  which 
the  first  contains  the  proper  History  of  Russian  Li- 
terature, and  the  second.  Biographical  and  Lite- 
rary Notices  of  Russian  Authors  ;  and  to  which  last, 
for  the  sake  of  greater  convenience,  I  have  given 
the  form  of  a  lexicon.  As  to  the  orthography  of 
the  Russian  names,  I  have  followed  the  most  re- 
cent mode,  as  they  are  given  by  Tappe,  in  com- 
pliance with  which,  for  instance,  I  use  ff,  ii,  sh, 
where  others  write  w  ox  v,  y  or  ui,  and  sch  or  the 
French ^*'^.  With  regard  to  the  names  of  places,  I 
have  guided  myself  principally  by  their  ordinary 
spelling  in  the  most  modern  geographies. 

OTTO. 


'■  Note  of  the  Translator.    The  orthography  of  the  Original  Work  has 
been  followed  throughout  in  the  Translation. 


CONTENTS. 


PART  THE  FIRST. 

THE  HISTORY  OF  RUSSIAN  LITERATURE. 

Division  of  the  subject       ...... 


Page 
.       1 


PRELIMINARY  VIEW 


OF  RUSSIAN  LITERATURE  TO  THE  COMMENCEMENT  OF  THE 

FIRST  PERIOD. 


Early  history  of  the  Sclavonic  race 
Manners  and  Customs  of  the  Sclaves  . 
The  Sclavonic  Language    . 


3 
4 
5 


BOOK  I. 

First  Period.  From  the  invention  of  the  Sclavonic  Al- 
phabet, TO  THE  introduction  OF  THE  NATIONAL  WRITING  : 
OR  FROM  THE  REMOTEST  ORIGIN  OF  THE  RUSSIAN  EmPIRE,  TO 
THE  REIGN  OF  PeTER  THE  GrEAT.  FrOM  THE  MIDDLE  OF  THE 
NINTH  TO  THE  END  OF  THE  SEVENTEENTH  CENTURY. 


CHAPTER  I. 

From  the  discovery  of  the  Sclavonic  Letters,  to  the  introduction 
of  the  Christian  Religioii  into  Russia :  that  is,  from  the  Mid- 
dle of  the  Ninth  Century  to  the  year  A.  D.  989. 


I.  Political  condition  of  Russia    . 

II.  Progress  of  Enlightenment 

III.  Influence  of  the  Norse  Language 

Translation  of  the  Bible 

IV.  Literature      .  .         .         .         . 


.  10 
.  11 
.  12 
.  ib. 
.  17 


xxii  CONTENTS. 


CHAPTER  IT. 

From  the  introduction  of  the  Christian  Religion  into  Russia,  to 
the  throwing  off  the  yoke  of  the  Tatars ;  or  from  the  year 
989  to  1462. 

I.  Political  condition  : — 

a)  to  the  time  of  the  Tatar  invasion  .         .         .18 

V)  during  the  Tatar  domination        .         .         .         .  ib. 

II.  Civilisation  : — 

a)  to  the  time  of  the  Tatar  invasion  .         .         .20 

b)  during  the  Tatar  domination   '     .         .         .         .22 

III.  The  Language         .         ,         ,         .         .         .         .23 

IV.  Literature      .         .         .         .         .         .         .         .25 

Writers  : — A)  before  the  Tatar  invasion        .         .         .27 

B)  during  the  Tatar  domination  .         .         .28 

CHAPTER  in. 

From  the  deliverance  from  the  Tatar  yoke,  to  the  reign  of  Peter 
the  Great;  or  from  A.  D.  1462  to  1689. 

I.  Political  condition  : 

a)  to  the  time  when  the  house  of  Romanoff  mounted 
the  throne       .         .         .         .         .         .         .28 

h)  under  the  Romanoff  dynasty        .         .         .         .29 

II.  Civilisation  : — 

a)  under  John  the  Third  and  Wassilj        ,         .         .30 

b)  under  John  the  Fourth,  and  to  the  time  when  the 

family  of  Romanoff  mounted  the  throne     .         .31 

c)  under  the  Romanoffs  .         .         .         .         .         .35 

III.  The  Language        .......  39 

IV.  Literature  : — 

a)  to  the  time  of  the  Romanoffs       .  .     '     .  .42 

b)  under  the  Romanoffs  .  .  .  .  .43 

Beginning  of  the  Theatre    .         .         .         .         .  .44 

Writers  : — A)  till  the  Romanoffs  mounted  the  throne  .  4G 

B)  after  the  accession  of  the  Romanoffs         "  47 


CONTENTS. 


xxni 


BOOK  II. 

Second  Period.     From  the  reign  of  Peter  the  Great,  to 

OUR  own  time. 


CHAPTER  I. 

From  the  beginning  of  the  Second  Period,  to  the  accession  of 
the  Empress  Elizabeth. 


I.  Political  condition    . 

II.  General  Enlightenment 

Printing         .         ,  .         . 

Schools  .... 

Cabinets  of  Sciences  and  Arts  . 
Academy  of  Sciences 
Under  the  Empress  Anne 

III.  The  national  writing  : — 

The  Language 

Grammar      .... 

IV.  Literature  : — 

The  Theatre 

Writers  .         .    ~     .         . 


48 

49 
51 
53 
54 
ib. 
56 

58 
59 

61 

ib. 


CHAPTER  II. 

The  reigns  of  Elizabeth  and  Catherine  ;  or,  from  Lomonossoff 
'  to  Karamsin. 

rl.  Political  condition  of  Russia  : — 

«)  under  Elizabeth  the  First   .  .  .  .  .62 

6)  under  Catherine  the  Second  .  .  ,  .  ib. 

c)  under  Paul  the  First  .         .  .  ,  '     .  .63 

11.  The  progress  of  enlightenment  under  Elizabeth  : — 

Learned  Institutions        .  .  .  .  .  .64 

Progress  of  Enlightenment  under  Catherine  II.  .  QG 
Men  of  letters,  and  learned  Institutions  .  .  .67 
Under  Paul  1 72 


XXIV 


CONTENTS. 


Catherine — tlie 


III.  Formation  of  the  Language  and  style  of  Lomo- 

NOSSOFF  : 

The  Lyric  and  Dramatic  Metres 
Rhetorical  Style     . 
Grammar       .... 
The  Language  under  the  Empress 

Language  of  Prose 
The  Language  of  Poetry 
Grammar  and  Lexicography     . 
Literature  under  Elizabeth 
Journalism    .  .  .  .       ■ 

The  Russian  Theatre 
Wolkoff        ..... 
Literature  under  Catherine 
Journalism     .... 
Pulpit  Eloquence  . 
History  .... 

The  Theatre  .         .         . 

Writers  .... 


.  73 

.  74 
.  75 


.  76 

.  ib. 
.  77 
.  78 
.  79 
.  80 
.  ib. 


81 
82 
83 
ib. 


84 
85 


CHAPTER  HI. 

The  Century  of  Alexander  ;  or,  from  Karamsin  to  our  own 

time. 

I.  Political  condition  of  Russia 


II.  General  Enlightenment 

III.  The  Language 

IV.  Literature    . 
Writers  . 
Continuation    . 
Conclusion 


86 

87 

97 

102 

107 

108 
ib. 


PART  THE  SECOND. 

LEXICON  OF  RUSSIAN  AUTHORS. 

Introduction  :  containing  a  review  of  the  different  kinds 

of  productions  of  the  Russians,  in  prose  and  verse    .  Ill 

Biographical  and  Literary  Notices  of  Russian  Au- 
thors   119 

Appendix      .........  403 


THE  HISTORY 
OF  RUSSIAN  LITERATCTRE. 


Division  of  the  subject. 

§.  1.  The  history  of  Russian  literature  may  be  di- 
vided into  two  principal  periods ;  namely,  from  the 
invention  of  the  Sclavonic  characters  to  the  intro- 
duction of  the  popular  writing,  or,  in  a  political 
point  of  view,  from  the  earliest  origin  of  the  Rus- 
sian empire  to  the  reign  of  Peter  the  Great ;  and 
from  this  epoch  down  to  our  own  times.  The  lat- 
ter period  distinguishes  itself  from  the  first  through 
the  establishment  of  a  regular  national  literature. 
The  first  of  these  periods  separates  again  into  three 
divisions.  The  first  extends  to  the  introduction  of 
the  Christian  religion  into  Russia :  the  second  to 
the  end  of  the  Tatar  domination  :  the  third  to  the 
point  where  the  second  period  commences.  The 
first  division  of  this  period  exhibits  scarcely  any- 
thing but  translations  of  the  Scriptures,  rendered 
from  the  Greek  into  the  Sclavonic  language.  The 
second  abounds  in  numerous  Russian  works,  in  di- 
plomacy, history,  rhetoric,  and  poetry.  The  third, 
distinguished  by  the  destruction  of  the  eastern  em- 
pire, and  the  establishment  of  relations  between 

B 


2  THE  HISTORY  OF 

Russia  and  the  west  of  Europe,  displays  also  in 
the  productions  of  its  literature,  the  influence  of 
these  important  changes.  The  last  period  contains 
likewise  three  divisions :  the  first  reaches  down  to 
LomonossofF;  the  second  to  Karamsin  ;  and  the 
I  ( ';  thiv4  :^0  Qtir  own  time.  In  the  first  division  we 
witness  the' earliest  experiments  in  the  new  or  ver- 
c  c'  ^  ''''  Tjacuiar  dialect,  and  the  efforts  and  perseverance  of 
the  first  authors  in  settling  its  principles  and  rules. 
With  LomonossofF  the  language  of  sublime  poetry 
and  eloquence,  properly  speaking,  may  be  said  to 
have  commenced.  With  Karamsin  appeared  an 
even,  clear,  and  elegant  prose  style,  and  at  the 
same  time  a  lighter  description  of  poetry.  Having 
thus  marked  out  the  rough  divisions  of  the  literary 
history  of  Russia,  we  may  again  separate  each  of 
these  divisions  into  the  following  sections :  1)  A 
review  of  the  political  condition  of  the  empire.  2) 
A  review  of  the  general  enlightenment  of  the  peo- 
ple. 3)  A  history  of  the  progress  of  language  and 
grammar.  4)  A  history  of  poetry  and  eloquence, 
illustrated  by  the  various  authors  who  attempted 
each  branch  of  letters. 


RUSSIAN  LITERATURE.  .3 


I 


I 


PRELIMINARY  VIEW 

OF  RUSSIAN  LITERATURE  TO  THE  COMMENCE- 
MENT OF  THE  FIRST  PP:RI0D. 

Early  history  of  the  Sclavonic  race, 

§.  2.  The  oldest  history  of  the  Sclavonic  tribes 
is  involved  in  uncertainty  (1).  It  is  probable  that 
their  forefathers  came  in  the  earliest  times  from 
Asia.  In  the  first  century  after  the  birth  of  Christ 
the  Sclaves  began  to  occupy  their  present  situa- 
tion. In  the  fifth  century  they  gave  evidence  of 
their  existence  by  an  attack  on  the  eastern  empire, 
and  from  that  time  they  carried  on  an  uninter- 
rupted war  with  their  neighbours,  conquered  them 
through  their  valour,  but  lost  the  fruits  of  their  vic- 
tory through  the  divisions  of  party  jealousy  and 
the  disunion  caused  by  family  disputes ;  and  were 
frequently  subjugated  by  the  superior  force  of 
powerful  enemies,  as  the  Germans,  the  Warags, 
and  the  Chosars.  In  the  middle  of  the  ninth  cen- 
tury (A.  D.  862)  the  Russian  empire  was  founded  ; 
and  from  this  time  the  proper  history  of  Russia 
becomes  divided  from  the  general  history  of  the 
Sclavonic  people.  In  the  tenth  century  the  king- 
dom of  Poland  was  founded.  The  Bohemians  had 
since  the  beginning  of  the  eighth  century,  pos- 
sessed a  government  of  their  own ;  and  in  the  ele- 
venth century  their  country  assumed  the  name  of 
a  kingdom.  The  kingdom  of  Moravia,  which  had 
been  so  powerful  in  the  eighth  century,  fell  to 

b2 


4  THE  HISTORY  OF 

pieces  in  the  beginning  of  the  tenth,  and  was  di- 
vided between  the  Hungarians  and  the  Germans. 
The  history  of  the  Illyrian,  Hungarian,  and  Ger- 
man Sclaves  is  connected  with  the  history  of  those 
nations  who  have  ruled  over  them. 

(1)  The  nations  of  the  Sclavonic  race,  which  now  in- 
habit the  greatest  part  of  the  east  of  Europe,  and 
rule  the  whole  of  northern  Asia,  as  far  as  the  very 
borders  of  America,  are 

1)  The  Russians,  the  most  powerful  of  all  the 
Sclavonic  tribes. 

2)  The  Poles,  the  second  Sclavonic  nation  which 
asserted  its  independence. 

3)  The  Bohemians,  or  Tscheks,  now  subject  to 
Germany ;  with  these  the  Moravian  Sclaves  are 
associated. 

4)  The  Illyrian  Sclaves :  that  is,  the  Servians,  Bul- 
garians, Bosnians,  Dalmatians,  and  others,  who 
occupy  the  whole  territory  from  the  banks  of 
the  Danube  to  the  Adriatic  and  Black  seas,  and 
which  for  the  most  part  are  subject  either  to 
Turkey  or  Austria. 

5)  The  Hungarian  Sclaves :  as  the  Sclavonians, 
the  Croats,  the  Russians  scattered  round  the 
Carpathian  mountains,  and  others.  With  these 
must  be  reckoned  also  the  Sclavish  inhabitants 
of  Steyermark,  Karnthen,  and  Krain. 

6)  The  German  Sclaves,  or  Wends;  who  occupy 
Pomerania,  Brandenburg,  Silesia,  Lusatia,  and 
as  far  as  the  banks  of  the  Elbe;  although  for 
the  most  part  these  have  lost  the  language  of 
their  ancestors. 

Manners  and  Customs  of  the  Sclaves. 

§  3.  The  ancient  Sclaves  were  a  hardy  and  cou- 
rageous race,  and  distinguished  themselves  by  all 


I 


RUSSIAN  LITERATURE.  5 

the  virtues  and  vices  which  are  found  among  al- 
most every  people  in  their  infancy  ;  by  their  love 
of  freedom,  their  rapacity  and  lawlessness  in  war, 
and  their  good-heartedness  and  hospitality  at  home. 
The  Sclaves  occupied  themselves  from  the  earliest 
times  in  tending  cattle,  and  in  agriculture — in  some 
sorts  of  trade,  and  a  few  rough  manufactures.  They 
loved  music,  and  composed  national  and  war  songs, 
which  however  have  not  descended  to  our  times. 
They  had  some  idea  of  arithmetic  and  chronology, 
but  till  the  ninth  century  very  few  of  them  could 
either  read  or  write*.  Their  rehgion  was  heathen- 
ish, and  included  the  worship  of  many  gods,  and 
the  offering  of  sacrifices ;  they  seem  nevertheless 
to  have  had  some  conception  of  a  supreme  Being. 

The  Sclavonic  Language. 

§  4.  It  is  probable  that  the  Sclaves  spoke  a 
common  language,  which  (2),  as  indeed  all  the  Eu- 
ropean languages,  originally  was  derived  from  Asia. 
This  is  confirmed  by  the  resemblance  which  the 
roots  of  their  words  bear  to  the  Greek,  Latin,  and 
German,  as  well  as  to  the  Sanscrit,  the  old  lan- 
guage of  India,  in  which  the  sacred  writings  of  the 
Brahmins  are  preserved.  The  peculiarities  of  the 
ancient  Sclavonic  language  are  unknown  to  us ;  we 
possess  no  written  memorials  of  it  before  the  time 
of  the  division  of  the  Sclavonic  races,  and  (a  re- 
markable circumstance !)  before  the  translation  of 
the   Christian    Scriptures   into   the    Sclavish   Ian- 

»  The  Venedians,  Sclaves  who  inhabited  the  shores  of  the  Baltic,  were 
acquainted  with  the  use  of  letters.  On  their  idols  are  found  inscriptions 
in  the  Runic  or  Gothic  character. 


6  THE  HISTORY  OF 

guage  by  the  Greek  monks.  This  language,  ac- 
cording to  all  probability,  consisted  in  the  oldest 
times  of  only  one  dialect ;  afterwards  it  divided  it- 
self into  two,  namely,  the  eastern  and  western  (the 
Sclavonic  and  the  Antish),  which  in  the  sequel 
formed  various  distinct  branches.  All  that  we  know 
of  the  original  Sclavonic  language,  rests  upon  the 
evidence  of  Procopius,  the  secretary  of  Belisarius, 
who  calls  it  a  barbarous  language,  and  a  few  Scla- 
vish  names  preserved  and  most  likely  already  cor- 
rupted in  the  works  of  the  Byzantine  chroniclers 
— as  Mesamir,  Kelagast,  Ardagast,  Pirogast,  and 
others. 

(2)  All  the  Sclavonic  languages  are  divided  into  two 
principal  branches — the  Eastern  and  Western''. 

I.  The  languages  of  the  Eastern  branch  are — 

1)  The  Russian,  which  is  less  adulterated  than 
any  of  the  others  by  the  admixture  of  foreign 
words.  Its  originality  may  be  accounted  for 
by  the  circumstance  of  the  Russians  being  si- 

''  Much  of  the  difference  of  the  languages  spoken  by  the  eastern  and 
western  branches,  depends  (according  to  Dobrowski's  idea)  on  the  dif- 
ferent usage  of  these  words  : 

1.  The  eastern  Sclaves  use  the  preposition  rus;  the  western,  on  the 
other  hand,  use  ros. 

2.  The  eastern  Sclaves  use  the  preposition  is,  where  the  western  have 
substituted  the  form  wui. 

3.  Among  the  eastern  Sclaves  the  word  ptiza  is  in  use ;  whereas  the 
western  snpply  its  place  by  ptak. 

This  explanation,  however,  is  not  satisfactory — since  the  Russians, 
who  belong  to  the  eastern  branch,  use  the  prepositions  ros  and  wui,  and 
have  also  the  word  ptacha.  Herr  Wostokoff  has  much  more  correctly 
observed,  that  the  chief  peculiarity  of  the  western  dialects  consists  in  the 
interpolation  of  the  letter  Schiivetje  (pronounced  like  a  French  j)  and  d — 
as,  for  instance,  dzieti  Polish,  den'  Russian,  the  day  ;  mijdlo  Polish, 
and  muilo  Russian,  soap  ;  etc. 


RUSSIAN  LITERATURE.  7 

tuated  in  the  centre  of  the  other  Sclavish  races, 
and  having  had  Httle  immediate  intercourse  with 
foreign  nations,  till  their  language  had  been 
perfected.  Through  the  fact  of  the  Russians 
having  adopted  the  Greek  form  of  the  Christian 
religion,  their  language  was  enabled  to  establish 
and  define  itself,  before  it  acquired  any  admix- 
ture of  Latin  idiom.  The  words  borrowed  from 
the  Tatars  are  not  numerous,  and  have  not 
encroached  upon  their  Sclavonic  synonyms. 
The  Russian  language  has  one  principal  dia- 
lect —  the  high-Russian  —  and  some  cognate 
dialects,  of  which  the  most  important  is  the 
Utile-Russian,  which  is  distinguished  from  the 
first  by  the  pronunciation,  by  numerous  idioms 
of  expression,  and  by  heteroclite  anomalies  in 
the  construction  and  grammar.  The  little- 
Russian  dialect  merited  and  preserved  distinc- 
tion through  the  long  dominion  of  the  Poles  in 
the  south-west  of  Russia ;  so  that  it  might  not 
inaptly  be  called  the  Polish  provincial  dialect. 
The  other  chief  cognate  dialect  is  the  white- 
Russian,  which  the  people  speak  in  Lithuania, 
and  in  part  of  Volhynia.  This  dialect,  (called 
also  the  Russian,)  is  the  language  in  which  the 
works  of  some  writers  of  the  sixteenth  and 
seventeenth  centuries  are  written.  (See  below 
some  further  information  on  this  head.)  The 
remaining  dialects  bear  a  closer  resemblance  to 
the  principal  one,  from  which  they  differ  only 
in  certain  words,  (as,  for  instance,  the  Sudalish 
dialect,  which  contains  many  words  entirely  un- 
known in  the  Russian  language ;  the  Olenish, 
which  is  made  up  of  a  mixture  of  Finlandish 
with  Russian,  etc.)  or  else  in  the  pronunciation 
of  certain  letters,  (as,  for  instance,  the  dialect 
of  Novogorod  at  the  present  day).  The  purest 
high-Russian  is   spoken  by  the  people  in  the 


8  THE  HISTORY  OF 

government  of  Moscow,  and  some  of  the  other 
governments  near  it.  In  Siberia  the  dialect  of 
Novogorod  is  preserved  tolerably  pure,  although 
lately  corrupted  by  some  provincialisms. 

2)  The  Church- language,  or  the  proper  Sclavonic, 
has  been  handed  down  in  the  ecclesiastical 
records  —  namely,  in  the  translations  of  the 
scriptures,  and  other  books  connected  with  the 
church,  which  have  been  rendered  from  the 
Greek  into  the  Sclavonic  (Servian)  dialect. 
This  language  had,  as  we  shall  afterwards  see, 
an  immense  influence  on  the  formation  and  cha- 
racter of  the  modern  Russian. 

3)  The  Illyrian  branch — of  which  the  chief  forms 
are — 

a)  The  Servian,  (which  has  several  smaller 
dialects — as  the  Proper  Servian,  the  Bos- 
nian, the  Bulgarian,  the  Sclavonish,  the 
Dalmatian,  the  Czarna-Goratian,  or  Mon- 
tenegrinian,  the  Ragusanian,  the  Sieben- 
burgian,  etc.)  a  language,  not  very  pure, 
but  as  we  are  assured  remarkably  sweet, 
and  which  is  only  waiting  for  some  lucky 
accident  to  awaken  from  its  long  sleep  of 
obscurity. 

b)  The  Croatian,  and 

c)  The  Krainian,  which  has  scarcely  any 
distinct  characteristic,  and  is  much  mixed 
with  Italian  and  German. 

II.  The  languages  of  the  Western  branch  are — 

1)  The  Polish,  which  has  lost  much  of  its  origi- 
nality, through  the  intercourse  of  the  Poles 
with  Germany  and  Rome ;  but  which  lias  the 
same  principles  of  organisation  with  the  other 
Sclavonic  languages,  and  can  also  boast  a  rich 
and  copious  literature. 


RUSSIAN  LITERATURE.  9 

2)  The  Bohemian,  or  Tschechisch,  which  having 
escaped  being  entirely  destroyed  by  German 
dynasties,  and  Latin  monks,  is  at  last  beginning 
again  to  assert  its  right  of  having  books  written 
of  its  own.  It  has  also  some  dialects,  as  the 
Moravian,  the  Slowakian,  etc. 

3)  The  Wendish,  which  the  people  of  Lusatia 
speak. — The  poorest  of  all  the  Sclavonic  lan- 
guages, and  which  is  every  day  becoming  more 

"  and  more  encroached  upon  by  the  German. 


10  THE  HISTORY  OF 


BOOK  I. 

First  Period.  From  the  invention  of  the  Sclavonic 
Alphabet,  to  the  introduction  of  the  National 
Writing  :  or  from  the  remotest  origin  of  the 
Russian  Empire,  to  the  reign  of  Peter  the  Great. 
From  the  middle  of  the  ninth  to  the  end  of  the 
seventeenth  century. 

CHAPTER  I. 

From  the  discovery  of  the  Sclavonic  Letter$,  to  the  intro- 
duction of  the  Christian  Religion  into  Russia :  that  is, 
from  the   Middle  of  the  Ninth   Century  to  the  year 
A.D.989. 

I. 

Political  condition  of  Russia. 

§  5.  The  beginning  of  the  first  literary  period  of 
Russia  is  marked  out  in  the  political  world  by  the 
founding  of  the  Russian  empire  by  the  three  Wara- 
gian  princes,  Rurik,  Sinaff,  and  Truwor.  The 
bold  Norsemen  found  in  Russia  food  for  their  love 
of  fame  and  conquest.  Oleg  brought  young  Rus- 
sia completely  under  his  power,  and  conquered 
Constantinople.  Igor  followed  his  example.  Swa- 
tosslaff  earned  for  himself,  by  his  bravery,  his  bat- 
tles, his  spirit,  and  his  misfortunes,  an  imperishable 
name  in  history.  Wladimir  raised  Russia  by  the 
wisdom  of  his  administration,  by  his  friendly  inter- 
course with  Constantinople,  and  especially  by  the 
introduction  of  the  Greek  form  of  the  Christian  re- 
ligion, to  a  high  degree  of  political  prosperity ;  and 


RUSSIAN  LITERATURE.  11 

would  have  fitted  it  to  succeed  at  last  to  the  in- 
heritance of  the  Roman  empire  in  the  east,  had 
not  the  unfortunate  idea  of  dividing  the  empire  at 
that  time  predominated  through  all  Europe. 

II. 

Progress  of  Enlightenment. 

§  6.  The  migration  of  the  Warags  into  Russia 
had  an  important  influence  on  the  government  and 
legislation  of  the  Russians  of  that  time.  The 
first  princes  settled  the  form  of  government  in 
Russia,  introduced  taxation,  established  an  army 
and  navy,  extended  trade,  encouraged  commerce 
with  neighbouring  nations,  and  concluded  treaties 
with  them.  In  regard,  however,  to  what  may  be 
properly  called  enlightenment,  the  Warags  could 
do  nothing  for  the  people  of  Novogorod,  and 
Kieff,  since  they  themselves  had  attained  no  very 
lofty  eminence  in  education.  Intercourse  with 
Constantinople,  and  still  more  the  introduction  of 
the  Christian  religion,  opened  the  road  for  the  ad- 
vance of  science  and  art  in  Russia.  Wladimir 
founded  schools  for  boys,  a  thing  which  at  that 
time  appears  to  have  been  so  unusual,  that  the 
mothers,  whose  children  were  selected  to  be  put 
into  these  institutions,  mourned  for  them,  as  if 
dead;  reading  and  writing  being  accounted  for 
magic.  Architecture,  sculpture,  and  painting 
adorned  the  new  church  at  KiefF.  Philosophers 
and  artists  came  from  Greece.  Monasteries  were 
founded,  towns  were  built,  and  laws  enacted.     In 

B   the  court  of  the  princes  splendour  and  luxury  pre- 

H   vailed. 

II _________ __.._.__. 


12  THE  HISTORY  OF 

III. 

Influence  of  the  Norse  Language. 

§  7.  Under  the  division,  §  4,  we  have  already 
spoken  of  the  condition  of  the  Sclavonic  language 
at  the  arrival  of  Rurik.  The  Warags  exercised  an 
important  influence  upon  the  language  as  it  then 
existed.  They  brought  many  Norse  words  into 
use.  Later,  however,  when  they  had  more  amal- 
gamated themselves  with  the  Sclaves,  they  them- 
selves adopted  the  language  of  the  country ;  only 
a  few  anomalous  words  and  peculiar  names  re- 
mained in  the  Russian  language  as  traces  of  their 
ascendancy  (3). 

(3)  Such,  for  instance,  are  the  following  Scandinavian 
words. 

1)  Icelandishf  rod,  Russ.  rdd,  a  row; — Icostr,  Russ. 
hosier,  a  wood-stack ; — Ttetill,  Russ.  kotell,  a  kettle ; 
— sina,  Russ.  ssuno,  hay ; — brynia,  Russ.  hrond,  a 
harrow ; — sild,  Russ.  sseVd\  a  herring ; — gardr, 
Russ.  gorod,  a  town,  &c. 

2)  Danish  and  Swedish,  torg,  Russ.  torgg,  trade  ; — 
laege,  Russ.  lekar,  a  surgeon ; — miod,  Russ.  medd, 
mead; — morJce,  Russ.  mrak,  darkness; — dal,  Russ. 
doll,  a  valley ; — skrig,  Russ.  krik,  a  cry ; — bbsemen, 
Russ.  besmenn,  a  steelyard ; — dele,  Russ.  delit,  to 
divide ; — tolke,  Russ.  tolkowaf,  to  enlighten,  &c. 

3)  Finnish,  meri,  Russ.  morje,  the  sea; — sama,  Russ. 
ssamtn,  self; — hamet,  Russ.  chomut,  a  horsecollar ; — 
leipo,  Russ.  chldb,  a  loaf; — tavara,  Russ,  towarr, 
wares,  &c.  / 

Translation  of  the  Bible. 

§  8.  Unquestionably  the  greatest  change  in  the 
language  was  produced  by  the  Sclavonic  transla- 


RUSSIAN  LITERATURE.  13 

tion  of  the  Holy  Scriptures.  The  brothers  Method 
and  Constantine  (called  Cyril  by  the  monks)  who 
lived  in  the  middle  of  the  ninth  centmy,  and  were 
born  in  the  Greek  town  Solun,  (the  present  Salo- 
nica,)  were  the  inventors  of  the  Sclavonic  Church- 
Alphabet.  The  first  of  them  was  sent  by  the 
Greek  emperor,  Michael  the  Third,  into  the  coun- 
tries inhabited  by  the  Sclaves,  where  he  became 
acquainted  with  their  language.  But  the  other, 
brought  up  at  the  court  of  Constantinople,  was  a 
priest,  librarian  to  the  cathedral  of  St.  Sophia  at 
Constantinople,  and  teacher  of  philosophy.  In  the 
year  863  the  Moravian  princes,  RostislafF,  Swato- 
polk,  and  Kozel,  sent  to  ask  for  some  teachers  of 
Christianity  from  Constantinople.  In  the  follow- 
ing year  the  brothers.  Method  and  Constantine, 
were  sent  to  them.  They  invented  the  Sclavonic 
letters  (called  after  the  name  of  the  last,  "  the  al- 
phabet of  Cyril,")  by  setting  together  the  Greek 
characters  in  different  ways,  and  adding  to  them  a 
description  of  the  peculiar  sounds  of  the  Sclavonic 
language,  as  {he,  she,  ze,  scha,  the  Hebrew  ^ — 
schtscha,  jerr,  ui,  je  or  e,  ju,  ja.  After  this,  they 
translated  from  the  Greek  the  Acts  of  the  Apostles, 
the  Gospels,  the  Psalms,  the  Oktoick  Hymns  %  and 
other  books  necessary  for  the  service  of  the  church, 
into  one  of  the  dialects  of  the  Sclavonic  language, 
which  at  that  time  resembled  the  Russian  much 
more  than  now  (4).  After  the  introduction  of  the 
Christian  faith  into  Russia,  books  on  sacred  sub- 
jects, which  were  probably  at  this  time  in  great  re- 

<=  The  Oktoick  Hymns  are  a  collection  of  sacred  songs  composed  for 
eight  voices  by  John  of  Damascus. 


14  THE  HISTORY  OF 

quisition  among  the  baptized  Sclaves,  were  in- 
creased considerably  in  number ;  and  hence  arose 
among  the  Russians  the  two  distinct  languages — 
the  ecclesiastical,  or  proper  Sclavonic  language, 
which  was  for  a  long  time  the  language  in  which 
books  were  exclusively  written,  and  the  Russian. 
Through  the  translation  of  the  Scriptures  many 
words  and  idioms  were  introduced  from  the  Greek 
into  the  Sclavonic  language ;  since  the  translators 
performed  their  task  almost  literally,  and  finding  a 
new  and  scarcely  organized  language  before  them, 
took  the  liberty  of  incorporating  with  it  expres- 
sions from  a  foreign  but  more  perfect  language,  of 
coining  many  new  words,  and  even  of  leaving 
some  words  of  the  original  entirely  unchanged. 
New  ideas  required  also  new  modes  of  expression ; 
for  instance,  Mitropolit,  Jjerej,  a  priest;  trapesa, 
the  high-altar,  etc.  etc.  It  is  probable  that  many 
of  these  idioms  and  expressions  sounded  strange 
and  unnatural  to  the  Russians  of  that  period,  but 
by  degrees,  as  this  new  language  was  heard  with 
less  and  less  remark  in  the  ceremonials  of  the 
church  service,  their  ear  grew  accustomed  to  its 
peculiarities,  and  at  last  they  began  to  honour 
these  recent  acquisitions  as  if  they  were  part  of 
their  original  inheritance.  This  book-language  also 
exercised  the  greatest  influence  on  the  vernacular 
tongue,  which,  however,  by  no  means  lost  on  that 
account  half  its  originality.  We  repeat  our  above 
remark  (§  4.)  that  it  is  impossible  now  to  conjec- 
ture exactly  how  far  the  original  Sclavonic  lan- 
guage may  have  been  altered  by  the  Greek,  since 
we  are  entirely  without  any  records  of  the  first  be- 


RUSSIAN  LITERATURE.  15 

fore  this  translation  into  it  from  the  latter.     In  the 
mean  time  also  the  Russian  language,  like  all  living 
languages,  has  been  gradually  changed  by  the  pro- 
gress of  time,  whereas  the  Sclavonic  has  been  pre- 
served the  same  in  books;  except  that  the  tran- 
scribers sometimes  found  it  necessary  to  make  a 
few   improvements   to   render  it  intelligible,  and 
more  reconcileable  with  the  now  prevailing  tongue. 
(4)  Some  historians  assert  that  this   dialect  was  the 
present  Servian  language.     The  oldest  transcript  of 
the  Sclavonic   Scriptures  extant  is  a  copy  of  the 
Gospels  upon  parchment,  which  was  written  by  the 
Deacon  Gregory,  in  the  year  1056,  for  Ostromir, 
governor  of  the  city  Novogorod.     This  manuscript 
is  now  in  the  Imperial  Public  Library.     The  Syno- 
dal Library  at  Moscow  possesses  another  copy  of  the 
Evangelists  upon  parchment,  written   in   the   year 
1144.     In  the  transcripts  of  the  Scriptures  in  the 
different  centuries,  it  is  easy  to  remark  various  alte- 
rations, which  have  evidently  been  made  on  purpose 
by  learned  copyists.     The  New  Testament  and  the 
Psalms  were  printed  for  the  first  time  at  Ostrog,  in 
the  year  1580,  and  the  whole  Bible  in  1581,  at  the 
same  place.     In  the  reign  of  the  Empress  Elizabeth 
Petrowna,  an  entire  new  translation  of  the  Bible  was 
accomplished.     Now  that  we  are  speaking  of  the 
Ostromir  manuscript   of  the  Evangelists,  it  may  be 
as  well  to  say  a  few  words  summarily  on  the  subject 
of  the  ancient  handwriting.     In  the  whole  of  Europe 
there  are  no  earlier  manuscripts,  than  those  which 
date  from  the  fifth  century  **,  and  of  these  there  are 
not  more  than  ten ;  of  the  sixth  century  there  are 

*'  Note  of  the  translator. — The  learned  author  appears  to  have  fallen 
into  an  unaccountable  error  here.  The  British  Museum,  and  we  believe 
Dantzic  and  Padua  also,  possess  each  a  manuscript  of  the  third  cen- 
tury. 


16  THE  HISTORY  O^ 

about  twenty ;  of  the  seventh  some  hundreds ;  and 
of  the  eighth  scarcely  a  thousand,  known  to  exist. 
The  oldest  Russian  manuscripts  do  not  date  earlier 
back  than  the  eleventh  century,  and  these  are  the 
Evangelists  of  Ostromir,  which  we  have  mentioned, 
and  the  Sbornik^,  of  the  year  1046  or  1076,  which 
now  is  the  property  of  Prince  SchtscherbatofF.  Of 
the  twelfth  century  we  are  acquainted  with  tyo  ma- 
nuscripts of  the  Evangelists ;  the  first  written  on 
parchment  by  a  certain  Alexis,  for  Prince  Mstisslaff 
Wladimirowitsch,  of  Novogorod,  in  the  year  1125, 
and  the  other,  which  we  have  mentioned  above,  of 
the  date  1144.  Of  archives  and  records,  the  oldest 
extant  is  written  upon  parchment,  dated  between  the 
years  1 128  and  1 132,  being  a  diploma  from  the  Grand 
Prince  MstisslafF  Wladimirowitsch  and  his  son  to  a 
tributary  prince  of  Novogorod,  called  Wsewolod 
Mstisslawitsch  ^  The  oldest  Russian  records  and 
books  down  to  the  fifteenth  century,  and  some  still 
later,  are  upon  parchment  or  cotton-paper,  which  is 
remarkable  for  its  thickness,  fineness,  and  smooth- 
ness ;  in  the  sixteenth  century,  however,  they  begin 
to  be  written  upon  fine  linen  paper.  The  handwrit- 
ing in  the  oldest  manuscripts  is  a  sort  of  large  text 
hand,  very  like  the  Russian  Church-writing,  and  in 
this  the  earliest  Russian  parchment  books  are  writ- 
ten, through  the  eleventh,  twelfth,  thirteenth,  and 
part  of  the  fourteenth  centuries.  From  the  middle 
of  the  fourteenth  century,  the  half  text  hand  had  be- 
gun to  be  used,  and  in  the  fifteenth  the  running 
hand  was  introduced  from  Poland,  and  brought  into 
common  use. 


*  Sbornik,  a  prayer  book ;  also  in  former  times  any  Russian  manu- 
script was  so  called,  which  contained  writings  upon  various  subjects. 

^  A  masterly  and  detailed  explanation  of  this  document  may  be  found 
in  the  15th  and  16lh  numbers  of  the  European  Messenger  for  the  year 
1818. — ("  Indent  15. und  16.  Hefteda  Boten  von  Europa") 


RUSSIAN  LITERATURE.  17 

Literature. 

§  9.  This  portion  of  Russian  history  contains  no 
memorial  of  proper  Russian  hterature.  A  few  po- 
pular ballads,  in  which  mention  is  made  of  the 
pagan  gods,  of  Wladimir's  banquets,  and  of  the  he- 
roes of  his  time,  may  perhaps  still  exist  in  our 
days,  but  not  in  their  original  state.  They  have 
necessarily  been  much  corrupted  by  oral  tradition 
in  descending  to  us  through  the  lapse  of  centuries. 
Besides  the  translation  of  the  Bible,  (which  how- 
ever we  do  not  possess  complete  in  manuscript, 
but  merely  the  Gospels,  the  Acts  of  the  Apostles, 
and  the  Psalms,  and  these  not  earlier  than  the  ele- 
venth century,  see  above,  annot.  4,)  two  other  do- 
cuments of  the  language  of  that  time  have  been 
preserved,  namely.  Treaties  concluded  with  the 
Greeks  by  the  princes  Oleg  and  Igor,  between  the 
years  912  and  945.  In  these  the  Waragian  names 
of  some  noble  Russians  are  observable  :  as  Karl, 
Farlaff,  Weremid,  Rulaff,  Stemid,  and  so  forth ;  and 
several  peculiar  rhetorical  expressions  deserve  par- 
ticular remark.  The  other  is  the  speech  of  Swa- 
tosslafF  to  the  army,  a  most  valuable  memorial  of 
ancient  Russian  eloquence;  it  is  however  extremely 
improbable  that  Nestor  has  given  us  the  original 
words  of  the  hero.  It  is  also  not  unlikely  that  the 
above-mentioned  treaties  were  translated  by  this 
annalist  from  the  Greek,  since  the  Greek  method 
of  reckoning  time  is  used  in  them  throughout. 


18  THE  HISTORY  OF 


CHAPTER  n. 

From  the  introduction  of  the  Christian  religion  into  Rus- 
sia, to  the  throwing  off  the  yoke  of  the  Tatars ;  or  from 
the  year  989  to  1462. 

I. 

Political  condition : 

a)   to  the  time  of  the  Tatar  invasion. 

§  10.  Wladimir's  successor,  JarosslafF,  preserved 
the  splendour  and  power  of  his  throne  by  consoli- 
dating the  separate  and  subordinate  jurisdictions 
with  the  chief  government,  and  by  victories  over 
foreign  enemies.  It  was  not  till  he  found  himself 
at  the  point  of  death  that  he  bequeathed  as  a  legacy 
to  the  century  in  which  he  had  lived,  a  new  division 
of  Russia,  which  from  this  time  became  a  scene  of 
disorder,  civil  strife,  bloodthirstiness,  and  crime. 
Enemies  assailed  it  from  without  and  within ;  ne- 
vertheless it  had  acquired  so  much  more  real  po- 
litical strength  than  its  neighbours,  that  for  two 
centuries  it  successfully  withstood  their  attacks. 
For  the  subjugation  of  Russia,  a  whole  section  of 
the  world  was  required. 

b)   during  the  Tatar  domination. 

§11.  In  the  first  half  of  the  thirteenth  century, 
the  formidable  Mongols,  who  received  from  the 
Russians  of  that  time  the  name  of  Tatars,  poured 
themselves  forth,  like  a  fiery  and  bloody  torrent, 
over  the  whole  face  of  Russia,  and  taking  advan- 
tage of  their  own  impetuous  multitudes,  and  at  the 


RUSSIAN  LITERATURE.  19 

same  time  of  the  domestic  divisions  of  the  Rus- 
sians, brought  almost  the  whole  of  the  provinces 
under  their  dominion.  The  successors  of  St.  Wladi- 
mir  were  for  two  centuries  vassals  of  the  savage 
Bathes  and  Gajuks.  The  undaunted  Alexander 
Nefskj,  the  talented  Johan  Kalita,  did  not  venture 
to  think  of  direct  resistance,  but  contented  them- 
selves with  softening  the  rigour  of  their  insolent 
tyrants,  and  satisfying  their  rapacity  for  plunder. 
The  Russians  dragged  on  their  existence  in  a  state 
of  shameful  servitude,  and  forgot  their  former  glory. 
The  whole  of  the  south  and  south-western  divisions 
fell  under  the  authority  of  the  Lithuanian  prince, 
Ghedyminn.  During  his  sway,  the  surrounding 
appanages  gradually  dwindled  away,  and  the  power 
of  the  Grand-Prince  of  Moscow  increased.  At  the 
same  time  also,  the  dominion  of  the  Tatars,  through 
schisms  and  differences  among  themselves,  some- 
what relaxed.  At  last  the  first  glimpse  of  deliver- 
ance approached.  The  Grand-Prince  Dimitrj  Jo- 
hannowitsch,  by  his  victory  over  the  Tatars  on  the 
field  of  Kulikowitsch,  A.  D.  1380,  laid  the  founda- 
tion of  the  emancipation  of  his  native  country. 
The  Tatars  indeed  several  times  after  this,  made 
inroads  upon  Russia ;  but  after  a  short  time,  in- 
stead of  thinking  any  longer  of  the  subjugation  of 
[a  foreign  country,  they  were  obhged  to  attend  to 
the  maintenance  of  their  own  existence ;  and  in  the 
year  A.  D.  1462,  the  Grand-Prince  Johann  Wassil- 
jewitsch  mounted  the  throne  of  Russia  entirely 
free  and  independent. 


c2 


20  THE  HISTORY  OF 

n. 

Civilisation : 

a)   to  the  tiine  of  the  Tatar  invasion. 

§  12.  JarosskfF  followed  with  zeal  and  with  suc- 
cess the  good  example  set  him  by  Wladimir.     He 
loved  religion,  and  with  it  also  enhghtenment.    He 
invited  learned  Greeks  from  Constantinople,  pro- 
cured the  translation  of  a  number  of  ecclesiastical 
works  into  Russian,  and  ordered  them,  as  well  as 
other  books,  to  be  kept  in  the  cathedral  of  St.  So- 
phia at  KiefF,  for  the  use  and  benefit  of  the  pubhc. 
He  founded  at  Novogorod  the  first  school  for  the 
common  people,  including  three  hundred  boys;  and 
dispersed  priests  into  the  provincial  towns  for  the 
instruction  of  the  people.     The  most  famous  me- 
morial of  his  time  is  a  Russian  law  book,  known 
under  the  name  of  ^'Russian  Rights *^."     At  the  be- 
ginning of  this  division  of  our  history,  Russia  stood 
on  the  highest  eminence  with  regard  to  civihsation, 
•and  far  beyond  many  of  the  other  European  com- 
«iunities,  which  were  groaning  under  the  oppres-- 
-sive  bondage  of  the  feudal  system.     Domestic  di- 
visions  and  disturbances  extinguished   again   the 
hght  which  had  been  scarcely  kindled  by  Wladimir 
and  his  son — but  Providence  preserved  a  spark  of 
the  holy  fire.     While  the  Russian  empire  was  one 
scene  of  distraction,  blood,  and  rapine,  the  lower 
order  of  monks,  protected  rather  by  the  pious  faith 
of  the  times  than  by  the  stone  walls  of  their  con- 

'  Russkaja  Prawda. 


RUSSIAN  LITERATURE.  21 

vents,  occupied  themselves  with  the  sciences,  the 
arts,  and  hterature,  and  infused  also  a  love  for  these 
noble  pursuits  into  the  minds  of  some  of  their  lay 
contemporaries.  Many  monks  applied  themselves 
to  the  study  of  medicine  ;  others  to  the  computa- 
tion of  calendars:  many  travelled  into  foreign  coun- 
tries, or  handed  down  in  their  quiet  cells  the  names 
and  deeds  of  their  forefathers  and  contemporaries 
to  immortahty.  Among  the  Russian  princes,  besides 
JarosslafF  Wladimirowitsch,  others  distinguished 
themselves  also  by  their  love  of  letters :  particu- 
larly Konstantin  Wsewolodowitsch  and  Wladimir 
Wsewolodowitsch  Monomach  ;  of  whom  the  last 
occupies  a  considerable  post  in  the  list  of  Russian 
authors ;  but  unfortunately  the  work  of  the  first 
(a  history  of  the  Russian  princes)  has  not  descended 
to  us.  The  daughter  of  the  prince  of  Polozk,  St. 
Euphrosyne,  occupied  herself  night  and  day  in  the 
transcription  of  church  books.  The  princess  Wer- 
chuslawa  was  a  strenuous  protector  of  learned  men. 
Down  to  the  end  of  the  twelfth  century,  foreigners 
had  been  employed  for  the  designs  and  building  of 
the  churches;  but  in  the  year  1194,  the  old  Sus- 
dalishian  monastery  was  beautifully  completed  in 
the  exterior  by  Russian  architects,  who  were  mem- 
bers of  the  ecclesiastical  profession.  About  the 
same  time,  the  architect  Milonegh-Peter  built  a 
stone  wall  at  Kieff,  on  the  banks  of  the  Dnieper, 
which  excited  the  astonishment  of  his  cotempora- 
ries.  The  oldest  Russian  painter  was  St.  Alimpj, 
a  monk  of  the  subterranean  monastery  at  Kieff, 
who  had  acquired  his  art  among  the  Greeks.  This 
industrious  and  disinterested  monk   i>ainted   pic- 


22  THE  HISTORY  OF 

tures  of  the  saints  for  all  the  churches ;  for  which 
he  refused  to  accept  any  remuneration.  The  old 
manuscripts  were  illuminated  with  various  designs, 
in  which  we  cannot  help  admiring  the  durabihty  of 
the  colours,  which  through  the  lapse  of  more  than 
six  centuries  have  retained  all  their  original  fresh- 
ness. 

b)   during  the  Tatar  domination. 

§  13.  The  Tatars  destroyed  almost  all  memo- 
rials of  civil  institutions,  burnt  down  whole  cities, 
and  thereby  caused  great  havoc  among  the  ancient 
manuscripts.  South-western  Russia,  the  cradle  of 
Russian  civilisation,  fell  under  the  Lithuanian  yoke. 
The  political  relations  of  Russia  with  the  rest  of 
Europe  were  interrupted.  The  general  confusion 
of  the  empire  occasioned  in  turn  the  corruption 
and  stultification  of  the  people ;  to  curb  their  un- 
bridled passions,  recourse  was  had  to  severe  cor^^ 
poral  punishments,  debasing  to  humanity.  The 
Russians  were  indebted  to  the  Christian  religion 
for  all  the  morality  and  love  of  country  which  they 
still  retained,  as  well  as  for  the  enlightenment  which 
existed  among  the  people.  The  Tatars,  guided  by 
a  cunning  policy,  favoured  the  Russian  clergy. 
They  enriched  the  cloisters,  and  added  to  the  num- 
ber of  monks,  who  however,  in  putting  off  their 
worldly  habiliments,  did  not  on  that  account  cease 
to  be  Russians.  The  servants  of  the  Greek-Rus- 
sian church  did  not  use  their  influence  and  riches 
to  a  bad  end  ;  whilst  they  were  purified  from  the 
lust  of  power  and  from  partizanship  in  the  political 
affairs  of  the  empire,  tliey  discharged  the  duty  of 


RUSSIAN  LITERATURE.  23 

faithful  subjects,  and  laboured  to  keep  alive  the 
holy  fires  of  religion  and  patriotism  among  the  peo- 
ple. Within  the  walls  of  the  monasteries,  science 
and  art  were  concealed  in  safety ;  and  there  the 
old  chronicles  and  books  of  the  church  were  com- 
piled and  copied.  The  connection  of  the  clergy 
with  Constantinople  was  still  kept  up,  and  books 
on  temporal  as  well  as  spiritual  subjects  were 
brought  from  thence.  The  metropolitan  (called 
also  from  these  men  the  patriarchal)  library,  which 
is  so  rich  in  ancient  manuscripts,  was  established 
in  Moscow.  In  the  middle  of  the  fourteenth  cen- 
tury, Spiridon  StrogonofF  brought  with  him  from 
the  Hordes  the  arithmetic  tables,  which  afterwards 
came  into  universal  use.  In  the  fifteenth  cen- 
tury paper  made  from  rags,  and  gunpowder,  were 
adopted.  About  this  time  also,  money  began  to 
be  coined  ;  magnificent  buildings  continued  to  be 
erected,  principally  by  foreign  architects. 

III. 

The  Language. 

§  14.  During  the  lapse  of  this  period  many 
changes  occurred  in  the  Russian  language.  The 
vernacular  tongue  separated  itself  more  and  more 
from  the  other  Sclavonic  languages,  the  Polish 
and  Bohemian,  as  well  as  from  the  church-lan- 
guage. At  the  same  time  it  is  probable  that  many 
idioms  of  these  last,  and  even  Graecisms,  were 
transplanted  into  the  vernacular.  New  grammati- 
cal phrases  came  into  fashion,  and  new  words  were 
invented.     The  influence  of  the  Mongol  language 


24  THE  HISTORY  OF 

was  perceptible,  but  yet  not  important.  A  few 
Tatar  words  (as,  for  instance,  den'ga,  a  small  cop- 
per coin ;  altuin,  an  imaginary  coin  of  three 
copecks ;  kaftan,  a  coat ;  and  so  forth,)  were 
adopted  in  the  language,  but  they  never  super- 
ceded, although  they  encroached  upon  the  original 
Russian.  Further  than  this  we  can  supply  nothing 
but  conjectures  with  regard  to  the  changes  in  the 
vernacular  language ;  for  the  Russians  themselves 
possess  scarcely  any  memorials  of  that  period. 
The  church-language  continued  unchanged ;  al- 
though the  transcribers  occasionally  altered  and 
improved  a  few  phrases  and  expressions,  in  order 
,  to  accommodate  it  more  to  the  prevailing  dialect. 
The  book-language  of  the  chronicles,  annals,  and 
so  forth,  was  originally  the  same  as  the  church- 
language,  which,  however,  altered  itself  by  degrees. 
In  the  fourteenth  century  the  old  Sclavonic  book- 
language  changed  into  the  middle  ;  and  this  again, 
in  the  seventeenth  century,  was  converted  into  the 
new — the  customary  one  in  printed  books  (5). 

(5)  The  principal  features  which  distinguish  the  old 
Sclavonic  language  from  the  middle^  are,  among 
others — 

1)  The  use  of  the  half  vowels,  as,  for  instance, 
ivlk,  frg,  ssl'sa,  ssfs'd ;  instead  of  wolk,  a  wolf; 
torg,  a  trade ;  sslesa,  lamentation ;  sstes'd,  a 
footpath.  This  form  remains  in  the  Bohemian 
and  Servian  languages. 

2)  The  avoiding  to  join  particular  letters  in  con- 
tact with  others.  After  the  aspirated  letters 
{g,  Ic,  ch)  the  old  language  never  admitted  the 
soft-sounding  onesy Je,j(i,  i,  ju,ja,  and  the  half- 
vowel  jerj  ;    and  after  the  hissing  consonants 


RUSSIAN  LITERATURE.  25 

{she,  tsche,  scha,  schtscha,  ze)  it  admitted  no  o, 
ui,  or  jerr.  At  that  time,  for  instance,  the  name 
of  the  town  KiefF  was  written  Kuijeffy  instead 
of  Kijeff. 


IV. 

Literature. 

§  15.  In  the  course  of  our  second  period,  the  path 
of  what  may  be  properly  called  Russian  literature 
widens  considerably.  Religious  tracts,  chronicles, 
and  poems  appeared.  The  Russian  Rights  is  a 
work  which  does  not  properly  belong  to  literature, 
but  is  of  inestimable  value,  as  the  oldest  memorial 
we  possess  of  Russian  legislation,  and  the  know- 
ledge of  jurisprudence  which  then  existed.  It 
must  be  remembered,  moreover,  that  it  is  not  an 
original  work  of  the  Sclaves,  but  entirely  borrowed 
from  the  Norsemen  (6).  During  the  time  of  the 
Tatar  domination  religious  and  ecclesiastical  books 
were  multiplied,  chronicles  were  compiled,  and 
various  historical  and  moral  tales  were  translated 
from  the  Greek.  For  instance.  Of  the  courage 
of  Alexander  of  Macedon,  from  Arrian ;  Of  the 
Heroes  of  Antiquity  ;  Of  the  Gods  of  India  ;  and 
so  forth.  The  clergy  wrote  exhortations  and 
epistles  to  their  flocks.  Towards  the  end  of  this 
period  the  productions  of  Russian  literature  become 
much  more  numerous,  but  not  perhaps  to  the 
degree  that  might  be  expected  in  an  independent 
and  free  people.  During  the  time  of  the  Tatar 
domination,  as  is  supposed,  were  also  composed 
some  songs  and  ballads,  principally  historical,  and 
relating  to  the  glorious  days  of  Wladimir  the  Great. 


26  THE  HISTORY  OF 

"  The  force  of  imagination,  languishing  under  the 
yoke  of  the  unbehevers,  sought  to  refresh  itself  by 
recollections  of  the  by-gone  glory  of  its  father- 
land !"  says  Herr.  v.  Karamsin''. 

(6)  The  famous  Russian  Rights  were  found  by  Tatisch- 
schefF  among  the  annalists  of  Novogorod,  and  laid 
by  him  before  the  Academy  of  Sciences  in  the  year 
1738,  but  published  at  Petersburg  by  Schlozer  in 
the  year  1767.  It  was  printed  the  second  time,  from 
Tatischtscheff's  copy  in  the  Continuation  of  the  old 
Russian  Library,  in  the  year  1786 ;  and  the  third 
time,  after  an  old  copy  of  the  Church  Rights 
{Kormtschaja  Kniga^),  in  the  third  volume  of  the 
V  same  Library.  The  fourth  edition  came  out  at 
Petersburg  with  explanatory  notes  by  Boltin,  and  a 
translation  into  modern  Russia,  in  the  year  1792 ; 
and  again  in  1799.  In  the  first  volume  of  the  Rus- 
sian Memorabilia,  published  in  1815  at  Moscow, 
by  the  Moscow  society  for  the  study  of  history  and 
antiquities,  the  Russian  Rights  again  appeared, 
being  printed  from  the  copy  of  the  Church  Rights, 
which  were  preserved  in  the  Synodal  library,  and 
written  towards  the  end  of  the  thirteenth  century : 
probably  in  the  year  1282.  This  last  edition  is  far 
better  than  any  of  the  preceding''. 

Writers. 

§  16.  The  authors  of  this  period,  copies  of  whose 
works  have  descended  to  us,  are  the  following : 

h  On  the  subject  of  the  Russian  popular  songs,  see  above,  §  9. 

'  That  is,  the  Nomo-Kanon,  or  Rights  of  the  Clergy,  collected  by  the 
Patriarch  Nikon. 

''  A  small  work  on  the  Russian  Rights  appeared  by  the  title  of  Neu- 
mann's Explanation  of  the  Russian  Rights  from  the  First  to  the  Second 
Prawdaw ;  extracted  from  the  studies  for  a  fundamental  acquaintance 
with  early  history  of  Russia,  by  Joh.  Phil.  Gust.  Ewers.     Dorpat,  1830. 


RUSSIAN  LITERATURE.  27 

A.  before  the  Tatar  invasion. 

1.  LUKA  SCHIDATA,  or  5.    MoNOMACH. 

ScHiRATA.  6.  Daniel. 

2.  Nestor.  7.  Simon. 

3.  Wassilj.  8.  St.  Cyril. 

4.    NiKlPHOR. 

Among  the  most  valuable  records  of  this  epoch 
that  we  possess,  should  be  reckoned  the  old  chi- 
valrous poem  composed  in  the  twelfth  century,  and 
called  the  Address  to  the  Army  of  Igor.  This 
work,  the  action  of  which  lies  in  the  year  1185,  is 
written  in  the  Russian  vernacular  language  of  that 
period,  which  approaches  very  nearly  to  the  style 
of  Nestor,  and  of  the  translation  of  the  Bible.  In 
it  are  found  Polish  words,  a  conclusive  proof  that 
the  author  must  have  lived  in  south-western  Rus- 
sia, and  expressions  which  are  now  entirely  lost, 
as,  for  instance,  segsiza,  char'alushniij,  scheres- 
chn^Ui,  etc.  (7.)  From  certain  allusions  in  this 
poem,  it  is  easy  to  perceive  that  the  author  must 
have  had  other  and  older  poets  in  his  eye,  whose 
works  and  very  name  have  vanished  in  the  lapse 
of  time. 

.  (7)  The  Address  to  the  Army  of  Igor  was  discovered 
in  the  year  1796,  by  Count  A.  J.  Mussin-Puschkin, 
in  the  book  which  bears  the  title  of  Chronograph. 
He  purchased  it  from  Joil'  (Joel),  archimandite  of 
the  Jarosslaviari  cloister.  Shame !  that  the  original, 
which  contained  also  other  historical  and  ecclesiasti- 
cal treasures,  soon  after  its  discovery  was  again  lost! 
This  poem  appeared  in  the  year  1800  at  Moscow, 
under  the  title  of  a  Heroic  Song,  on  the  march  of 
Igor  Swatosslawitsch,  tributary  prince  of  Novogorod- 
Ssawerskj,   against  the   Polowzers ;    written  in  the 


28  THE  HISTORY  OF 

old  Russian  language  at  the  end  of  the  twelfth 
century,  with  a  version  in  the  common  language  of 
the  present  day.  On  this  translation,  and  the  notes 
which  accompanied  it,  were  employed  A.  F.  Ma- 
linofskj,  N.  N.  Bantiisch-Kamenskj,  and  Count  A. 
J.  Mussin-Puschkin.  A  second  edition,  with  anno- 
tations and  a  new  translation,  is  to  he  found  in  the 
first  section  of  works  and  translations  published 
under  the  direction  of  the  Russian  Academy  at 
Petersburg,  1805.  Since  this  have  appeared  still 
more  reprints,  translations,  illustrations,  and  poetical 
versions  of  this  metrical  romance.  Pastor  Sederholm 
published  it  in  1825,  at  Moscow  and  Leipsic,  trans- 
lated into  German  metre,  and  with  historical  notes. 
8)  The  author  of  this  poem  mentions  by  name  the  an- 
cient poet  Bojan. 

B.  during  the  Tatar  domination. 

1.  Cyril.  5.  Dimitrj. 

2.  Cyprian.  6.  Ignatj. 

3.  PhOTJ.  ,  7.    ISAIJA. 

4.  Grigorj  Samblak.  8.  Ssopronj. 

CHAPTER  III. 

From  the  deliverance  from  the  Tatar  yoke,  to  the  reign  of 
Peter  the  Great;  or  from  A.D.  1462  to  1689. 

I. 

Political  condition : 

a)  to  the  time  when  the  house  of  Romanoff  mounted 

the  throne. 

§  17.  The  emancipation  of  Russia  from  the  yoke 
of  the  Mongols,  is  one  of  the  most  important 
epochs  in  relation  both  to  politics,  morals,  and  lite- 
rature. John  the  Third,  who  established  on  a  firm 
basis  the  monarchical  government  of  Russia,  raised 


RUSSIAN  LITERATURE.  29 

it  to  the  same  footing  with  the  other  kingdoms  of 
Europe,  gave  it  municipal  laws,  extended  its  bound- 
aries, and  fortified  them.  His  successor,  Wassilj 
Johannowitsch,  trod  in  the  footsteps  of  his  father. 
John,  surnamed  the  Strong,  subjugated  three  king- 
doms to  his  sceptre ;  namely,  those  of  Casan,  Astra- 
can,  and  Siberia.  Under  the  administration  of 
Feodor  Johannowitsch  and  Boris  Godunoff  Russia 
did  not  loose  in  greatness,  and  was  advancing  with 
rapid  strides  upon  the  road  which  had  been  le- 
velled for  it  by  its  illustrious  sovereigns ;  but  never- 
theless, the  hopes  excited  by  these  prosperous 
times  were  destined  to  remain  unfulfilled.  After 
the  unfortunate  end  of  Boris  Godunoff,  the  cala- 
mities of  disorder,  of  domestic  discord,  and  an  un- 
successful foreign  war  came  all  at  once  upon  Russia. 
At  last  its  sufferings  were  put  an  end  to  by  the 
patriotism  of  a  Minin,  a  Trubezkoj,  and  a  Pozhars- 
skj,  and  particularly  by  the  elevation  of  the  house 
of  Romanoff  to  the  throne. 

h)  under  the  Romanoff  dynasty. 

§  18.  Michail  Feodorowitsch  dedicated  the  whole 
time  of  his  reign  to  the  healing  of  the  deep  wounds 
which  had  been  inflicted  upon  Russia  by  her  do- 
mestic and  foreign  foes.  He  put  a  stop  to  the 
wars  with  surrounding  countries,  laid  the  founda- 
tion of  peace  and  order  in  Russia  itself,  and,  unam- 
bitious of  the  fame  of  a  conqueror,  sought  a  different 
and  not  less  durable  renown  in  the  contentment 
and  prosperity  of  his  subjects.  The  Czar  Alexej 
Michailowitz  distinguished  his  reign  by  a  successful 
war  against  the  Poles,  the  result  of  which  was  the 


30  THE  HISTORY  OF 

recovery  of  White  and  Little  Russia,  and  the  resto- 
ration of  the  old  towns  of  Smolensk  and  KiefFto 
his  dominions.  During  this  period  Russia  became 
more  and  more  deeply  connected  with  the  general 
political'^relations  of  Europe;  and  whilst  she  at- 
tracted notice  by  her  bravery  and  victories  in  the 
field,  began  to  be  not  less  remarkable  for  the  tact 
and  enterprise  of  her  diplomatic  negociations.  The 
Czar  Feodor  Alexejewitsch  made  his  short  reign  il- 
lustrious by  the  pacification  of  the  long-pernicious 
feuds  about  priority  of  rank. 

II. 

Civilisation  : 
a)  under  John  the  Third  and  Wassilj. 

§  19.  During  this  period  the  enlightenment  of 
the  people  made  surprising  advances.  In  the  reign 
of  John  the  Third  the  mines  of  Perm  were  disco- 
vered, trade  rapidly  increased,  and  affluence  began 
to  be  known  among  the  Russians.  The  marriage 
of  the  Grand-Prince  with  the  Greek  princess  So- 
phia, added  new  splendours  to  the  age  in  which  he 
flourished.  Numerous  Greeks,  who  followed  in 
her  suite,  enriched  the  library  at  Moscow  with 
V  valuable  manuscripts.  The  celebrated  Bolognese 
architect,  Fioravanti-Aristotele,  was  invited  from 
Venice,  and  he  built  in  Moscow  the  magnificent 
cathedral  of  the  Ascension  of  the  Virgin.  Many 
other  buildidgs,  as  for  instance,  the  church  of  the 
Annunciation,  the  tower  of  the  Kremlin,  and  the 
palaces  of  some  of  the  Moscovite  Boyars,  adorned 
Moscow.  Other  arts  also,  conducive  rather  to  use 
and  convenience,  than  to  luxury,  were  now  first 


RUSSIAN  LITERATURE.  31 

practised ;  as  the  founding  of  cannon  and  bells,  and 
the  minting  of  money.  Good  order  was  established 
throughout  the  realm  by  the  promulgation  of  mu- 
nicipal regulations,  based  upon  clear  and  funda- 
mental principles  of  right.  These  statutes  received 
some  additions  from  Johann's  successor,  Wassilj 
Johannowitsch,  who  introduced  in  Novogorod  the 
beneficial  Prissdshian  laws^  Under  his  reign  also, 
many  foreign  artists,  especially  architects  and  paint- 
ers, were  invited  to  Russia.  The  Russians  them- 
selves soon  began  to  show  talent  for  the  arts. 
Feodor  JedinejefF  made  himself  reputed  among 
ecclesiastical  painters,  by  painting  the  church  of 
the  Annunciation.  The  portraits  of  the  Grand- 
Prince  were  painted  by  Russian  artists;  but  the 
regular  sciences,  as  philosophy,  astronomy,  physic, 
and  medicine,  were  still  in  their  infancy  in  Russia. 
The  physicians  in  Moscow  were  foreigners,  and  any 
one  obtained  the  name  of  a  surgeon,  who  was  ac- 
quainted with  a  few  wholesome  preparatiojis  of  the 
most  simple  herbs. 

b)  under  John  the  Fourth,  and  to  the  time  when  the 
family  of  Romanoff  mounted  the  throne. 

§  20.  Under  the  administration  of  John  Wassil- 
jewitsch,  surnamed  the  Strong,  Russia,  by  means 
of  her  traflfic  by  sea  from  Archangel,  was  brought 
into  much  closer  connection  with  the  rest  of  Eu- 
rope. English  and  German  physicians  came  to 
Russia.  The  Czar,  severe  towards  his  own  sub- 
jects, knew  well  how  to  pay  court  to  foreigners. 
He  ordered  a  school  to  be  erected  in  every  town 

'  That  is,  "The  laws  of  the  sworn." 


32  THE  HISTORY  OF 

for  the  children  of  the  most  pious  and  right-minded 
Christians,  for  their  instruction  in  reading,  writing, 
and  church  music.  The  most  important  event  of 
this  period  was  the  estabUshment  of  a  printing- 
house  in  Moscow  (9).  The  ecclesiastical  and  civil 
laws,  (the  Sstoglaff,  and  the  Ssudebnik,)  which  were 
intended  to  serve  as  a  supplement  to  the  above- 
mentioned  code,  constitute  one  of  the  most  remark- 
able memorials  of  the  reign  of  John.  Under  the 
dominion  of  the  Czars  Feodor  Johannowitsch  and 
Boris  Feodowitsch  GodunofF,  domestic  and  foreign 
commerce  was  extended.  Foreign  artizans,  espe- 
cially miners,  founders,  and  weavers,  journeyed  into 
Russia,  and  brought  with  them  their  manufactures, 
their  arts,  and  their  experience.  In  the  reign  of 
Boris,  the  first  general  chart  of  Russia  was  drawn 
out.  Numbers  of  foreign  officers  served  in  the 
Russian  army.  Foreign  princes  visited  the  bril- 
liant court  of  Moscow.  The  Czar  sent  eighteen 
young  Russians,  selected  from  the  poor  nobility, 
into  foreign  countries  to  study  languages  and 
sciences.  Five  of  them  were  entrusted  to  the  care 
of  the  chief  magistrate  of  Liibeck,  to  acquire  there 
the  German  and  Latin  languages :  three  were  made 
pages  at  the  court  of  Charles  the  Tenth  of  Sweden. 
The  heir  apparent,  prince  Feodor  Borissowitsch, 
received,  what  appeared  in  those  times  really  ex- 
traordinary, a  thorough  European  education.  The 
Czar  Boris  encouraged  particularly  the  mathemati- 
cal sciences,  and  paid  to  the  tutor  of  his  son  a 
yearly  stipend  of  ten  thousand  rubles,  in  money 
of  that  time.  But  on  a  sudden  a  storm  arose ;  and 
the  auspicious  day-dawn,  which  gave  so  bright  a 


RUSSIAN  LITERATURE.  S3 

promise  of  a  glorious  noon,  disappeared  from  the 
horizon.  The  shade  of  the  murdered  prince  Di- 
mitrj  sought  revenge :  years  of  calamity  and  trial 
succeeded ;  rivers  of  blood  were  shed ;  and  cities 
were  laid  in  ashes.  The  sciences,  the  arts  and  lite- 
rature, retreated  before  the  tumult  of  war,  and  the 
terrors  of  anarchy. 

9)  The  art  of  printing  was  introduced  into  Russia  in 
the  year  1553;  that  is,  above  a  hundred  years  after 
its  first  invention.  The  first  printing  in  the  Scla- 
vonic language  had  appeared  long  before  in  Cracovr, 
and  the  first  books  printed  there  were,  The  Psalter, 
in  1481:  The  Tschassosslowez  "^ :  and  the  Octoick 
Hymns,  in  1491,  which  were  prepared  under  the  su- 
perintendence of  the  first  Sclavish  printer,  Sswanto- 
polk  Fiol,  for  the  use  of  the  Sclaves  who  then  dwelt 
round  the  Danube.  After  this  appeared  numerous 
clerical  works,  in  the  Sclavonic  language,  at  Prague, 
(as  for  instance,  a  translation  of  some  of  the  biblical 
books  into  Russian,  by  Doctor  Franz  Skorina,  from 
Polosk),  at  Wilna,  at  Venice,  in  Servia,  at  Tubingen, 
and  other  places.  The  Czar  John  Wassiljewitsch 
complained  justly  at  an  assembly  of  the  clergy  at 
Moscow,  A,  D.  1551,  of  the  inaccuracy  of  the  exist- 
ing copies  of  the  Scriptures;  and  in  1553,  the  erec- 
tion of  a  printing-office  in  Moscow  was  determined 
on.  This  building  occupied  a  long  time  in  its  com- 
pletion ;  it  was  not  till  the  year  1564  that  the  first 
book  issued  from  the  Moscow  press:  viz.  The  Acts 
of  the  Apostles.  These  were  printed  by  two  work- 
men— a  Holstein  deacon,  named  Johann  Fodoroflf^ 
and  Peter  TimothejefF  MstisslafzefF,  with  tolerable 
uniformity  and  neatness ;  but  with  numerous  faults 
in  the  orthography,  especially  with  regard  to  the 

•"  Tschassosslowez :    that  is,  the  Prayer  Book,  which  contained  the 
forms  used  in  the  church  services. 

D 


34  THE  HISTORY  OF 

placing  of  the  marks  over  the  letters.  For  inter- 
punctuation  only  the  period  and  the  comma  were 
used,  and  these  frequently  appear  in  the  wrong 
places.  In  a  short  time,  the  printers  being  accused 
of  heresy  by  bigoted  and  ignorant  men,  found  them- 
selves obliged  to  retire  into  Poland,  and  recom- 
menced their  labours  at  Wilna  and  Lemberg.  Jo- 
hann  FodorofF  afterwards  moved  to  the  printing  esta- 
blishment which  the  Prince  Constantine  Constanti- 
nowitsch  had  instituted  at  Ostrog ;  (see  below).  At 
this  press  were  printed,  in  the  year  1580,  The  New 
Testament ;  and  in  1581,  the  entire  Bible  in  the  Scla- 
vonic language.  From  the  Moscow  press  appeared 
subsequently  to  1577,  The  Psalter:  Two  Triods", 
(namely,  the  Triod,  or  Church-service  from  the  ele- 
venth Sunday  after  Trinity  to  Easter  Sunday,  and 
.the  Triod  from  Easter-Sunday  to  All  Saints):  The 
Octoick  Hymns  :  The  Acts  of  the  Apostles,  a  second 
time :  The  Legends  of  All  the  Saints  :  The  Mass 
Book  of  the  Patriarch  Hiob :  and  the  Gospel.  The 
latter  was  issued  from  the  royal  residence  of  the 
Czar  Wassilj  Johannowitsch  Schujskj  during  the  year 
1606,  but  being  neglected  by  him,  was  not  much  bet- 
ter executed  than  the  former  impression.  In  the 
unquiet  times  which  succeeded,  the  building  which 
contained  the  printing-office  at  Moscow  was  de- 
stroyed ;  printing  however  was  persevered  in  unin- 
terruptedly even  under  Pseudo-Demetrius.  The 
Czar  Michael  Feodorowitsch,  after  he  had  again  ar- 
ranged and  enlarged  the  printing  establishment  at 
Moscow,  collected  with  care  the  best  copies  of  the 
church  books,  and  caused  them  to  be  printed.  In  the 
year  1643,  the  Hieromonach"  Arssenj  (the  founder 

"  The  Triods  are  the  church  books  containing  the  canons,  which  are 
arranged  in  triple  clauses,  or  consist  of  three  clauses  each. 

°  Hieromonach  :  that  is,  a  monk  who  is  allowed  to  perform  the  duty 
of  a  priest,  but  not  to  solemnise  marriage. 


RUSSIAN  LITERATURE.  3.T 

of  the  Graeco-Latino- Sclavonic  school)  brought  into 
use  the  new  types  of  fine  oblong  letters,  which  are 
still  called  at  the  Moscow  synodal  printing-house  the 
Arssenic  alphabet.  Under  the  Patriarch  Joseph, 
A.D.  1645,  a  distinct  stone  building  was  erected  for 
the  press,  and  the  art  of  printing  was  brought  to  a 
high  degree  of  perfection.  Under  the  reign  of  Alexej 
Michailowitsch  this  style  of  printing  had  made  so  great 
progress,  that  a  complete  cycle  of  the  church  books 
was  published  in  that  form ;  after  that  time,  the  cus- 
tom of  writing  the  church  books  in  manuscript  was 
discontinued.  Among  the  books  for  the  laity  were 
printed  the  Art  of  War,  A.  D.  1647,  and  the  Ulos- 
henijeP,  A.D.  1649. 

c)   under  the  Romanoff's. 

§  21.  The  enlightenment  of  the  people  is  the 
sure  companion  of  the  strength,  the  greatness,  and 
the  prosperity  of  an  empire.  Scarcely  had  Michael 
secured  peace  at  home  and  abroad,  than  the  fruits 
of  his  beneficial  exertions  appeared.  In  remote  Si- 
beria the  foundations  of  towns  and  fortresses  were 
laid ;  the  Russians  discovered  the  Eastern  ocean  ; 
foreign  commerce  received  an  impulse  by  treaties 
concluded  with  England  and  France,  and  inland 
trade  advanced  in  a  proportionate  degree.  The 
great  annual  fair  of  Irbitsk,  which  still  retains  its 
repute,  was  instituted  in  a  distant  part  of  Russia. 
On  the  banks  of  the  Wolga,  men  began  to  cultivate 
the  vine.  The  army  received  its  organisation  from 
the  model  of  foreign  troops.  In  the  year  1643,  the 
Hieromonach  Arssenj,  a  Greek  by  birth,  founded, 

P  Uloshenije :  the  celebrated  code  of  old  laws  down  to  the  year 
1649,  a  German  translation  of  which  was  printed  at  Dantzic  in  4to. 
in  1723,  under  the  title  Al/gemeines  russ.  Landrec/it. 

d2 


36  THE  HISTORY  OF 

with  the  sanction  of  the  Patriarch  Filaret,  a  Greek 
and  Latin  Sclavonic  school  at  the  patriarchal  court 
at  Moscow.  The  government  resolved  to  institute 
similar  schools  for  learning  in  different  parts  of 
Russia.  Under  the  reign  of  Alexej  Michailowitsch, 
manufactories  of  cloth,  glass,  and  hats  were  esta- 
blished, and  founderies  were  erected ;  as  for  in- 
stance, at  Tula.  A  German  post  was  regulated 
from  Moscow  to  Riga  and  Wilna.  Many  foreign 
books  were  translated  into  Russian,  as  for  instance. 
The  Art  of  War,  which  we  mentioned  above.  Ger- 
man artists  and  officers  thronged  in  great  numbers 
to  enter  the  Russian  service ;  the  Russians  how- 
ever did  not  yet  venture  to  imitate  their  manners 
and  habits.  In  the  year  1648  the  strait  which  di- 
vides Asia  from  America,  afterwards  called  Bering's 
Strait,  was  discovered  (10).  The  most  celebrated 
memorial  of  this  reign  is.  The  Universal  Law  of  the 
Land,  which,  in  compliance  with  a  ukase  of  the  Czar 
to  that  effect,  was  compiled  by  the  Boyar  Nikita 
Iwanowitsch  Odojefskj,  the  Prince  Semen  Wassil- 
jewitsch  Prosorofskj,  the  high  marshal  of  the  court, 
Feodor  Feodorowitsch  Wolkonskj,  and  by  the  se- 
cretaries, Gabriel  Leontjeff  and  Feodor  Gribojedoff, 
containing  a  collection  of  all  the  civil  and  criminal 
laws  of  Russia.  This  code  received  the  ratification 
of  the  Czar,  and  was  promulgated  in  print  at  Mos- 
cow, A.  D.  1649.  The  sciences  and  literature 
made  signal  progress  in  Russia,  after  Little  Rus- 
sia, and  with  it  the  clerical  academy  at  KiefF, 
founded  in  1588,  was  incorporated  with  the  em- 
pire. The  clergy,  educated  at  Polish  or  Italian 
seminaries  of  learning,  brought  their  united  talents 


RUSSIAN  LITERATURE.  37 

and  information  to  Moscow.  In  the  year  1682,  a 
Sclavonic  academy  for  Greek  and  Latin  was  founded 
at  the  Saikonosspasskish  monastery — the  subjects 
of  instruction  there  were  grammar,  poetry,  rhetoric, 
logic,  philosophy,  and  theology.  All  teachers,  even 
those  in  private  houses,  were  made  subject  to  this 
academy.  No  one  dared  trust  his  children  to  the 
education  of  masters  professing  a  different  creed. 
In  the  year  1685,  two  Greeks,  the  brothers  Johan- 
nikj  and  Sophronj  Lichud,  were  appointed  teachers 
at  this  academy;  and  to  their  ability  it  was  in 
great  measure  indebted  for  its  early  success.  The 
schisms  and  disputes  which  prevailed  at  this  time 
among  the  Russian-Greek  clergy  with  regard  to. 
certain  dogmas,  (most  of  them  raised  and  fomented 
by  the  Jesuits  and  their  disciples,)  and  the  violence 
of  sectarian  bigots,  did  not  promote  the  progress 
of  general  enlightenment ;  but  they  gave  occasion 
to  several  beautifully  written  clerical  epistles  and 
entire  works. 

During  the  administration  of  the  empire  by  the 
Princess  Sophia  Alexejewna,  Prince  Wassih  Was- 
siljewitsch  Goliziin  endeavoured,  by  his  own  exam- 
ple, to  introduce  the  best  taste  in  architecture,  by 
imitating  the  Itahans;  in  which  attempt  he  was  fol- 
lowed by  many  of  the  principal  nobles.  Painting 
was  no  longer  restricted  to  copying  the  represen- 
tations of  the  saints.  The  progress  of  printing  (at 
Moscow,  Kieff,  Tschernigow,  Novogorod,  Ssawer- 
skj,  and  in  some  of  the  monasteries)  could  compete 
with  that  of  any  contemporary  nation.  In  the 
years  1677-1680,  the  map  of  Russia,  which  had 
been  prepared  under  GodunofF  (see  §  20),  was  im- 


38  THE  HISTORY  OF 

proved  and  enlarged,  and  the  hydrographical  part 
of  it  in  particular  was  marked  out  with  singular 
accuracy.  It  extended  to  the  Crimea,  included 
some  part  of  the  Black  sea,  and  the  greatest  part 
of  the  Caspian,  the  sea  of  Aral  and  Bucharia,  but 
only  reached  into  Siberia  as  far  as  the  Ob.  The 
apothecaries  and  physicians  were  at  this  time,  as 
formerly,  exclusively  foreigners. 

10)  Their  settlement  in  Siberia  aiForded  the  Russians 
their  first  facilities  for  making  geographical  disco- 
veries. From  the  banks  of  the  earliest  known  river, 
the  Ob,  they  pursued  their  way  towards  the  east, 
and  discovered  the  Jenisej  and  the  Pasida.  When 
and  how  the  rivers  Chotanga,  Anabara,  Olenek,  and 
Lena  were  first  discovered,  is  not  known.  The  Czar 
Johann  Wassiljewitsch  sent  out  three  ships  of  dis- 
covery to  explore  the  Frozen  ocean ;  but  after  having 
passed  through  the  Straits  of  Waigaz,  they  were  all 
lost.  In  the  year  1636,  Jelissej  Busa,  a  cossack  cor- 
poral, was  despatched  to  the  Frozen  Ocean  to  make 
discoveries.  He  found  the  river  Jana;  and  his  com- 
panions the  Indugirka,  and  the  Alasija.  By  whom 
the  river  Kowiima  was  discovered  is  unknown.  In 
the  year  1644,  the  cossack  Michael  Staduchin,  laid 
the  foundations  of  the  Nishnekowiimisch  Ostrog% 
and  gave  the  earliest  intimation  of  the  Tschukts, 
and  of  the  islands  lying  about  the  rivers  Jana  and 
Kowiima.  The  first  traveller  who  visited  the  coun- 
try of  the  Tschukts  was  Isaias  IgnatjefT.  Enriched 
by  his  dealings  with  the  inhabitants  of  those  regions, 
he  excited  others  to  travel  into  the  adjoining  dis- 
tricts. In  the  year  1647,  Fodot  AlexejefF,  a  native 
of  Cholmogor,  and  the  cossack  Semen  Iwanoft' 
Deshneff',  were  sent  out  in  four  ships  of  discovery 

1  That  is,  a  place  fenced  with  palisades. 


RUSSIAN  LITERATURE.  39 

(Kotsclien),  from  the  mouth  of  the  river  Kowiima  to- 
wards the  east ;  but  found  themselves  compelled  to 
return  again  by  the  thickness  of  the  ice.  In  the 
follovi^ing  year  they  were  again  sent  out  with  seven 
ships.  In  this  voyage  Deshneff  solved  one  of  the 
*  most  important  geographical  problems  :  namely,  that 
Asia  is  not  joined  with  America.  With  three  of  his 
ships  he  sailed  through  Bering's  Strait  into  the 
great  ocean.  The  Czar  Alexej  Michailowitsch  con- 
ceived the  design  of  making  his  subjects  acquainted 
as  much  as  possible  with  navigation.  The  ship  Orell, 
(the  Eagle,)  which  he  built,  made  a  voyage  in  the 
Caspian  sea,  and  probably  her  excursiou  might 
have  extended  much  further,  had  it  not  been  burnt 
by  the  robber  Str'nka  (Stephen)  Rasin. 

III. 

The  Language. 

§  22.  "  The  Sclavonic  language,"  says  Karani- 
sin,  vii.  226,  "  at  this  period  (in  the  sixteenth  cen- 
tury) was  known/rom  the  Arctic  Circle  to  the  Adri- 
atic sea,  and  from  the  Thracian  Bosphorus  to  the 
Nile.  It  was  spoken  at  the  court  of  the  Turkish 
sultans  by  their  wives,  as  well  as  by  the  renegades 
and  the  mamelukes."  The  Russian  language,  how- 
ever, as  it  improved,  differed  considerably  from  the 
other  Sclavonic  tongues.  As  the  first  half  of  our 
first  division  of  this  period  may  be  called  the  Greek 
era,  and  the  other  the  Tatar  era,  so  the  third  in- 
terval of  time  might  not  improperly  be  styled  the 
PoHsh  era.  In  the  sixteenth  century  the  Bohe- 
mians and  Poles  were  already  in  possession  of  good 
grammars  and  dictionaries,  the  fruit  of  their  early 
enhghtenment,  and  long  familiarity  with    letters* 


40  THE  HISTORY  OF 

The  prevailing  traffic  with  Poland,  the  supremacy 
of  the  Poles  in  south-western  Russia,  the  efforts  of 
the  Catholics  to  convert  the  Russians  who  were 
subject  to  them  to  their  creed,  and,  lastly,  the  at- 
tractive power  of  education  and  science,  all  worked 
together   in   promoting   the   influence   which    the 
Polish  language  assumed  over  the  Russian,  and 
which  continued  even  down  to  the  eighteenth  cen- 
tury.    In  the  sixteenth  century  this  influence  dis- 
played itself  among  those  who  were  subject  to  the 
Poles,  and  in  the  neighbouring  provinces ;  the  first 
Russian  grammars  appeared  in  the  shape  of  weak 
and  imperfect  attempts,  which  were  drawn  up  after 
Greek  and  Latin  models,  and  printed  in  the  coun- 
tries which  continued  under  the  dominion  of  the 
Poles.     How  many  obstructions  to  the  preserva- 
tion of  the  purity  and  originahty  of  the  Russian 
language !  (11.)      The  church,    or  Sclavonic  lan- 
guage, was   still  appropriated   to  the   purpose    of 
printing  the  sacred  books.     Many  clerical  writers 
also  availed  themselves  of  this  language  exclusively, 
as  the  vernacular  was  found  too  simple  and  un- 
formed for  the  conveyance  of  sublime  and  abstract 
truths.     At  this  time,  nevertheless,  the  vernacular 
tongue  was  in  use  in  all  public  documents,  laws, 
jurisprudential   and   civil   transactions,   in    corres- 
pondence, and  so  forth.     In  this  way  there  existed 
in  Russia,  throughout   the   sixteenth   and  seven- 
teenth centuries,  three   distinct   languages.     The 
church  language,  or  proper  Sclavonic,  in  the  sacred 
books  and  the  writings  of  the  clergy  ;  the  Russian, 
used  by  the  people  in  their  ordinary  business  and 
books  ;  and  the  White  Russian,  (which  the  inhabit- 


RUSSIAN  LITERATURE.  41 

ants  of  Lithuania  and  Volhynia  still  speak,)  adopted 
in  the  works  which  were  printed  in  the  provinces 
subject  to  the  Poles,  as  well  as  in  the  writings  of 
such  of  the  clergy  as  had  received  their  education 
at  Kieff,  Wilna,  Prague,  and  such  places.  These 
different  languages,  however,  or,  more  properly 
speaking,  dialects,  had  no  definite  boundary-lines 
to  distinguish  them,  and  were  often  mixed  and 
confounded  one  with  another.  In  the  second  half 
of  the  seventeenth  century  the  Russian  language 
gradually  emancipated  itself  from  the  Polish  fet- 
ters, which  had  been  imposed  upon  it  by  writers 
who  had  been  born  and  educated  in  Little  Russia, 
Lithuania,  and  Poland  ;  and  it  continued  to  im- 
prove more  and  more  by  borrowing  some  of  its  ex- 
pressive and  full-sounding  phrases  from  the  church 
language. 

11)  The  first  grammar  in  the  Russian  language  was 
the  Hellenish-Sclavish,  or  Greek  and  Sclavonic 
grammar,  which  was  edited  by  students  educated 
at  the  school  of  Lemburg,  and  published  at  that 
place  in  Svo.  A.  D.  1591,  in  Greek  and  Sclavonic 
letters  printed  on  the  opposite  pages.  The  authors 
of  this  book  framed  the  existing  nomenclature  of  the 
Russian  grammar ;  their  other  chief  object  was  to 
facilitate  the  acquirement  of  the  Greek  language. 
In  the  year  1596  appeared,  at  "Wilna,  a  Sclavonic 
grammar,  etc.,  written  by  Lawrentj  Sisanj.  The 
author  availed  himself  largely  of  the  Greek  models  ; 
he  affected  to  write  in  Sclavonic,  but  in  the  execu- 
tion of  his  task  he  frequently  lapsed  into  the  Polish 
dialect.  In  his  chapter  upon  metre  he  gives  ad- 
vice to  follow  the  example  of  the  Greeks ;  at  the 
same  time  he  writes  himself  verses  in  rhyme. 
In  the  year  1619  appeared   in   print   at  Wilna,  a 


i2  THE  HISTORY  OF 

Sclavonic  grammar,  which  had  been  finished  by 
Meletj  Smotrizki  the  preceding  year.  This  was 
arranged  in  the  usual  divisions  of  orthography,  ety- 
mology, syntax,  and  prosody.  In  the  first  part  the 
author  treats  very  discursively  the  subject  of  Sclavo- 
nic orthography,  and  borrows  his  whole  learning  from 
the  Greek  grammars.  Under  the  head  of  etymology 
he  agrees  with  Sisani,  in  laying  down  eight  parts  of 
speech.  The  article,  however,  as  it  is  called,  occu- 
pies not  the  first,  but  the  fifth  place  amongst  them. 
This  etymology,  here  given  by  Smotrizki,  served 
Lomonossoff  as  his  model.  In  the  syntax  the  author 
makes  constant  references  to  the  Greek  languages, 
and  uses,  as  indeed  in  every  part  of  his  work,  Greek 
expressions.  In  the  prosody  he  lays  down  the  rules 
of  the  Greek  metres,  and  expresses  a  wish  that 
Sclavonic  verses  might  be  written  on  the  same  plan. 
(See  below,  annot.  12.)  A  Russian  grammar  was 
printed  at  Oxford,  in  8vo.  in  the  year  1696,  which 
had  for  its  author  a  foreigner  named  William  Henry 
Ludolf.  He  derived  his  information  from  this  work 
of  Smotrizkj,  but  betrayed  his  own  narrow  acquaint- 
ance with  the  Russian  language.  About  the  same 
time  the  first  Sclavonic  dictionary  (taken  from 
Sisani's  short  Sclavonic  dictionary)  was  written  and 
pubHshed  by  Pamwa  Beriinda,  at  KiefF,  A.  D.  1627, 
in  4to. 

IV. 

Literature  : 
a)  to  the  time  of  the  Romanoffs. 

§  23.  At  the  end  of  the  sixteenth,  and  beginning 
of  the  seventeenth  centuries,  a  few  learned  and 
able  writers  appeared,  but  almost  all  of  them  be- 
longing to  the  ecclesiastical  profession.  The  works 
of  St.  Ambrose,  Augustine,  Jerome,  Gregory,  Sue- 


RUSSIAN  LITERATURE.  43 

Ponius's  History  of  the  Roman  Caesars,  and  other 
works,  were  at  this  epoch  translated  into  Russian. 
Some  authors  busied  themselves  with  historical 
labours ;  others  with  the  writing  of  romances, 
under  the  modest  name  of  fables.  Herr  Karamsin 
found  two  of  these  fables  in  manuscript,  belonging 
to  the  sixteenth  century ;  namely,  the  Tale  of  a 
certain  Merchant,  and  the  Legend  of  Drakul. 

b)  under  the  Romanoffs. 

§  24.  In  the  course  of  the  seventeenth  century 
literature  received  a  perceptible  impulse.  Besides 
many  theological  writings  which  made  their  ap- 
pearance in  this  era,  some  historical  works  and 
books  of  national  poetry,  arrayed,  however,  in  a 
foreign  dress,  were  published.  Some  writers  of 
this  period  exerted  themselves,  as  we  have  seen 
above,  in  endeavouring  to  introduce  the  Greek 
system  of  metres,  grounded  upon  the  different 
quantities  of  the  long  and  short  vowels ;  but  the 
verses  which  were  constructed  on  this  plan  sounded 
strange  and  discordant  to  a  Russian  ear  (12). 
The  introduction  of  the  syllabic  system,  or  of 
metres  measured  by  the  number  of  syllables,  was 
equally  ill  adapted  to  the  nature  of  the  Russian 
language,  but  was  more  flattering  to  the  sense  of 
hearing  (13).  In  the  mean  time  the  common 
people  of  Russia,  regardless  of  the  philosophical 
or  artistical  systems  of  the  learned,  composed  in 
their  own  measure  Russian  songs,  which,  with 
their  agreeable  and  truly  original  melodies,  have 
descended  unaltered  to  our  own  day.  Some  of 
these  songs  bear  the  stamp  of  extreme  antiquity ; 


44.  THE  HISTORY  OF 

mention  is  made  in  them  of  the  heathen  gods,  of 
the  days  of  Prince  Wladimir,  and  so  forth ;  but 
apparently  later  additions  rob  us  of  the  interesting 
pleasure  of  enjoying  these  memorials,  so  beautiful 
of  their  kind,  in  their  original  condition.  (See 
above,  §  9,  and  §  15.) 

12)  The  writers  who  attempted  to  compose  Russian 
verses  on  the  Greek  model,  were  the  above-men- 
tioned authors  of  the  two  first  Sclavonic  grammars, 
Sisanj  and  Smotrizkj.  They  gave  rules  such  as  the 
following :  That  a  vowel  before  two  consonants  is 
long ;  and  so  forth.  A  specimen  of  verses  of  this 
description,  may  be  found  appended  to  Gretsch's 
Manual  of  Russian  Literature. 

13)  The  syllabic  method  of  metres,  coming  from  Po- 
land, was  adopted  through  the  medium  of  Little 
Russia,  into  the  Russian  language.  The  oldest  verses 
of  this  description,  are  those  which  we  find  in  the 
preface  to  the  Ostrogian  Bible,  which  was  edited  by 
Gerassim  Danilowitsch  in  1581.  In  the  seventeenth 
century,  the  metropolitan  of  KiefF,  Peter  Mogila, 
was  zealous  in  promoting  their  general  adoption. 

Beginning  of  the  Theatre. 

§  25.  In  the  seventeenth  century  the  first  traces 
of  dramatic  art  became  visible  in  Russia.  The- 
atrical exhibitions  were  brought  from  Poland  to 
KiefF.  The  students  of  the  academy  at  that  place, 
under  the  favour  of  the  metropolitan,  Peter  Mogila, 
peformed  sacred  dramas,  or  rather,  oratorical  dia- 
logues, in  the  Polish  language.  Afterwards  some 
scholars  of  Little  Russia  (for  instance,  Dimitrj  Tup- 
talo,  Feophan  Prokopowitsch,  and  others)  began 
to  write  similar  pieces  in  the  Sclavonic  language. 


RUSSIAN  LITERATURE.  45 

The  scene  of  these  dramas  was  taken  (as  it  was  in 
France  and  England  during  the  infancy  of  the  dra- 
matic art)  from  the  Bible  history,  or  from  the  le- 
gends of  the  saints.  The  students  from  KiefF, 
during  their  holidays,  introduced  these  pieces  into 
the  Ukraine,  and  the  several  Russian  towns,  and 
accompanied  them  with  farcical  acting  and  buf- 
foonery. In  the  year  1676,  the  Boyar  Artemon 
Ssergejewitsch  MatwajefF asked  the  Czar  Alexej  Mi- 
chailowitsch  to  allow  the  German  companies  who 
were  then  coming  to  Moscow,  to  perform  some  plays 
at  his  country-house  in  the  village  Preobrashensk. 
In  the  Ras-rad'"  books  of  the  same  year,  the  follow- 
ing paragraph  alludes  to  this  event.  "  There  were 
comedies  at  Preobrashensk.  The  foreigners  de- 
lighted the  great  lord,  by  showing  how  Alaferna, 
the  princess,  cut  off  the  head  of  the  prince  (i.  e. 
how  Judith  beheaded  Holofernes) ;  and  the  Ger- 
mans played  before  the  nobles  of  the  Boyar  Arte- 
mon Ssergejewitch  Matwajeff,  upon  hand-organs. 
In  the  same  year,  another  comedy  was  played  at 
the  same  place :  how  Artaxerxes  commanded  to 
hang  Haman.  They  played  upon  hand-organs, 
fiddles,  and  wind-instruments,  and  danced.  A  third 
time  they  again  entertained  the  great  lord  at  the 
same  place,  on  the  last  feast-day  before  the  fast ; 
and  the  Germans,  and  some  of  the  people  of  Arte- 
mon Ssergejewitsch  performed  upon  hand-organs, 
violins,  wind-instruments,  and  presented  numerous 
other  amusements."    Among  these  numerous  other 

•■  Ras-r'ad  books — properly  a  sort  of  military  manuals  and  anny  lists, 
which  were  commenced  under  the  reign  of  Iwan  Wassiljewitsch,  and 
again  discontinued  by  Feodor  Alexejewitsch  the  Third. 


4-6 


THE  HISTORY  OF 


amusements,  a  ballet  was  represented  ;  in  the 
course  of  which,  Orpheus  sang  a  panegyrical  ode  to 
the  Czar,  and  then  danced  between  two  moving  py- 
ramids. Under  the  Czar  Alexejewitsch,  who  had  a 
singular  turn  for  music  and  poetry,  the  first  Russo- 
Sclavonic  dramas  appeared ;  which,  in  the  begin- 
ning, were  performed  in  the  newly-erected  Scla- 
vonic academy  for  Greek  and  Latin,  and  afterwards 
at  the  court  itself.  The  author  of  these  was  a 
monk,  called  Simeon  Polozki.  These  dramas  are 
still  preserved  in  manuscript,  in  the  synodal  library : 
two  of  them,  viz.  The  Prodigal  Son,  and  King  Ne- 
buchadnezzar, are  to  be  found  printed  in  the  eighth 
volume  of  the  second  edition  of  the  Russian  Li- 
brary of  Antiquities.  The  first  profane  comedy 
was  also  performed  under  the  reign  of  this  prince  ; 
being  one  from  Moliere,  Le  Medicin  malgre  lui, 
translated  into  Sclavonic,  and  privately  played  at 
the  court,  by  the  Princess  Sophia  Alexejewna  and 
a  company  of  noble  lords  and  ladies. 

Writers. 
§  26.  The  best  known  writers  of  this  period,  are 
A.)   till  the  Romanoffs  mounted  the  throne. 

11.  Prince    Andrej    Mr- 
chailowitsch  kurskj. 

12.  Prince     Konstantin 
konstantinowitsch 

OsTROSHSKJ. 

13.  Trifon      Korobejni- 

KOFF. 

14.  JuRj  Grekoff. 

15.  Franciskus  Skorina. 

16.  Afanassj  Nikitin. 


1.  Wassian. 

2.  St.  Joseph  Sanin. 

3.  Genadj. 

4.  Agathon. 

5.  Georgj. 

6.  Gerassim      Danilo- 

WITSCH. 

7.  Macarj. 

8.  Lawrentj  Sisanj. 

9.  Maksim  Grek. 

10.    JOFF  (HlOB.) 


RUSSIAN  LITERATURE. 


47 


B.)   after  the  accession  of  the  Romanoffs. 


1.  Abraham  PALizt?N. 

2.  Nikon. 

3.  Epifanj  Slawinezki. 

4.  Peter  Mogila. 

5.  Inokentj     (Innocen- 

TIUS)  GiSEL. 

6.  Lasar  Baranowitsch. 

7.  Simeon  Polozki. 

8.  Sylvester    Medwad- 

JEFF. 

9.  Sergj  Kubassoff. 
10.  Feodor      Kassiano- 

witsch  goswinskj. 


11.  Prince  Semen   Scha- 
chofskoj. 

12.  I  WAN  Petlin. 

13.  Feodor     Issakije- 

wiTSCH  Bajkoff. 

14.  Feodor     I  wan     Gri- 

BOJEDOFF. 

15.  AnDREJ  LiJSLOFF. 

16.  Artemon      Ssergeje- 

WITSCH  MaTWAJEFF. 

17.  Princess  Sophia  Ale- 

XEJEWNA. 


48  THE  HISTORY  OF 


BOOK  II. 

Second  Period.  From  the  reign  of  Peter  the  Great, 

to  our  own  time. 


CHAPTER  I. 

From  the  beginning  of  the  Second  Period,  to  the  acces- 
sion of  the  Empress  Eliisabeth. 

I. 

Political  condition. 

§  27.  The  reign  of  Peter  the  Great  forms,  in 
every  respect,  one  of  the  most  brilhant  epochs  of 
Russian  history ;  and  all  that  we  might  wish  to 
say  of  the  greatness  of  this  monarch,  and  his  im- 
mortal efforts  to  promote  the  good  of  his  country, 
would  be  vain  and  inadequate.  We  must  therefore 
confine  ourselves  in  this  place,  to  merely  taking  a 
glance  at  those  magnificent  designs  by  which  Rus- 
sia was  elevated  to  its  present  height  of  power, 
glory,  and  enlightenment.  One  chief  object  of  his 
endeavours  was  to  put  Russia  in  communication, 
by  means  of  her  marine,  with  the  western  countries 
of  Europe.  After  he  had  exterminated  the  licen- 
tious multitude  of  the  Strelitzes,  he  estabhshed  a 
regular  army,  built  ships  of  war,  and  commenced  a 
war  with  the  great  warrior  of  the  age,  Charles  the 
Twelfth  of  Sweden.  The  first  unfavourable  results 
did  not  discourage  him.  By  degrees  he  habituated 
his  new  armies  and  fleets  to  the  practice  of  war. 


RUSSIAN  LITERATURE.  49 

and  made  them  acquainted  with  victory,  which  at 
last  crowned  him  at  Pultawa ;  and  by  the  peace  of 
Nystadt,  A.  D.  1721,  put  Russia  in  possession  of 
the  greatest  part  of  the  eastern  coast  of  the  Baltic, 
and  the  following  provinces :  Carelia,  Ingermann- 
land,  Esthonia,  and  Livonia,  besides  numerous  is- 
lands and  advantageous  seaports ;  among  which, 
St.  Petersburg,  built  by  him  in  the  midst  of  the 
hurry  of  war,  and  on  a  most  ungenial  spot,  already 
occupied  by  no  means  the  least  conspicuous  posi- 
tion. In  his  war  with  the  Turks,  Peter  was  less 
fortunate.  He  however  left  Russia  on  a  lofty  emi- 
nence among  the  communities  of  Europe  :  Russia, 
which  till  his  time  had  been  regarded  as  an  Asiatic 
country,  and  with  which  the  princes  of  more  civil- 
ised kingdoms  hardly  cared  to  hold  any  inter- 
course but  in  regard  to  the  interests  of  commerce. 
His  successors  did  not  obscure  the  glory  of  their 
father-land.  Anna  Iwannowna  distinguished  her 
reign  by  a  successful  war  with  the  Turks. 

IL 

General  Enlightenment. 

§  28.  The  empty  glory  of  victory  and  conquest 
was  not  the  object  of  the  great  Peter's  indefatigable 
zeal,  but  the  aggrandisement  of  his  country,  and 
the  welfare  and  enlightenment  of  his  subjects.  \vi\ 
the  course  of  his  reign,  which  lasted  thirty-six  years, 
Russia  made  more  progress  than  in  the  two  pre- 
ceding centuries.  A  regular  land  army  was  organ- 
ised. The  sea  began  to  foam  beneath  the  prows 
of  Russian   fleets    already  crowned   with  victory. 


50  THE  HISTORY  OF 

Russia  formed  alliances  with  the  most  poHshed 
kingdoms  of  the  world  ;  took  an  active  part  in  the 
courts  of  Europe  ;  and  obtained  a  weighty  influence 
in  the  arrangement  of  its  balance  of  power.  In  the 
interior  of  the  empire  still  more  important  changes 
took  place.  The  will  of  the  monarch  emancipated 
itself  from  the  trammels  which  had  confined  it. 
The  rights  of  the  people  found  their  supporters  in 
well-ordered  ecclesiastical,  municipal,  and  military 
laws.  The  prosecution  of  all  suits  within  the  empire 
was  carried  on  by  a  new  and  uniform  process. 
The  taxes  were  arranged  upon  a  more  equitable 
and  beneficial  footing.  The  activity  of  the  people 
was  awakened  by  the  estabhshment  and  encou- 
ragement of  mines,  manufactures,  and  warehouses 
of  every  kind.  The  Russians  began  to  carry  on 
commerce  with  foreign  states  in  merchant-vessels 
of  their  own  building,  and  on  their  own  account, 
and  no  longer  allowed  themselves  to  be  regarded 
as  a  colony  for  the  factories  of  strangers.  The 
Russian  costume  was  exchanged  for  the  ordinary 
European  dress.  The  female  sex  reasserted  its 
rights  in  society.  Men  laid  aside  the  custom  of 
keeping  numerous  concubines.  The  indolence,  in- 
activity, and  selfishness  of  the  great,  gradually 
yielded  place  to  industry,  application,  and  attention 
to  personal  accomplishments.  The  Russians  now 
visited  foreign  countries  to  acquire  useful  sciences 
and  information.  Talented,  learned,  and  philan- 
thropic foreigners,  on  the  other  hand,  brought  to 
the  growing  youth  of  Russia  the  advantage  of  their 
acquirements  and  their  inventions.  In  the  mean 
time  every  attempt  of  native  talent  met  with  en- 


RUSSIAN  LITERATURE.  51 

coiiragemeiit  and  reward.     The  sciences  and  arts 
descended  upon  Russia. 

Printing. 

§  29.  One  of  the  first  expedients  of  the  great 
monarch  for  expediting  the  diffusion  of  knowledge 
in  his  native  country,  was  the  erection  of  numerous 
printing-houses.  We  have  spoken  above  (Annot. 
9,)  of  the  earhest  attempts  of  book-printing  in 
Russia.  In  the  year  1698,  Peter  gave  to  the  Am- 
sterdam printer,  Tessing,  the  privilege  of  printing 
books  for  Russia  on  subjects  connected  with  the 
sciences  or  arts,  as  well  as  all  charts,  maps,  draw- 
ings, and  the  like,  and  the  right  of  supplying  Rus- 
sia for  fifteen  years  (14).  In  the  year  1704,  the 
Emperor  himself  invented  the  new  types  of  the 
common  Russian  printing  alphabet,  in  which  he 
assimilated  the  shape  as  much  as  possible  to  the 
Latin  character,  and  got  rid  of  all  the  superfluous 
letters  and  accents.  (On  this  subject,  see  below, 
§  34.)  The  first  improved  alphabet  was  cut  and 
cast  in  Holland.  A  sheet  of  the  first  Russian 
newspaper  was  printed  fi^om  it,  as  a  trial,  at  the 
ecclesiastical  printing-house  at  Moscow,  in  the 
year  1 705.  After  this  many  historical  and  mathe- 
matical books  were  printed  in  the  same  way  at 
that  press  (15). 

(14)  Tessing  built  for  himself  a  printing-house,  and 
with  the  assistance  of  the  White-Russian  student, 
Elias  Kopjewitsch,  printed  a  number  of  Russian 
books ;  as,  for  instance,  A  Short  Introduction  to 
Universal  History,  1699;  The  Latin  Grammar, 
«rith  a  Russian  translation  ;  a  Lexicon  and  ABC- 

E  2 


52  THE  HISTORY  OF 

book  in  the  Latin,  German,  and  Russian  languages, 
etc.     After  the  death  of  Tessing  and  Kopjewitsch, 
A.  D.   1701,  the  printing  of  Russian  books  at  Am- 
sterdam was  continued  till  the  year  1710.     During 
this  time  appeared  in  print.  The  Manual  of  the  Art 
of  Navigation — a  translation,   executed   by  Kopje- 
witsch ;  Symbols  and  Emblems  ;  and  The  Picture- 
Book,  or  the  Mirror  of  Princes,  in  the  Greek  and 
German   languages — a  translation,   done   by   Peter 
Becklemitjeff.      In   the  year    1717   Peter  engaged 
John  van  Duren,  a  printer  at  the  Hague,  to  print  a 
folio  copy  of  the  whole  Bible  in  the  Dutch  language, 
and  directed  him  to  leave  a  broad  white  margin,  so 
as  to  leave  room  for  printing  the  Sclavonic  transla- 
tion by  the  side  of  it  at  Petersburg.     This  edition 
was  finished  and  brought  to  Petersburg  in    1721. 
The   Emperor  gave  orders  to   have   the  Sclavonic 
translation  printed  by  the  side  of  the  Dutch  at  the 
printing-press  of  Alexander  Newsky,  and  distributed 
the  copies  as  presents  among  his  nobles.     The  New 
Testament,  however,  was  at  first  published  in  this 
way  by  itself;  the  Old  continued  till  after  Peter's 
death  in  the  Dutch  language  only. 
(15)  In  the  year  1711a  press  was  established  in  Peters- 
burg expressly  to  print  the  Ukases  of  the  Emperor, 
and  in  1714  it  had  the  distinction  of  issuing  the  first 
Petersburg  Gazette.   After  this  presses  were  erected 
also  for  the  senate,  for  the  admiralty,   and  other 
public  offices.     By  the  means  of  such  like  helps, 
useful   books    were    rapidly   multiplied   in   Russia. 
The  most  important  of  these,  at  that  time,  were — 
1.  The  Art  of  Ship-Building,  by  Brinken ;  2.  The 
expert  Pilot;  3.  The  Works  of  Cohorn,  Vauban, 
Blondel,  Pagano,  and  Borgsdorf;   4.  The  Life  of 
Alexander  the  Great,  by  Quintus  Curtius  ;  5.  The 
Works  of  Arend  and  Comenius  ;  (i.  Hiibner's  Geo- 
graphy; 7.  An  Introduction  to  European  History, 
by    Puffendorff,    translated    by    the    Hieromonach 


RUSSIAN  LITERATURE.  53 

Gabriel  Bushinskj,  and  printed  by  command  of  the 
Emperor,  with  all  the  author's  unfavourable  reflec- 
tions  upon  Russia. 

Schools. 

§  30.  For  the  instruction  of  youth  in   all  con- 
ditions of  life,  suitable  schools  were  instituted.   .  At 
the  end  of  the  reign  of  Peter  the  Great  fifty-one 
national  schools  had  been  founded  in  the  govern- 
ment and  provincial  towns.     In  these  the  children 
of  parents  in  all  ranks  of  life  (with  the  exception  of 
the   nobility  and   clergy)    received   instruction  in 
reading,  writing,  arithmetic,  and  the  first  principles 
of  geometry.     The  sons  of  soldiers  were  instructed 
at  fifty-six   garrison   schools,  in  reading,  writing, 
arithmetic,  geometry,  instrumental  and  vocal  music, 
and   the  articles  of  war.     For  the   education   of 
children  of  ecclesiastics,  there  were   (besides    the 
two  academies  above  mentioned  at  KiefF  and  Mos- 
cow) twenty-six  different  places  of  instruction,  of 
which    that    of    Feophan    Prokopowitsch,   at    St. 
Petersburgh,  may  be  mentioned  as  the  most  re- 
markable.    The  most  distinguished  scholars,  after 
completing  their  course  of  education  at  these  semi- 
naries, were  sent  out  to  visit  foreign  universities. 
For  the  nobility  were  established  the  artillery  and 
engineer  school,  and  the  naval  academy  in  1702. 
The  latter  was  originally  seated  at  Moscow,  under 
the  name  of  the  school  of  navigation,  and  was  sub- 
sequently transplanted  to  St.  Petersburg.     It  in- 
cluded not  less  than  three  hundred  and  ten  sons  of 
noblemen  and  citizens  as  pupils. 


54  THE  HISTORY  OF 

Cabinets  of  Sciences  and  Arts. 

§  31.  Peter  the  Great  purchased,  during  his 
second  visit  to  Holland,  in  the  year  1717,  the  ana- 
tomical cabinet  of  the  celebrated  physician  Ruysch, 
and  a  geological  collection,  with  which  he  laid  the 
foundation  of  the  Museum,  or,  as  it  is  called,  the 
Chamber  of  Arts,  at  St.  Petersburg,  which  was 
afterwards  appended  to  the  Academy  of  Sciences. 
This  cabinet  was  uninterruptedly  enriched  with 
every  kind  of  rarity  and  natural  curiosity  from  all 
parts  of  the  world.  The  library,  collected  and 
systematically  arranged  by  the  Emperor  himself, 
was  thrown  open  to  the  public.  To  this  was  at- 
tached also  a  collection  of  coins  and  medals.  The 
Emperor  himself  often  passed  several  hours  con- 
tinuously there  in  reading.  This  was  also  in  the 
end  incorporated  with  the  Academy.  Peter  pur- 
chased pictures  from  foreign  countries  (especially 
sea-pieces  and  representations  of  battles),  as  well  as 
other  works  of  art,  with  which  he  adorned  the 
walls  of  his  palaces.  With  a  view  to  attract  the 
fine  arts  to  Russia,  he  despatched  young  men  to 
foreign  countries — as  Semzoff  and  Jaropkin  to 
Italy  to  learn  architecture  ;  and  MatwajefF,  Ssa- 
charoff,  Merkurjeff,  and  Wassilefskj,  to  Italy  and 
Holland,  to  perfect  themselves  in  the  knowledge 
of  painting. 

Academy  of  Sciences. 

§  32.  By  the  advice  of  the  celebrated  Leibnitz, 
the  Emperor  determined  to  found  an  Academy  of 
Sciences,  the  chief  end  of  which  should  be  the  in- 


RUSSIAN  LITERATURE.  55 


rstruction  of  pupils,  and  the  publication  of  useful 
books,  as  well  as  the  solving  of  all  questions  pro- 
posed to  it  by  government,  the  making  of  calendars, 
and  the  collection  of  every  species  of  information 
connected  in  any  way  with  Russian  interests.  Its 
twelve  members,  (in  the  departments  of  astronomy, 
geography,  mathematics,  analytics,  history  and 
antiquities,  natural  and  civil  rights,  mechanics  and 
experimental  physics,  anatomy,  chemistry,  litera- 
ture, the  belles-lettres,  and  practical  philosophy 
and  literary  history),  were  instructed  to  publish 
each  of  them  a  manual  on  the  subject  of  his  par- 
ticular province,  and  to  give  public  and  private 
lectures  on  the  sciences.  To  each  member  a 
pupil  was  appointed,  to  be  instructed  in  his  branch 
of  knowledge,  and  in  the  process  of  time  to  suc- 
ceed to  his  place.  To  the  Academy  of  Sciences 
belonged  also  the  department  of  the  arts.  Among 
these  were  included  instructions  in  drafts  and 
drawings,  painting,  engraving,  sculpture  in  stone 
and  in  steel,  and  various  other  useful  and  elegant 
studies.  The  imperial  court  physician,  Blument- 
rost,  was  elected  president  of  the  Academy,  and 
foreigners  distinguished  by  talent  and  learning 
were  invited  to  become  members ;  but  death  did 
did  not  allow  the  Emperor  himself  to  see  the  open- 
ing of  this  institution.  How  many  other  projects 
which  would  have  been  immortal,  vanished  with 
the  hfe  of  Peter  !  Catherine  the  First  opened  the 
Academy  of  Sciences  on  the  25th  of  December, 
1725,  and  annexed  to  it  a  Gymnasium,  (which,  till 
the  year  1762,  was  called  a  university,)  to  which 
was   entrusted  the   education    of  students.     The 


Ob  THE  HISTORY  OF 

first  members  were  Nicolas  de  Lille,  de  Lisle,  de 
la  Croyer,  Daniel  Bernouilli,  Bayer,  and  others. 
The  Petersburg  Gazette  was,  from  the  year  1728 
forward,  regularly  published  at  the  Academy. 

§  33.  Under  the  reign  of  the  Empress  Anna 
Iwannowna  (in  the  year  1732)  the  noble  land  ca- 
det corps  (now  called  the  first  cadet  corps)  was  in- 
stituted for  three  hundred  and  sixty  young  Russian 
nobles,  who  destined  themselves  for  the  military 
profession.  From  this  establishment,  which  in  later 
times  was  considerably  improved  and  enlarged, 
many  distinguished  men  were  produced.  At  the 
Academy  of  Sciences,  a  learned  society  formed  it- 
self under  the  presidency  of  the  Baron  von  Korff, 
and  was  opened  in  1735,  with  a  discourse  by  pro- 
fessor Tredjakofskj ;  its  labours,  however,  have 
not  descended  to  our  times.  Such  studies  as 
require  freedom  and  encouragement  made  but 
little  progress  during  this  reign.  The  severe  ad- 
ministration of  Biron,  and  the  preference  shewn 
to  foreigners  over  the  native  Russians,  were  not 
likely  to  assist  the  development  of  talent  among 
the  people.  Nevertheless,  on  the  shores  of  the 
Frozen  Ocean,  far  removed  from  royal  patronage, 
and  in  the  cadet  schools,  young  friends  of  the 
muses  nourished  in  their  souls  some  sparks  of  the 
holy  fire,  ready  to  burst  into  a  flame  with  the  first 
favourable  opportunity  (16). 

(16)  Under  the  reign  of  Peter,  which  is  distinguished 
by  the  first  building  of  a  Russian  fleet,  the  earliest 
voyage  from  Ochotsk  to  Bolscherazk  was  under- 
taken. At  the  same  time  (1719)  the  surveyors  Jew- 
rejnoff  and  Lusliin  sailed  to  the  sixth  Kurile  island. 


RUSSIAN  LITERATURE.  57 

In  the  year  1725  captain  Vitus  Bering,  a  Dane  by 
birth,  who  had  entered  the  Russian  service  in  1701, 
was  sent  out  to  solve  the  great  geographical  problem, 
whether  Asia  was  or  was  not  conjoined  with  America ; 
and  in  1728  (the  same  year  in  which  the  illustrious 
Cook  was  born)  passed  the  strait,  which  was  after- 
wards called  by  his  name.  Under  the  reign  of  the 
Empress  Anna  Iwannowna,  he  also  explored  the 
north-western  coast  of  America,  and  the  Aleutes. 
About  the  same  time  Spangberg,  Walton,  and 
Schelting,  not  only  brought  home  accounts  of  the 
eastern  coasts  of  Siberia,  but  penetrated  even  as  far 
as  Japan.  The  lieutenants  Murafjeff,  Malghin, 
SskuratofF,  Prontschischtscheff,  Lassenius,  and  the 
brothers  LaptjefF,  traversed  the  Frozen  Ocean  in 
every  direction,  and  readied  the  promontories  of 
Taimur  and  Schalaz. 

III. 

The  National  Writing. 

§  34.  The  invention  and  introduction  of  the  na- 
tional writing,  constitutes  an  important  epoch  in  the 
history  of  Russian  literature.  Through  its  instru- 
mentality, apparently,  the  common  popular  lan- 
guage, or  Russian  vernacular,  was  separated  from 
the  old  church,  or  proper  Sclavonic  language.  The 
national  writing  distinguished  itself  from  the  church 
writing,  in  the  first  place,  by  its  similitude  to  the 
Latin  character;  and  secondly,  by  its  omission  of  the 
accent,  and  of  the  unnecessary  letters  Semld,  Ishe, 
Ick,  Ott,  Jest,  Ja,  Ksi,  Psi,  Juss,  and  Ishiza,  This 
alphabet,  however,  still  underwent  several  changes. 
About  1716  the  letter  Ishe,  and  in  1718  Ishiza, 
were  re-admitted;  and  in  1733  Sdlo  was  substi- 
tuted for  Semldj  but  Ishiza  and  Ksi  were  excluded. 


58  THE  HISTORY  OF 

The  letter  E  was  also  restored  to  its  place ;  and 
since  that  time  the  present  Russian  alphabet  has 
continued  unaltered.  It  is  much  to  be  lamented, 
that  at  the  time  of  its  first  employment  not  a  man 
was  found  capable  of  assisting  Peter  to  ground  the 
Russian  alphabet  on  the  true  principles  and  genius 
of  the  language.  All  the  efforts  of  later  writers  to 
improve,  or  even  partially  to  alter  it,  have  been 
hitherto  in  vain. 

^    The  Language. 

§  35.  The  Russian  language  during  this  period 
underwent  numerous  changes,  from  which  it  de- 
rived, however,  but  little  advantage.  Peter  the 
Great,  in  his  introduction  of  European  customs, 
sciences,  and  arts,  into  Russia,  looked  only  to 
things,  and  paid  but  little  attention  to  words.  In 
this  way  many  foreign  expressions,  particularly  mi- 
litary and  naval  words,  crept  into  the  Russian  lan- 
guage ;  as  for  instance,  all  things  relating  to  ship- 
building were  called  by  their  Dutch  names,  and  all 
subjects  connected  with  arms  derived  their  nomen- 
clature from  the  English,  which  they  have  retained 
to  this  day.  In  the  style  of  learned  writers,  of 
common  conversation,  and  of  mercantile  affairs,  a 
tremendous  confusion  ensued  :  Sclavonic  and  com- 
mon Russian  phrases,  corrupted  foreign  words,  (as 
for  instance,  Fuhrleit,)  and  many  antiquated  Rus- 
sian ones,  were  promiscuously  mixed  with  each 
other.  This  chaos  equally  prevailed  in  books  of 
history  and  rhetorical  works,  and  waited  till  some 
genius  should  be  born  to  reduce  the  Russian  style 
to  order  and  uniformity.     One  party  of  authors 


RUSSIAN  LITERATURE.  59 

asserted  the  rights  of  the  Sclavonic  language,  and 
showed  their  violence  against  those  who  ventured 
to  write  in  Russian.  Another  was  ostentatious  of 
the  use  of  foreign  idioms,  of  their  familiarity  with 
the  Latin  grammars,  and  their  cleverness  in  verbal 
minutiae.  Only  one  poet  (Kantemir)  and  some  other 
talented  writers  knew  how  to  avail  themselves  of  a 
suitable  language  as  the  medium  for  their  works. 
In  the  mean  time,  no  one  thought  of  occupying 
himself  in  digesting  and  arranging  the  Russian 
grammar. 

Grammar.      ^ 

In  the  year  1704  was  published,  in  Moscow,  a 
Sclavonic-Russian-Latin  Lexicon,  which  Feodor 
Polycarpoff,  the  improver  of  the  clerical  typogra- 
phy at  Moscow,  had  undertaken  to  compile.  In 
1721  a  Sclavonic  Grammar,  derived  principally  from 
Smotrizki's  works,  was  printed  by  the  same  editor. 
In  1725  the  Sclavonic  gi-ammar  of  the  Hypo-dea- 
con, Feodor  MaksimofF,  appeared;  but  all  these 
books,  which  formed  a  useful  introduction  to  the 
knowledge  of  the  church-language,  had  scarcely 
any  influence  on  the  vernacular  tongue.  Tredja- 
kofskj,  in  his  work  entitled  "  Dialogues  between  a 
Foreigner  and  a  Russian  upon  the  old  and  new  or- 
thographies," reasoned  acutely  on  Russian  spell- 
ing, and  some  other  parts  of  grammar ;  he  exerted 
himself  to  get  rid  of  some  of  the  letters,  (as  the 
Semlci,  Ishe,  Schtscha,  E,  &c.);  he  laboured  hard 
to  terminate  all  plural  adjectives  of  the  masculine 
gender  in  w/,  of  the  feminine  in  iije,  and  of  the 
neuter  in  iljei ;  but  all  his  endeavours  were  in  vain. 


60  THE  HISTORY  OF 

He  did  not  ground  his  rules  on  the  practice  of  Rus- 
sian orthography,  which  had  been  in  use  for  centu- 
ries, and  did  not  possess  the  force  of  real  genius, 
which  confers  hfe  upon  all  its  undertakings ;  and 
yet  he  not  unfrequently  led  his  contemporaries  and 
successors  to  a  participation  of  his  errors.  The 
same  may  be  said  also  of  poetry.  The  syllabic  sys- 
tem of  metre  was  adopted  by  all  the  writers  of  this 
age.  Tredjakofskj  attempted  to  prove  that  it  was 
unsuitable  to  the  genius  of  the  Russian  language. 
The  public  wished  for  examples.  He  gave  them 
his  Telemachid  and  Deidamia :  but  the  public 
justly  gave  the  preference  to  the  thought  and  feel- 
ing displayed  in  the  syllabic  metres,  over  those  built 
on  the  principle  of  accentuation,  which  gave  no 
trace  of  either  one  or  the  other. 

IV. 

Literature. 

§  36.  The  sciences  and  arts  are  easily  translated 
from  one  country  into  another  by  the  invitation  and 
encouragement  of  learned  men:  they  speak  a  univer- 
sal language,  intelligible  by  all  the  nations  of  the 
earth.  But  it  is  otherwise  with  literature,  which  is 
the  free,  unforced  production  of  its  native  soil.  The 
ordinances  of  kings  and  of  governments  may  acce- 
lerate its  progress  or  its  decline,  but  to  create  it  is 
beyond  their  power.  It  rises  spontaneously,  or  at 
least  not  till  a  long  time  after  the  throwing  in  of 
the  seed.  Peter  the  Great  paved  the  way  for  the 
success  of  Russian  literature,  but  was  not  per- 
mitted to  live  till  it  attained  maturity.  The  au- 
thors of  his  time   were,  as  it  were,   brought  over 


RUSSIAN  LITERATUE. 


61 


from  the  preceding  era,  and  their  works  bore  the 
stamp  of  the  1 7th  century. 

The  Theatre. 

§  37.  There  did  not  yet  exist  any  regular  thea- 
tre in  Russia.  The  stage  is  a  luxury  of  superior 
civilisation,  and  Peter  looked  principally  to  the 
necessities  of  his  people.  The  getting  up  and  per- 
formance of  sacred  dramas  was  continued  at  the 
seminaries ;  some  of  them  also  were  made  to  turn 
upon  the  remarkable  events  of  the  actual  time. 
In  the  year  1730  the  Italian,  and  in  1738  the  Ger- 
man theatre,  were  attached  to  the  court. 


Writers. 


§  38.  The  most  illustrious  writers  of  this  period 


were, — 

1.  St.  DiMiTRj. 

2.  Stephan  Jaworskj. 

3.  Gabriel  Bushinskj. 

4.  Feophan    Prokopo- 

WITSCH. 

5.  Prince  Antioch  Dmi- 

TRIJEWITSCH  KaNTE- 
MIR. 

6.  Prince    Andrej    Ja- 

KOWLEWITSCH       ChIL- 
KOFF. 

Ilja      Fodorowitsch 
KopijEwiTscH,     or 
kopijefskj. 

Peter  Busslajeff. 

Semen  Klimofskj. 


7. 


8. 
9 


10.  KiRscHA,      or      KiRIL 

Daniloff. 

11.  Leontj      Philippo- 

WITSCH    MaGNTZKJ. 

12.  Ernst  Glijck. 

13.  IWAN  KiRILOFF. 

14.  Wassilj      Grigoro- 

WITSCH. 

15.  NiKODiM  Ssellj. 

16.  Wassilj   Nikititsch 

Tatischtscheff. 

17.  Stephan  Petrowitsch 

Krascheninnikoff. 

18.  Wassilj  KiRiLowiTscH 

Tredjakofskj. 


62  THE  HISTORY  OF 


CHAPTER  n. 

The  reigns  of  Elizabeth  and  Catherine ;  or,  From  Lo~ 
monossoff  to  Karamsin. 

I. 

Political  condition  of  Russia  : 

a)  under  Elizabeth  the  First. 

§  39.  Elizabeth  the  First,  daughter  of  Peter  the 
Great,  had  rendered  her  reign  conspicuous  by  the 
tranquilHty  of  the  empire  within,  and  by  victories 
over  its  enemies  without.  Sweden  and  Prussia 
were  the  theatre  where  the  heroism  of  its  armies 
was  displayed.  Ease  and  security  prevailed  in  Rus- 
sia. "  Twelve  years  of  the  administration  of  Eliz- 
abeth Petrowna,"  said  the  great  authoress  of  the 
celebrated  '  Instructions,'  "  give  the  world  a  more 
glorious  example  for  their  imitation,  than  the  most 
briUiant  conquests." 

b)  under  Catherine  the  Second. 

But  a  worthy  successor  of  Peter  the  First,  and 
the  completer  of  his  wise  designs,  was  Catherine  the 
Second.  She  relinquished  the  hitherto  prevailing 
policy  of  taking  part  in  the  events  of  Europe  only 
in  the  form  of  an  ally  or  a  subsidiary  of  one  or 
other  of  the  dominant  states,  and  feeling  to  what 
rank  her  strength  entitled  her,  began  to  treat  in- 
dependently of  other  powers ;  still  however  keeping 
her  constant  attention  fixed  upon  the  true  interests 


RUSSIAN  LITERATURE.  63 

and  glory  of  her  country.  She  knew  well  how  to 
choose  men  who  would  be  capable  of  advancing 
her  splendid  projects — the  Orloffs,  a  RuraanzofF, 
a  Potemkin,  a  Dolgoruki,  a  Kriimskj,  the  Soltikoffs, 
a  SuworofF,  a  Repnin,  a  Tschitschagoff,  a  Panin,  a 
Besborodko,  were  the  worthy  servants  of  her,  and 
of  their  country.  The  acquisition  of  Little  Russia, 
the  Crimea,  the  district  of  Otschakow,  of  Lithuania, 
Volhynia,  Podolia,  Courland,  etc.;  these  were  the 
results  of  her  subtle  councils  in  the  cabinet,  and 
her  glorious  triumphs  at  Tschesme,  Rimnik,  and  so 
forth.  Europe  bowed  her  gi'ey  head  with  respect- 
ful deference  before  this  wise  legislatress  of  her 
people  and  victorious  heroine  in  war,  who  had 
raised  Russia  to  the  loftiest  pinnacle  of  glory  and 
power,  and  prepared  the  way  for  those  brilliant  re- 
sults which  it  displayed  at  the  beginning  of  the 
nineteenth  century. 

c)   under  Paul  the  First. 

The  short  reign  of  Paul  the  First  is  rendered 
immortal  by  the  victories  of  SuworofF  in  Italy  and 
Switzerland. 

II. 

The  Progress  of  Enlightenment  under  Elizabeth. 

§  40.  The  Empress  Elizabeth  Petrowna  loved 
and  favoured  the  sciences  and  arts ;  she  derived 
from  them  in  many  respects  great  assistance  in  the 
administration  of  the  empire,  and  at  the  same  time 
availed  herself  of  their  cultivation  to  increase  the 
splendour  of  the  Russian  court,  which  under  the 
Empress  Anne  had  retained  the  simplicity  of  Peter's 


64  THE  HISTORY  OF 

time,  but  under  Elizabeth  became  one  of  the  most 
brilHant  in  Europe,  combining  all  the  taste  and  re- 
finement of  the  west,  with  the  luxury  and  magni- 
ficence of  oriental  chmes.  The  abolition  of  the 
punishment  of  death  raised  the  estimation  of  her 
government  in  the  eyes  of  the  empire.  The  adorn- 
ing of  the  imperial  palace  with  architectural  ele- 
gance, the  perfection  of  the  art  of  music,  (among 
other  things  by  the  invention  of  the  horn-bands, 
which  still  exist  only  in  Russia),  and  the  establish- 
ment of  a  national  theatre,  give  ample  evidence  of 
the  advances  made  by  inteUigence  under  this  reign. 

'>i  Learned  Institutions. 

The  most  important  regulations  of  Elizabeth  for 
the  promotion  of  science  and  the  enlightenment  of 
the  people,  may  be  chronologically  specified  as  fol- 
lows:  A.  D.  1747,  the  funds  of  the  Petersburg 
Academy  of  Sciences  were  materially  increased,  and 
one  class  of  the  department  of  the  fine  arts  was 
annexed  to  it.  In  the  year  1752,  the  navigation 
school,  founded  by  Peter  the  Great  (see  §  26  supra) 
received  considerable  augmentations,  and  was  newly 
named  The  Noble  Marine  Cadet  Corps.  This  in- 
stitution Russia  has  to  thank  for  its  most  distin- 
guished navigators  and  naval  officers  (17).  In  the 
year  1755,  at  the  suggestion  of  that  illustrious  pro- 
tector of  science  in  Russia,  Schuwaloff",  the  Mos- 
cow university  was  founded,  including  two  subor- 
dinate Gymnasiums — an  endowment  which  in  the 
sequel  produced  incalculable  advantages  in  every 
respect  to  the  country,  and  has  to  this  day  occu- 
pied the  first  place  among  the  learned  establish- 


RUSSIAN  LITERATURE.  65 

ments  of  Russia.     In  1758  the  foundation  was  laid  ' 
— likewise  by  Schuwaloffs  advice — of  the  St.  Pe- 
tersburg Academy  of  the  arts  of  painting,  sculpture, 
and  architecture. 

(17)  Under  the  reign  of  the  Empress  Elizabeth  Petrow- 
na,  the  discoveries  of  Bering  were  accurately  ascer- 
tained. From  1743  to  1760  Russian  navigators  made 
voyages  to  the  Aleutes,  and  carried  on  traffic  with 
the  inhabitants.  A  Moscow  merchant,  named  Sere- 
brennikofF,  and  a  merchant  from  Selenginski,  named 
Tolstiich  penetrated  to  the  peninsula  of  Aljaska,  and 
discovered  the  Fox  Islands. 

As  Catherine  the  Second,  immediately  on  the  com- 
mencement of  her  reign  received  intelligence  that 
some  Russian  hunters  had  discovered  several  new 
islands  (as  Unalashka,  Unimak,  etc.)  she  gave  instruc- 
tions (in  the  year  1764)  to  send  out  a  naval  officer  to 
make  discoveries,  and  give  descriptions  of  the  islands 
situated  between  Asia  and  America.     This  under- 
taking was  entrusted  to  lieutenant  Ssind,  who  served 
in  the  body  of  marines  which  accompanied  Bering. 
The  result,  however,  did  not  answer  to  the  anticipa- 
tions of  the  Empress.    Ssind,  although  he  continued 
sailing  about  for  some  years,  brought  home  no  im- 
portant information.     He  marked  on  his  chart  is- 
lands utterly  unknown,  and  gave  the  geographical 
situations   of  the  places  he  had  visited,  with  inac- 
curacy.     In  the  year  1764,  the  lieutenant-captain 
NemtinofF  was  sent  out  to  Spitzbergen  to  establish 
a  settlement  of  cabins,  magazines,  and  baths,  for  the 
use  of  the  hunters  in  that  region.     In   1765,  the 
captain  Wassilj  Jakowlewitsch  Tschitschagoff  was 
equipped  with  three  vessels  from  Kola,  to  go  and 
determine  the  question,  "  which  is  the  nearest  road 
to  India."     On  his  first  expedition,  Tschitschagoff 
reached  the  80°  N.  L.,  and  on  his  second  (in  the 

F 


66  THE  HISTORY  OF 

year  1766),  he  attained  to  the  80"  21';  but  the  ice- 
bergs effectually  prevented  him  from  prosecuting  his 
voyage  further,  or  from  approaching  the  Greenland 
coast.  In  1767  captain  Kreniziin  and  lieutenant- 
captain  Lewascheff  received  a  commission  to  sail 
from  the  mouth  of  the  Kamtschatka  river,  and  to 
explore  the  exact  position  of  the  Aleutes,  and  the 
mainland  of  America  as  far  as  California.  Kreni- 
ziin, in  his  voyage  to  the  Frozen  Ocean,  reached  only 
the  peninsula  of  Aljaska,  and  wintered  there.  Le- 
wascheff however  passed  the  winter  at  Unalaschka. 
The  extreme  cold  and  the  scurvy  made  such  havoc 
among  the  men  attached  to  both  expeditions,  that 
they  were  obliged  to  return  home  without  accom- 
plishing their  object.  These  failures  disposed  Ca- 
therine to  give  up  undertakings  of  this  sort  for  a 
time;  and  it  was  not  till  1785  that  the  well-known 
captain  Billings  was  commissioned  on  a  northern 
voyage  of  discovery.  The  Empress  had  intended  to 
send  out  captain  Muloffskj  to  meet  him  by  way  of  the 
Cape  of  Good  Hope,  but  the  war  with  Sweden,  in 
which  Muloffskj  was  engaged,  having  broken  out 
soon  afterwards,  the  execution  of  this  project  was 
abandoned. 

Progress  of  Enlightenment  under  Catherine  II. 

§  41.  Catherine  the  Second  did  not  content 
Tierself  with  the  fame  of  victories  and  conquests ; 
she  was  also  the  lawgiver  and  instructress  of  her 
people.  She  loved  the  sciences  for  the  sake  of 
science  itself,  and  because  she  esteemed  them  as 
the  indispensable  means  of  elevating  the  moral 
nature,  and  promoting  the  welfare  of  mankind. 
"  She  recognised  in  her  subjects,"  says  Karamsin, 
"  the  dignity  of  human  nature,  and  of  that  moral 
being,  which   was   created   for   the   happiness   of 


RUSSIAN  LITERATURE.  67 

social  life.  Peter  the  Great  sought  to  raise  us  to 
the  grade  of  an  enlightened  people ;  Catherine 
wished  to  treat  us  as  a  people  already  enlightened." 
Under  her  government  the  senate  received  a  new 
and  suitable  building.  Trade  and  commerce 
flourished  through  the  removal  or  abatement  of 
many  difficulties  and  monopolies,  and  by  conclud- 
ing for  Russia  advantageous  commercial  treaties 
with  neighbouring  powers.  In  different  parts  of 
the  empire  foreign  colonists  were  invited  to  settle. 
The  property  of  the  church  received  a  new  and 
advantageous  adjustment.  By  the  division  of 
Russia  into  separate  jurisdictions,  by  the  appoint- 
ment of  special  tribunals  for  each  class  of  affairs, 
by  the  separation  of  the  judicial  office  from  the  ad- 
ministrative and  from  the  police,  and  by  the  intro- 
duction of  members  chosen  out  of  different  classes 
into  the  tribunals— the  rights  of  all  conditions  of  men 
were  ascertained  and  confirmed,  and  the  administra- 
tion of  the  empire  wore  an  entirely  different  aspect. 
Many  other  not  less  important  and  useful  laws 
were  promulgated,  and  preparations  were  made 
for  a  complete  new  Statute-Book ;  but  circum- 
stances hindered  the  development  of  this  grand 
conception,  of  which  only  the  immortal  "  Instruc- 
tions," written  by  the  master  hand  of  Catherine, 
have  remained  as  a  memorial  to  posterity. 

^    Men  of  letters,  and  learned  Institutions. 

§  42.  Equally  zealous  was  this  great  Empress  in 
promoting  the  sciences,  and  the  progress  of  gene- 
ral enlightenment.  We  can,  however,  give  here 
only  a  short  sketch  of  the  learned  men,  and  learned 

f2 


68  THE  HISTORY  OF 

institutions,   which  were  projected   or   completed 
under  her  government. 

Tn  the  year  1762,  the  noble  Artillery  School, 
founded  by  Peter  the  Great  (§  30),  was  altered 
and  enlarged,  and  received  the  name  of  the  Artil- 
lery and  Engineer  Cadet  Corps.  Its  numbers  con- 
sisted of  one  hundred  and  forty-six  cadets  of  noble 
families,  and  one  hundred  and  fifty  selected  from 
the  children  of  soldiers.  In  A.  D.  1784  the  num- 
ber of  the  cadets  was  increased  to  four  hundred. 
In  the  year  1764  the  Foundling  House  in  Moscow, 
and  in  1770  the  one  in  Petersburg,  were  founded. 
In  the  same  year  was  instituted  the  society  for  the 
education  of  two  hundred  and  forty  daughters  of 
noble  houses,  and  two  hundred  and  forty  daughters 
of  plebeians,  better  known  by  the  name  of  the 
Smolnishian  Convent.  This  establishment,  by  the 
education  which  it  bestowed  on  the  female  sex, 
produced  a  most  beneficial  effect  on  the  general 
education  of  Russia.  It  was  also  in  the  same  year 
that  the  Academy  of  the  Arts  was  enlarged.  Besides 
the  three  classes  of  painting,  sculpture,  and  archi- 
tecture, an  institution  was  annexed  to  it  for  the 
instruction  of  one  hundred  and  eighteen  pupils  in- 
tending to  practise  as  artists.  This  academy  well 
responded  to  the  expectations  of  its  exalted  pa- 
troness. Under  Catherine's  reign  the  following  of 
these  pupils  earned  themselves  a  lasting  reputation : 
1.  As  painters,  Lossensko,  died  1773  ;  SokolofF, 
1791.  2.  As  sculptor,  Koslofskj,  1802.  3.  As 
architects,  Kororin,  1771  ;  BaschenofF,  1798;  Wol- 
koff,  1803;  and  Staroff.  4.  As  engravers,  Berse- 
koff,  1788;    and  SkorodunofF,   1792.     The  Land 


RUSSIAN  LITERATURE.  69 

Cadet  Corps,  which  Catherine  denominated  a  Nur- 
seryground  for  Heroes,  received  under  her  reign 
marked  proofs  of  her  favour.  In  the  year  1766  it 
was  remodelled  completely,  and  presented  with  a 
code  of  regulations  suited  to  its  distinction.  Rus- 
sia has  been  indebted  to  this  institution,  and  to  the 
Engineer  Corps,  for  its  most  distinguished  gene- 
rals and  statesmen.  During  Catherine's  govern- 
ment (from  1788  to  1794)  it  was  under  the  super- 
intendence of  the  celebrated  Count  Anhalt.  The 
admiration  and  acknowledgments  of  posterity  are ' 
due  to  the  name  of  Bezkoj,  who  was  the  zealous 
assistant  of  Catherine  in  the  organisation  of  the 
above-named  institutions. 

In  the  year  1772  the  Mining  School,  or  the 
Mining  Cadet  Corps,  w^as  founded,  for  the  instruc- 
tion of  officers  and  commissioners  in  the  principles 
of  mining;  in  1775  the  Gymnasium,  for  persons 
professing  foreign  creeds,  called  also  the  Greek 
Corps,  was  erected. 

The  St.  Petersburg  Academy  of  Sciences  at- 
tained, under  the  auspices  of  Catherine,  to  a  lofty 
pitch  of  prosperity  and  fame.  Its  funds  were  con- 
siderably increased,  and  the  means  supplied  to  it 
of  working  for  the  pubUc  good,  by  the  publication 
of  useful  books  and  periodical  papers,  by  the  open- 
ing of  free  lectures  to  the  people,  and  such  like 
measures.  After  a  plan  suggested  by  the  Empress, 
the  following  members  of  the  Academy,  viz.  Pallas, 
Falk,  Georgj,  Giildenstadt,  RiitschkofF,  Rumofskj, 
GmeHn,  Lepechin,  Kraft,  InochodzefF,  Oserez- 
kofskj,  and  Herrmann,)  undertook  journeys  into 
different  provinces  of  the  Russian  dominions,  with 


70  THE  HISTORY  OF 

the  view  of  giving  descriptions  of  them  in  all  their 
bearings,  and  taking  observations.  Among  the 
directors  of  the  Academy,  DomaschnefF,  and  the 
Princess  DaschkofF  merit  the  gratitude  of  posterity. 
Among  its  members  were  included,  not  only  illus- 
trious foreigners,  but  native  Russians  also,  who  were 
there  educated.  The  Moscow  University,  enriched 
by  Catherine's  liberality,  began  to  bear  fruits,  which 
its  first  founders  had  not  lived  to  see.  There  were 
educated  servants  truly  worthy  of  their  royal  mis- 
tress. From  thence  enlightenment  and  the  love  of 
knowledge  spread  themselves  over  every  part  of 
Russia,  and  penetrated  the  towns  and  villages  the 
furthest  removed  from  the  imperial  residence^. 
The  Free  Russian  Societv,  annexed  to  the  univer- 
sity,  contributed  much  to  the  increase  of  know- 
ledge, particularly  in  Russian  literature  and  his- 
tory (18).  Of  the  influence  of  this  university  on 
Russian  literature  in  general,  we  shall  have  occa- 
sion to  speak  further  below.  At  the  beginning  of 
Catherine's  reign  the  Translation  Department  was 
instituted,  for  the  purpose  of  supplying  Russia  with 
all  useful  books;  but  in  1783  it  was  broken  up^ 
and  its  funds  transferred  to  the  newly-founded 
Russian  Academy  ",  whose  professed  object  was  the 
perfecting  and  enriching  of  the  Russian  language. 
(See  below,  §  48.)    In  the  year  1765  the  Free  Eco- 


''  The  Moscow  University  owes  its  fame  and  the  advantages  it  has 
conferred  upon  Russia  to  the  union  there  of  several  superior  intellects — 
as  the  Russians  Popofskj,  Barssoff,  Desnizkj,  Tschebotareff;  and  the 
foreigners,  Reichel,  Schaden,  Buuse,  and  Matthai,  who  occupied  its  pro- 
fessional chairs. 

«  Not  to  be  confounded  with  the  Academy  of  Sciences. 


RUSSIAN  LITERATURE.  71 

nomical  Society  was  founded,  which  in  the  sequel 
published  so  many  useful  books  in  the  province  of 
Economy,  and  advanced  the  progress  of  enlighten- 
ment by  offering  large  rewards  for  the  solving  of  its 
prize-questions.  In  the  year  1783  the  Surgical 
Seminary  was  instituted  at  St.  Petersburg.  In 
the  same  year  a  Ukase  appeared,  giving  permission 
to  any  individuals  to  erect  printing  presses,  and  to 
print  and  issue  books  from  them  under  a  censor- 
ship. Soon  after  numerous  private  presses  were 
opened  at  Petersburg  and  Moscow,  and  by  their 
means  the  publication  of  books  was  greatly  faci- 
litated. In  this  year  also  a  commission  for  the 
erection  of  National  Schools  in  different  parts  of 
the  empire  was  appointed.  This  commission 
founded  a  Seminary  for  Schoolmasters ;  it  opened 
in  Petersburg  one  upper  and  twelve  private  Na- 
tional Schools,  and  published  instruction  books, 
and  other  instruments  of  improvement  in  the  Rus- 
sian language,  adapted  for  the  use  of  all  classes. 
By  degrees  National  Schools  were  set  in  motion  in 
every  government  and  provincial  town  of  Russia. 
Among  these  schools  none  took  a  more  prominent 
position  than  the  High  School  for  the  German 
subjects  of  the  empire,  which  had  been  founded 
by  the  celebrated  Biisching,  in  1762,  at  St.  Peters- 
burg, and  attached  to  the  Evangelical  Church  of 
St.  Peter.  The  noble  Herr  Saritsch  devoted  a 
considerable  part  of  his  fortune  to  the  formation  of 
a  Cadet  Corps  at  Schklow,  which  was  afterwards 
transferred  to  Smolensk,  and  is  now  situated  at 
Kostroma. 

(18)  The  Free  Russian  Society  was  founded  at  the 


72  THE  HISTORY  OF 

University  principally  through  the  exertions  of  its 
curator,  J.  J.  Melissino,  and  opened  August  2nd, 
1771.  The  object  of  this  society  was  the  improve- 
ment and  enrichment  of  the  Russian  language  by  the 
publication  of  useful  works,  and  translations  in  prose 
and  poetry,  as  well  as  productions  in  Russian  his- 
tory. The  ordinary  members  were  the  professors 
of  the  University,  and  other  learned  and  literary 
men  —  Professor  BarssofF  was  elected  secretary. 
This  society  busied  itself  in  the  construction  of  a 
Russian  dictionary,  and  from  1774  to  1783  it  pub- 
lished six  divisions  of  a  Specimen  of  its  Labours,  in 
which  the  historical  articles  contributed  by  Miiller 
and  Peter  Alexijiff  are  most  distinguished.  The 
operations  of  this  society  were  continued  about  four- 
teen years. 

Under  Paul  I. 

§  43.  The  reign  of  the  Emperor  Paul  I.  distin- 
guished itself,  as  far  as  the  education  of  the  peo- 
ple is  concerned,  by  the  founding  of  the  Univer- 
sity of  Dorpat,  of  the  School  of  Agriculture,  of 
the  Soldiers'  Orphan  Corps,  of  the  School  of  the 
Order  of  St.  Catherine,  and  by  the  carrying  on  of 
the  educational  houses,  and  all  other  institutions 
provided  for  the  female  sex  by  the  benevolent  ex- 
ample of  the  Empress  Maria  Feodorowna.  From 
this  time  forward  a  new  and  remarkable  epoch 
commenced  in  the  history  of  these  sort  of  estab- 
lishments. 

III. 

Formation  of  the  Language  and  Style  of  Lomonossoff. 

§  44.  The  beginning  of  this  division  of  the  his- 
tory of  Russian  literature  is  rendered  remarkable 


RUSSIAN  LITERATURE.  73 

by  the  re-formation,  or  more  properly  speaking, 
the  creation  of  the  Russian  language.  For  this 
mighty  result  we  can  only  thank  the  genius  of  a 
LomonossofF.  (See  below,  §  49.)  He  first  learnt 
the  way  to  separate  the  Russian  vernacular  lan- 
guage, which  is,  nevertheless,  the  fullest  and  no- 
blest, from  the  church  language;  without,  how- 
ever, losing  the  intrinsic  beauties  of  the  latter. 
He  first  wrote  a  pure  Russian  prose,  introduced 
the  use  of  the  proper  metre  of  lyrical  verse,  and 
fixed  and  defined  the  rules  of  Russian  grammar. 
This  revolution  in  the  Russian  language  could  only 
be  accomplished  by  a  man,  who,  nourished  in  his 
youth  by  solitary  study  and  reflection,  had  after- 
wards stored  his  mind  and  improved  his  talents  by 
the  acquirement  of  the  most  finished  scholarship. 
Good,  however,  is  slow  in  ripening.  Tredja- 
kofskj's  style  was  still  upheld  for  a  long  time  in 
Russian  literature.  The  ecclesiastical  writers  of 
Russia  continued  for  a  long  time  to  follow  a  Feo- 
phan  and  a  Gabriel,  rather  than  this  new,  but  really 
exemplary,  author.  Ignorance,  jealousy,  and  ma- 
lice, pursued  LomonossofF  to  the  grave,  where  in- 
deed great  men  must  ever  expect  to  reap  the  first 
rewards  of  their  labours  in  this  life.  The  further 
we  proceed  in  our  history  from  this  period,  the 
more  we  begin  to  prize  and  to  esteem  it. 

The  Lyric  and  Dramatic  Metres. 

Ever  since  1739  (the  year  when  LomonossofF 
published  his  first  ode  at  St.  Petersburg,  upon  the 
capture  of  Chotin)  the  present  lyrical  metre  has 
existed  in  Russian  poetry.     At  the  same  time  Su- 


74  THE  HISTORY  OF 

marokoff,  who  had  been  brought  up  in  the  Cadet 
Corps,  wrote  some  dramatic  attempts  in  Alexan- 
drine verse.  In  this  way  was  estabUshed  that 
metre,  which  was  in  almost  exclusive  use  among 
the  Russians  till  the  nineteenth  century.  Lomo- 
nossofF  had  a  fancy  for  hexametres,  and  it  is  pro- 
bable that  he  would  have  adopted  the  use  of  them 
in  time,  if  death  had  not  intervened  to  shorten  his 
days.  He  only  wrote  in  iambics  and  chorales,  and 
these  feet  consequently  continued  to  constitute  the 
prevailing  Russian  metre.  Rules  do  not  so  easily 
form  the  taste  of  a  people  as  the  example  of  great 
and  distinguished  writers. 

Rhetorical  Style. 

Among  the  prose  compositions  of  this  era  two 
splendid  and  inimitable  panegyrics  by  Lomonossoff 
deserve  the  first  attention.  An  easy,  light  style, 
such  as  is  used  in  conversation  and  epistolary  cor- 
respondence, did  not  then  exist  among  the  Rus- 
sians ;  the  comedies,  dialogues,  and  letters  of  that 
time,  were  written  in  heavy,  harsh,  and  vulgar 
language.  Lomonossoff  took  the  younger  Pliny 
and  Cicero  as  his  models ;  the  words,  he  borrowed 
from  the  common  vernacular,  as  well  as  from  the 
church  language ;  and  by  the  force  of  his  genius 
he  knew  how  to  distinguish  and  estimate  them 
separately.  An  agreeable  style,  however,  requires 
expressions  and  phrases  such  as  are  in  daily  use 
in  elegant  society,  and  at  that  period  it  was  not 
customary  to  speak  Russian  in  company.  Under 
the  Empress  Anna,  and  in  the  time  of  the  re- 
gency,  the    German    language   prevailed ;    under 


RUSSIAN  LITERATURE.  75 

Elizabeth,  the  Itahan,  and  after  that  the  French 
came  into  fashion ;  and  the  latter  has  since  re- 
tained the  precedence.  The  Russians  let  their 
own  solid  gold  remain  unwrought  into  shape,  and 
adopted  the  ready  beaten  tinsel  of  foreigners  for 
present  use. 

Grammar. 

The  grammar  of  LomonossofF  constitutes  an 
epoch  in  itself.  In  it  are  set  forth  and  explained 
the  rules  of  the  pure  Russian  language,  which  bor- 
rows indeed  its  chief  materials  from  the  Sclavonic, 
although  it  does  not  follow  it  throughout.  It  is, 
however,  to  be  regretted  that  LomonossofF  adhered 
so  closely  to  the  Latin  grammar.  He  makes  five 
declensions,  and  distributes  the  conjugations  ac- 
cording to  the  first  persons  of  the  present  tenses ; 
he  adopts  a  praeter-imperfect  tense,  which  does  not 
belong  to  the  Russian  language,  and  omits  at  the 
same  time  several  actually  existing  forms.  Besides 
this,  he  gives  many  false  rules,  (as  for  instance, 
with  regard  to  the  terminations  of  adjectives  in  the 
plural  number,)  apparently  out  of  mere  caprice. 
In  spite  of  this,  however,  his  grammar  retains  to 
this  day  the  first  place.  It  has  also  been  objected 
to  him  that  he  adopted,  without  rule  or  system, 
the  customary  terminology  of  his  time,  which  was 
then  gradually  forming  itself;  this  is  in  part  cor- 
rect ;  but  in  this  only  the  genius  of  LomonossofF  is 
to  blame,  the  bold  course  of  which  no  one  in  after 
times  has  been  able  to  transcend. 

In  the  year  1763,  A.  L.  Schlozer  (see  below)  oc- 
cupied himself  in   the   preparation  of  a  Russian 


K^  THE  HISTORY  OF 

gi'ammar,  which,  alas !  he  only  continued  as  far  as 
the  declension  of  adjectives.  In  the  nine  sheets  of 
it,  of  which  only  a  few  copies  were  printed,  and 
preserved  by  some  true  friends  of  literature,  some 
excellent  rules  are  to  be  found,  many  of  which 
have  been  adopted  by  the  authors  of  the  most  re- 
cent grammars. 

The  Language  under  the  Empress  Catherine. 
The  Language  of  Prose. 

§  45.  The  language  of  LomonossofF  continued 
to  prevail  during  the  whole  period  of  EHzabeth's 
reign,  during  which  time  but  little  and  very  gradual 
alteration  took  place.  Between  1770  and  1780  the 
translations  of  Jelagin  began  to  appear :  they  dis- 
played a  pure  Russian  language,  but  still  greatly 
mixed  up  with  Sclavonic  words.  The  construction 
was  difficult ;  many  expressions  were  false  or  mis- 
applied. The  pubhc,  however,  read  these  transla- 
tions with  avidity,  although  they  felt  that  they  had 
not  yet  attained  to  the  possession  of  a  perfect  prose. 
A  special  attention  to  the  subject  supplied  at  this  time 
the  formation  of  a  fine  diplomatic  style.  The  ma- 
nifestoes and  some  of  the  ukases  of  Catherine  H. 
may  be  called  superb.  The  principal  persons  who 
took  part  in  their  composition  were  TeplofF,  Bes- 
borodko  (19),  Sawadofskj  (20),  and  Krapowizkj. 

The  Language  of  Poetry. 

The  language  of  lyrical  poetry  received  new  life 
from  the  pen  of  Dershawin.  Vigorous  ideas  ne- 
cessarily sought  for  new  expressions.  The  poet 
created  them  in  merely  following  the  suggestions 


RUSSIAN  LITERATURE.  77 

of  his  own  genius,  and  these  expressions  remained 
as  an  inheritance  to  the  Russian  tongue.  In 
the  mean  time  the  style  of  other  sorts  of  poetry 
was  gradually  forming  itself.  In  the  style  of 
Knashnin's  tragedies,  we  find  much  more  regu- 
larity, roundness,  and  aptitude,  than  in  those  of  Su- 
marokofF.  The  language  of  The  Mother's  Spoilt 
Son,  and  of  The  Brigadier,  is  good ;  not  so 
much  by  the  art  it  exhibits,  as  in  the  accurate  re- 
presentation it  conveys  of  the  manners  of  that 
time.  The  style  of  Psyche  (Duschinka)  is  a  re- 
markable phenomenon  of  the  age  in  which  it  was 
written.  Bogdanowitsch  was  long  without  a  rival, 
as  far  as  simplicity  and  lightness  are  concerned. 
Chemnizer,  inimitable  in  his  simplicity,  was  un- 
known to  many  of  his  contemporaries.  He  did  not 
belong  to  their  age. 

Grammar  and  Lexicography. 

The  Russian  grammar  formed  itself  in  time, 
rather  by  daily  experiment  and  practice,  than  by 
the  authority  of  any  great  writer.  The  Russian 
Academy  performed  a  truly  great  work,  in  the  pro- 
duction of  the  Etymological  Dictionary  of  the 
Russian  language  (21). 

(19)  Prince  Alexander  Andrejewitsch  Besborodko, 
chancellor  of  the  empire,  superior  director  of  the 
posts,  and  knight  of  numerous  Russian  and  foreign 
orders  (born  1746,  and  died  April  6th,  1799,)  served 
in  the  beginning  under  Count  Rumanzoff-Sadu- 
naiskj.  In  the  year  1775  Catherine  the  Second  ap- 
pointed him  secretary  of  state,  and  he  afterwards 
received,  for  his  important  and  profitable  services  tp 


78  THE  HISTORY  OF 

his  country,  both  from  that  Empress,  and  from  her 
successor,  Paul  I.,  manifold  proofs  of  favour.  Bes- 
borodko  took  part  in  the  conclusion  of  the  following 
treaties — with  Denmark,  1782  ;  with  France,  Naples, 
and  Portugal,  1787 ;  with  the  Port  at  Jassy,  1791 ; 
with  Austria,  1792 ;  with  the  Order  of  Malta,  and 
with  Prussia  and  England,  1797. 

(20)  Count  Peter  Wassiljewitsch  Sawadofski,  acting 
privy-councillor,  began  service  under  the  hero 
Sadunaiskj,  and  in  the  year  1775  attained  the  rank 
of  secretary  of  state.  He  was  also  practised  in  lite- 
rary and  learned  subjects,  and  took  a  prominent 
part  in  the  establishment  of  National  Schools.  Under 
the  reign  of  Alexander  I.  he  created  an  everlasting 
testimony  to  his  fame  by  his  organisation  of  the 
Educational  Bureau.  He  died  January  10th,  1812. 
Many  manifestoes,  in  a  masterly  style  of  composi- 
tion, and  other  public  documents,  were  drawn  up  by 
him  under  the  reigns  of  Catherine  and  Paul. 

(21)  At  the  end  of  Catherine's  reign  the  fruits  of  the 
foundation  of  the  Moscow  University  became  visible. 
We  will  speak  of  them  more  at  length  in  discussing 
the  ensuing  period.  DmitrijefF,  Karamsin,  Muraw- 
jefF,  lived  and  wrote  under  Catherine's  government ; 
but  as  Lomonossoff,  (who  died  in  1765,)  belongs,  by 
the  nature  of  his  genius  and  writings,  to  the  age  of 
Elizabeth,  so  these  authors  belong  rather  to  the  fol- 
lowing period.  It  is  often  difficult  to  connect  poli- 
tical and  literary  periods  with  uniformity.  The  first 
are  clearly  defined  by  the  occurrence  of  brilliant 
events  ;  the  latter  glide  gradually  one  into  another, 
without  any  definite  lines  of  demarcation. 

Literature  under  Elizabeth. 

§  46.  Russian  literature,  properly  so  speaking, 
commenced  with  the  accession  of  Elizabeth.  Till 
her  time  we  saw  nothing  but  sketches,  attempts, 


RUSSIAN  LITERATURE.  79 

and  essays.  LomonossofF's  poems  awakened  in 
Russia  a  love  for  elegant  literature,  first  at  court, 
afterwards  among  the  inhabitants  of  the  chief 
towns,  and  lastly  in  the  provinces.  About  this 
time  appeared  SumarokofF.  He  had  neither  the 
genius  nor  the  talents  of  a  LomonossofF;  but  the 
kinds  of  poetry  which  he  attempted  were  more 
diversified,  the  ideas  of  his  contemporary  readers 
were  more  matured,  and  hence  he  has  been  called 
to  the  present  time  the  rival  of  Lomonossoff. 
Tredjakofskj  displayed  in  his  labours  industry  and 
originality.  Young  authors  formed  themselves 
under  him  ;  old  ones  took  him  under  their  protec- 
tion ;  and  thus  was  established  among  the  Russians 
a  hterary  repubhc,  in  which  there  was  no  want  of 
names  to  people  it.  It  comprised  a  phalanx  of 
imitators,  translators,  critics,  etc. 

Journalism. 

About  this  time  the  academician  Miiller  com- 
menced the  first  literary  journal  in  Russia,  entitled 
Monthly  Essays,  Useful  and  Entertaining.  This 
was  continued  to  the  year  1765,  and  contained 
many  original  and  translated  articles  on  historical, 
geographical,  and  commercial  subjects,  which  at 
the  time  were  interesting  and  new.  Almost  all 
the  Russian  poets  contributed  articles  to  this  jour- 
nal. The  Russian  public  read  with  avidity  this 
periodical,  which  gave  example  and  occasion  for 
the  publication  of  other  literary  journals.  In  the 
year  1759  appeared  the  Industrious  Bee  of  Suma- 
rokoff,  and  1756  the  Moscow  newspaper.    In  1762 


80  THE  HISTORY  OF 

CherafskofF  published   at  Moscow   the  Hours  of 
Leisure. 

The  Russian  Theatre. 

§  47.  The  Russian  Theatre  dates  its  origin  from 
the  time  of  Ehzabeth  I.  At  her  accession  there 
were  already  German  and  Italian  performances  at 
St.  Petersburgh.  In  the  year  1748  the  cadets  of 
the  Land  Corps,  who  were  well  schooled  in  the 
practice  of  declamation,  ventured  to  introduce  a 
Russian  piece  to  the  notice  of  the  Empress,  and 
they  were  so  fortunate  as  to  succeed.  From  that 
time  SumarokofF  began  to  meditate  on  the  exten- 
sion of  the  dramatic  art  in  Russia,  and  employed 
himself  in  the  composition  of  plays.  In  the  mean 
time  a  National  Theatre  had  been  established  in  a 
Russian  province  without  any  foreign  assistance. 

Wolkoff. 

The  son  of  a  merchant  at  Kostroma,  named 
Feodor  WolkofF,  who  had  received  instructions  at 
Moscow  in  the  German  language,  in  music,  and  in 
painting,  erected  at  Jarosslawl,  together  with  some 
other  young  men,  a  small  theatre  in  his  apartment, 
and  began  to  play  the  dramas  of  St.  Dimitrj.  In 
the  year  1746  he  came  to  Petersburg,  saw  there 
the  representations  of  the  Italian  theatre,  took 
pains  to  acquire  accurate  information  respecting 
its  interior  arrangements  and  decorations,  and  as 
soon  as  he  returned  to  Jarosslawl  erected,  with  the 
assistance  of  some  friends  of  the  arts,  a  theatre 
capable  of  accommodating  a  thousand  spectators. 


RUSSIAN  LITERATURE.  SI 

He  himself  was  architect,  machinist,  painter,  ma- 
nager, and  first  actor  there.  Dmitrefskj,  PopofF, 
and  some  other  young  people,  associated  them- 
selves with  the  company.  A  rumour  of  the  erec- 
tion and  success  of  this  theatre  reached  the  court, 
where  Sumarokoff's  tragedies  were  at  that  time 
being  performed  by  the  young  nobles.  In  1752 
WolkofF  and  his  companions  received  a  summons 
to  court.  Here  they  played,  to  the  great  gratifi- 
cation of  the  Empress,  the  piece  called  The 
Sinner  (Greschnik),  and  some  of  Sumarokoff's 
tragedies.  The  young  actors  were,  in  the  mean 
time,  placed  in  the  Cadet  Corps,  to  improve  them- 
selves in  the  fine  arts  and  elegant  studies ;  and  at 
last,  on  the  30th  of  August,  1756,  appeared  a 
ukase  directing  the  erection  of  a  public  Russian 
theatre,  to  which  SumakarofF  was  nominated  as 
director,  and  Wolkoff  as  chief  actor.  Actresses 
were  also  now  permitted  to  appear.  Hitherto  the 
womens'  parts  had  been  performed  by  men.  Under 
the  highest  patronage  WolkofF  also  erected  in  the 
year  1759  a  Russian  theatre  in  Moscow,  at  which 
place  he  died,  in  1763,  in  the  flower  of  his  age,  as 
he  was  engaged  in  preparatory  arrangements  for  a 
grand  festival  to  celebrate  the  accession  of  Cathe- 
rine. His  exertions,  however,  did  not  die  with 
him.  Encouraged  by  his  example,  Dmitrefskj,  and 
other  friends  of  the  Muses,  carried  on,  and  at  last 
perfected,  the  dramatic  art  in  Russia. 

Literature  under  Catherine. 

§  48.  Catherine  the  Second  gave  new  life,  partly 
by  the  encouragement  she  bestowed,  partly  by  her 

G 


82  THE  HISTORY  OF 

own  example,  to  Russian  literature.  The  bards  of 
Elizabeth  were  still  alive ;  LomonossofF  could  still 
pour  out  to  her  his  tributes  of  admiration  and 
praise  ;  Sumarokoff  rejoiced  in  her  especial  favour. 
New  poets  too  crowded  into  the  phalanx — Petroff 
sung  the  heroic  exploits  of  the  first  Turkish  war  ; 
CheraskofF  appeared  with  an  epic  poem  ;  Bogda- 
nowitsch  with  one  in  the  romantic  style ;  Van 
Wisin  created  the  Russian  comedy ;  tragedy  rose 
from  beneath  the  pen  of  Knashnin  ;  Dershawin 
shone.  All  these  authors  were  warmed  by  the 
rays  of  the  auspicious  and  genial  star ;  but  they 
no  longer  wrote  only  for  the  court,  as  under  Eliza- 
beth, for  the  court  now  distinguished  itself  by 
identifying  the  glory  of  the  people  with  its  own. 
A  reasonable  freedom  was  permitted  to  the  press, 
and  free  printing-houses,  as  mentioned  above,  were 
established  everywhere. 

Journalism. 

Literary  journals  now  multiplied  themselves  on 
every  side.  The  St.  Petersburg  Messenger  spread 
useful  information  over  the  whole  of  Russia.  In 
the  Companion  for  the  Friends  of  the  Russian 
Language,  appeared  poems  by  Dershawin,  and 
treatises  in  prose  by  Van  Wisin ;  clever,  witty  es- 
says, which  the  Empress  herself  condescended  to 
answer.  The  Russian  Academy  consisted  of  all 
the  most  distinguished  literati  of  the  time.  In  the 
mean  time  the  operation  of  the  University  at  Mos- 
cow made  rapid  advances  ;  Nowikoff  gave  life  and 
animation  to  Russian  hterature,  (see  below).  At 
this  period  the  number  of  Russian  authors  becomes 


RUSSIAN  LITERATURE.  83 

so  extended,  that  we  can  no  longer  enumerate 
them  m  detail,  but  are  compelled  to  content  our- 
selves with  giving  the  general  characteristics  of  the 
whole.  In  the  last  years  of  Catherine's  life,  and 
under  the  reign  of  Paul,  the  unhappy  results  of  the 
French  revolution  had  the  effect  of  narrowing  the 
career  of  general  literature  in  Russia. 

Pulpit  Eloquence. 

The  science  of  preaching  was  at  this  time  in  its 
highest  state  of  perfection.  The  labours  and  me- 
rits of  a  Platon,  a  Georgj,  an  Anastassj,  and  a  Le- 
wanda,  will  be  afterwards  considered. 

History. 

Russian  history  has  to  thank  Catherine  for  its 
existence.  Down  to  her  time  the  Russian  chroni- 
cles (Latopisse)  were  regarded  as  private  annals  of 
the  empire.  No  one  had  dared  either  to  print 
them,  or  comment  upon  them.  Only  the  Synopsis 
of  Gisel  (see  §  26)  had  served  till  the  middle  of  the 
eighteenth  century  as  a  manual  of  instruction  on 
these  subjects.  Under  Elizabeth's  reign  Miiller 
began  to  divide  and  distribute  the  fountains  of  Rus- 
sian history ;  Lomonossoft'  wrote  a  short  Russian 
chronicle,  and  began  to  put  together  a  complete  his- 
tory. Catherine,  from  the  first  time  of  her  arriving 
in  Russia,  evinced  the  greatest  interest  in  the  pro- 
gress of  this  history ;  and  soon  after  her  accession 
to  the  throne,  she  occupied  herself  some  hours 
every  day  in  the  business  of  digesting  its  materials. 
Under  her  auspices,  many  chronicles  and  other 
useful  helps  to  the  formation  of  a  Russian  history 

g2 


84.  THE  HISTORY  OF 

(as  for  instance.  The  Step-Books,  Tatischtscheff's 
Works,  The  Byzantine  MemorabiHa,  and  so  forth,) 
were  edited  by  Miiller,  Schlozer,  BashilofF,  and 
Stritter.  Prince  SchtscherbatofF  was  anxious  to 
write  a  complete  history  of  his  native  land,  and  had 
even  collected  nearly  half  the  necessary  materials. 
Boltin,  encouraged  by  the  Empress  herself,  wrote 
his  remarks  upon  Le  Clerc  and  SchtscherbatofF. 
NowikofF  edited  and  published  the  Old  Russian  Li- 
brary. GolikofF  consigned  to  the  press  The  Acts 
of  Peter  the  Great.  The  Empress  herself  published 
Events  worthy  to  be  Remembered  in  Russian  His- 
tory. In  this  way  the  materials,  and  the  opening 
for  a  general  Russian  history  were  extended  and 
enlarged ;  but  it  was  reserved  for  the  century  of 
Alexander  to  see  it  ushered  into  the  world. 

The  Theatre. 

The  theatre,  which  under  the  preceding  reign 
had  been  an  exclusive  amusement  for  the  court 
and  higher  ranks  (who  enjoyed  their  free  admis- 
sion, and  seats  according  to  their  class  of  nobility), 
became  under  the  government  of  Catherine  open 
to  the  public.  Any  one,  by  the  payment  of  a  mode- 
rate price  of  admission,  was  entitled  to  participate  in 
this  noble  recreation,  which  helped  greatly  to  pro- 
mote the  cultivation  of  manners,  and  a  general  love 
of  poetry  and  art.  The  tragedies  of  Knashnin,  the 
comedies  of  Van  Wisin,  and  the  excellent  repre- 
sentations derived  from  the  Russian  history,  in  the 
preparation  of  which  the  Empress  herself  took  part, 
led  the  public  on,  and  infused  into  them  a  taste  for 
the  beautiful. 


RUSSIAN  LITERATURE. 


85 


Writers. 


§  49.  The  most  important  writers  of  this  period 


are, 

1.  lomonossoff. 

2.  sumarokoff. 

3.  Krinofskj. 

4.  Satschenoff. 

5.  popofskj. 

6.  konisskj. 

7.  Lefschin. 

8.  Bratanofskj. 

9.  Lewanda. 

10.  Cheraskoff. 

11.  Petroff. 

12.  Barkoff. 

13.  bogdanowitsch. 

14.  Chemnizer. 

15.  Van  Wisin. 

16.  Dershawin. 


17.  Kapoist. 

18.  kostroff. 

19.  Knashnin. 

20.  Neledinskj-Melezkj. 

2\.    BOBROFF. 

22.  dolgorukj. 

23.  Chwostoff. 

24.    MiJLLER. 

25.  Schtscherbatoff, 

26.    BOLTIN. 

27.  Golikoff. 

28.  Jelagin. 

29.  Pleschtschejeff. 

30.  schlozer. 

31.  nowikoff. 


86  THE  HISTORY  OF 


CHAPTER  HI. 

The  Century  of  Alexander  ;  or,  from  Karamsin  to  our 

own  time. 

I. 

Political  condition  of  Russia. 

§  50.  The  beginning  of  a  new  and  a  brilliant 
epoch  in  Russian  history,  is  marked  out  by  the  ac- 
cession of  Alexander  the  First.  He  concluded  peace 
with  the  powers  who  were  then  at  war  with  Rus- 
sia, and  to  ensure  its  endurance  made  treaties  not 
only  in  Europe,  but  with  nations  scattered  over 
the  whole  earth.  This  peace,  however,  was  not 
destined  to  be  of  long  duration,  since  the  thirst  of 
conquest  and  glory  which  distinguished  the  then 
government  of  France,  soon  gave  occasion  for  the 
outbreaking  of  a  still  more  formidable  war.  Rus- 
sia armed  herself  for  the  defence  of  the  oppressed  ; 
but  the  time  for  the  rescue  of  Europe  from  the 
yoke  was  not  yet  come.  The  peace  of  Presburg 
concluded  the  war  of  1805,  and  the  treaty  of  Tilsit 
that  of  1806-1807;  but  these  compacts  may  rather 
deserve  the  name  of  truces  than  of  peace.  In  the 
mean  time,  Russia  acquired  the  districts  of  Bialystok 
and  Tarnopol ;  afterwards,  at  the  treaty  of  Frede- 
ricksheim  (1609),  the  grand  principality  of  Finland, 
and  by  that  of  Bucharest  (1812),  Bessarabia  and 
part  of  Moldavia.  Suddenly  the  storm,  which  had 
been  hanging  over  Russia,  burst.  On  the  12th  of 
July,  1812,  Napoleon  crossed  the  Russian  frontier; 


RUSSIAN  LITERATURE.  87 

on  the  2nd  of  September  he  advanced  to  Moscow ; 
and  on  the  1st  of  January,  1813,  there  was  not  a 
man  left  of  the  invading  army,  with  the  exception 
of  the  prisoners,  on  the  soil  of  Russia.  The  year 
1813  was  distinguished  by  the  liberation  of  Ger- 
many ;  that  of  1814  by  the  taking  of  Paris,  and  the 
disenthronement  of  Napoleon.  In  1815  this  enemy 
of  the  people's  peace  renewed  his  attempts,  but  was 
again  beaten,  and  exiled  to  a  place  of  security.  By 
the  conclusion  of  the  peace  of  Paris,  and  soon  after 
by  the  confederation  of  the  Holy  Alhance,  perma- 
nence was  assured  to  political  arrangements — their 
honours  were  secured  to  princes,  and  their  rights 
to  the  people — and  Russia  earned  the  imperishable 
fame  of  a  peacemaker,  and  protectress  of  both 
kings  and  people. 

II. 

General  Enlightenment.. 

§  51.  The  reign  of  Alexander,  distinguished 
abroad  by  the  most  glorious  triumphs  over  the  ene- 
mies of  the  peace  of  Europe,  and  by  the  liberation 
of  our  quarter  of  the  globe  from  an  oppressive 
yoke,  left  also  lasting  memorials  of  legislation  and 
enlightenment  at  home.  Immediately  after  his 
accession,  this  monarch  established  and  defined 
the  rights  of  the  senate,  the  nobility,  and  the  mu- 
nicipal communities.  He  put  a  final  stop  to  the 
operations  of  the  secret  tribunal,  and  to  the  torture. 
In  the  year  1802  he  organised  anew  the  different 
bureaus  of  administration  ;  and  in  1803  appointed 
the  law-commission.  In  1807  he  ascertained  and 
extended  the  rights  of  the  commercial  classes;  and 


88  THE  HISTORY  OF 

in  1810  gave  a  new  form  of  arrangement  to  the 
council  of  state.  The  public  revenues  considerably 
and  rapidly  increased.  The  directory  for  the  con- 
struction of  roads  was  placed  on  a  better  foundation. 
A  new  society  was  formed  for  the  free  agriculturists 
of  the  empire.  Commerce  and  trade  received  a 
great  impulse  by  the  cessation'  of  the  continental 
system.  Domestic  activity  was  developed,  and  fa- 
brics and  manufactures  found  new  channels  for  the 
products  of  industry.  In  the  years  1803-1806  the 
Russians  for  the  first  time  sailed  round  the  world ; 
which  they  have  since  frequently  repeated  (22). 
With  the  most  assiduous  zeal  for  the  true  enlighten- 
ment of  his  people,  Alexander  completed  what 
Peter  and  Catherine  had  begun.  We  will  mention 
the  most  remarkable  of  the  institutions  and  altera- 
tions in  this  respect  which  took  place  under  his 
reign. 

In  the  year  1802  a  new  Educational  Bureau  was 
established  in  Russia,  and  the  chief  superintendence 
of  all  places  of  learning  in  Russia,  with  the  excep- 
tion of  the  clerical  schools,  the  military  school,  the 
mining  school,  and  the  seminaries  which  were 
established  under  the  especial  direction  of  Maria 
Feodorowna,  was  entrusted  to  it.  This  Bureau 
adopted,  immediately  on  its  erection,  a  general 
system  of  education  throughout  Russia,  which  was 
crowned  with  the  highest  success.  By  the  funda- 
mental laws  of  this  system,  Russia  was  divided  into 
the  following  six  departments — 1.  That  of  Moscow, 
to  which  belong  the  governments  of  Moscow,  Twer, 
Kaluga,  Wologda,  Kostroma,  Jarosslaw,  Wladimir, 
Tula,  and  Smolensk.     2.  That  of  St.  Petersburg, 


RUSSIAN  LITERATURE.  89 

with  the  governments  of  St.  Petersburg,  Olonez, 
Archangel,  Novogorod,  and  Pskow.  3.  That  of 
Charkovv,  with  the  governments  of  Slobodsko- 
Ukraine,  Tschernigow,  Poltawa,  Kieff,  Kursk, 
Orel,  Woronesh,  Cherson,  Taurien,  and  the  lands 
of  the  people  of  the  Don.  4.  That  of  Dorpat, 
with  the  governments  of  Courland,  Esthonia,  and 
Liv6nia.  5.  That  of  Kasan,  with  the  governments 
of  Kasan,  Pensa,  Simbirsk,  Nishegorod,  Astracan, 
Perm,  Wjatka,  Tobolsk,  Tomsk,  Irkutsk,  Tam- 
bow,  Saratow,  and  the  Caucasus.  6.  That  of 
AVilna,  with  the  governments  of  Wilna,  Grodno, 
Minsk,  Mogilew,  Witepsk,  Volhynia,  Podolia,  and 
Bialystok.  For  each  of  these  educational  depart- 
ments a  university  was  appointed ;  to  every  go- 
vernment town  a  gymnasium  was  assigned ;  to 
every  district  town  a  distinct  school,  and  to  every 
hamlet  a  parish-school.  The  supervision  of  each 
district  was  confided  to  a  curator,  and  the  general 
superintendence  of  all  these  together  was  given  to 
the  directory  of  the  head-school.  This  beneficial 
plan  was  immediately  put  in  execution.  The 
already  existing  universities  of  Moscow,  Dorpat, 
and  Wilna,  (founded  in  1578,)  were  included  in 
the  general  arrangement,  and  received  new  sta- 
tutes, and  letters  patent  of  the  Emperor.  Two 
new  universities  were  founded,  viz.  Charkow,  the 
charter  of  which  is  dated  Nov.  4th,  1804,  and  for 
which  the  Slobod-Ukrainian  nobility  subscribed 
a  sum  of  400,000  rubles— opened  Jan.  17th,  1805  ; 
and  Kasan,  opened  the  5th  of  July,  1814.  The 
University  of  St.  Petersburg,  (of  which  the  prin- 
cipal constituent  parts,  the  schoolmasters'  school. 


90  THE  HISTORY  OF 

the  government  school,  and  the  town  school, 
had  already  existed  since  1803,)  was  opened  on  the 
8th  of  February,  1819.  The  number  of  the  Rus- 
sian universities  was  increased  in  the  year  1809, 
upon  the  acquisition  of  Finland,  by  the  university 
of  Abo,  founded  A.  D.  1 640. 

Each  university,  as  soon  as  completed,  occupied 
itself  with  the  formation  and  improvement  of  its 
subordinate  schools.  Besides  the  schools  esta- 
blished on  this  general  plan,  many  other  special 
schools  were  instituted  in  the  different  depart- 
ments, viz.,  Zarsko-jeselo  Lyceum,  1811,  with  the 
seminary  for  young  nobles  attached  to  it ;  the 
seminary  for  noblemen  at  the  university  of  Mos- 
cow (23)  and  of  St.  Petersburg,  1817  ;  the  instiut- 
tion  for  schoolmasters  at  the  university  of  Peters- 
burg, 1819 ;  the  RicheHeu  Lyceum  at  Odessa, 
1817.  The  gymnasiums  of  Kasan,  Mitau,  Kreme- 
nez,  (now  the  Volhynian  Gymnasium,)  Kieff,  and 
St.  Petersburg,  possessed  especial  rights  and  pri- 
vileges of  their  own. 

In  the  year  1813  the  Russian  Bible  Society  was 
first  founded  at  St.  Petersburg,  which  had  for  its 
object  the  diffusion  of  God's  Word  in  all  the  lan- 
guages, and  over  all  the  countries  of  the  world  (24). 
Russia,  mindful  that  she  herself  was  indebted  to 
the  Holy  Gospel  for  the  beneficial  enjoyment  of 
the  sciences,  of  arts,  and  of  literature,  now  in  re- 
turn scattered  over  all  the  nations  which  lay  in 
darkness,  its  healing  light,  and  laid  by  this  means 
the  surest  foundation  for  their  future  complete 
enlightenment.  In  the  year  1816  the  Educational 
Bureau  was  united  to  the  Bureau  for  Ecclesiastical 


RUSSIAN  LITERATURE.  91 

matters,  and  since  that  time  a  new  period  com- 
menced in  these  points,  of  which  we  daily  see  the 
beneficial  results. 

The  great  and  wholesome  ordinances  of  the 
government  could  not  fail  to  kindle  the  imitative 
zeal  of  private  societies  and  individuals  in  Russia. 
The  state-councillor  DemidofF  enriched  the  Uni- 
versity of  Moscow,  and  founded  from  its  funds  the 
Jarosslawish  Gymnasium,  1805  ;  Count  Besbo- 
rodko  founded  a  Gymnasium  for  the  superior  sci- 
ences at  Neshin,  1805.  In  almost  all  the  govern- 
mental and  district-towns  the  noblemen  and  the  so- 
cieties of  merchants  contributed  large  sums  for  the 
building  of  schools.  The  most  remarkable  of  these 
places  of  learning  were — The  Alexander  School  at 
Tula,  1802,  and  the  Noble  School  at  Tambow, 
1803.  Those  who  could  not  give  money  contri- 
buted their  personal  exertions.  Many  noblemen 
doubled  the  value  of  their  beneficence,  by  them- 
selves partaking  in  the  oflSce  of  instruction.  Other 
friends  of  utility  founded  learned  and  literary 
societies.  Thus  were  established,  in  1802,  the 
Society  for  Literature  and  Praxis,  at  Riga ;  in 
1803,  for  the  Lovers  of  Literature,  Sciences,  and 
Arts,  at  St.  Petersburg  (25)  ;  1804,  for  Russian 
History  and  Antiquities,  at  the  University  of  Mos- 
cow (26)  ;  1805,  for  Natural  Philosophy,  at  Mos- 
cow (27)  ;  for  Medicine,  at  Wilna ;  for  the  ad- 
vancement of  the  Medical  and  Physical  Sciences, 
at  Moscow  (28);  1808,  for  the  lovers  of  Native 
Literature,  at  Kasan  (29) ;  1810,  for  the  lovers  of 
the  Russian  language  (30) ;  for  the  lovers  of  Russian 


92  THE  HISTORY  OF 

Literature,  at  the  University  of  Moscow  (31)  ;  and 
a  similar  one  at  the  Demidoff  Institution  for  Learn- 
ing at  Jarosslaw  ;  for  the  Sciences,  at  the  Univer- 
sity of  Charkow(32)  ;  1816,  the  Free  Society  for 
the  lovers  of  Russian  Literature,  at  Petersburg  (33)  ; 
1818,  the  Society  for  Mineralogy  (34),  and  for 
Pharmacy,  at  the  same  place  (35)  ;  and  1819,  the 
Society  for  the  Erection  of  Schools  upon  the  Plan 
of  Mutual  Instruction  (36). 

Besides  the  schools  and  other  institutions  con- 
nected v^ith  the  Educational  Bureau,  the  following 
also  were  established  or  remodelled  under  the  reign 
of  Alexander — 1802,  the  Corps  of  Pages  was  reorga- 
nised; 1805,  the  High  School  of  Jurisprudence  at  St. 
Petersburg  was  opened  ;  1807,  the  Clerical  Schools 
received  a  new,  universal,  and  systematic  arrange- 
ment, through  the  appointment  of  a  special  com- 
mission at  St.  Petersburg.  They  were  divided  into 
academies,  (at  St.  Petersburg,  Moscow,  KiefF,  and 
Kasan,)  seminaries,*  district  and  parish  schools  (37). 
In  1808,  the  Medico-Surgical  Academy  was  opened 
at  St.  Petersburg,  and  a  branch  of  the  same  at 
Moscow  ;  also,  in  1809,  the  Institute  for  the  Edu- 
cation of  the  Roads-Communication  Corps.  In 
Odessa  a  Commercial  School  was  opened  in  1804 ; 
and  at  St.  Petersburg  the  Engineer  School,  in 
1817  ;  and  the  Artillery  School,  in  1821. 

Besides  this,  the  spread  of  information  in  Rus- 
sia was  extended  by  the  publication,  in  1804,  of 
the  Ordinances  of  the  Censorship  ;  the  opening  of 
the  Imperial  Pubhc  Library  at  St.  Petersburg,  in 
1811  ;  the  reorganisation  of  the  Russian  Academy, 


I 


RUSSIAN  LITERATURE.  93 

1816  ;  and  the  erection  of  professorial  chairs  for 
the  teaching  of  the  oriental  languages,  at  the 
University  of  St.  Petersburg,  1818. 

(22)  The  first  voyage  of  the  Russians  round  the  world 
was  achieved  in  the  years  1802-1806,  by  the  ships 
Hope  and  Neva,  belonging  to  the  Russian-American 
Company,  and  under  the  command  of  captain  Kru- 
senstern.  After  this  the  American  Company  de- 
spatched ships  almost  every  year  to  the  north-west 
coast  of  America.  Among  other  scientific  expedi- 
tions, the  best  known  are  that  of  captain  Golownin, 
in  the  Diana  sloop,  in  the  years  1807-1814,  for  the 
closer  examination  of  the  Kurile  islands ;  that  of 
lieutenant  von  Kotzebue,  of  the  sloop  Rurik,  at  the 
expense  of  count  N.  P.  RumanzofF,  in  the  years 
1815-1818,  for  the  discovery  of  a  north  (western?) 
passage  between  Asia  and  America;  of  lieutenant 
LasarefF,  in  the  year  1819,  in  the  brig  Nova  Zembla, 
for  exploring  the  island  of  Nova  Zembla;  of  the 
captains  Bellinghausen,  in  the  sloops  I'Orient  and 
Friedliche ;  and  WassiljefF,  in  the  sloops  Discovery 
and  Confidence,  1819,  for  making  discoveries  in  the 
north  and  south  polar  regions. 

(23)  The  Seminary  for  Noblemen  at  the  University  of 
Moscow  was  founded  in  the  year  1770,  principally 
by  the  exertions  of  Messrs.  CheraskofFand  Melissino. 
Russia  has  to  thank  this  institution  for  the  formation 
of  her  best  men,  in  the  civil,  military,  and  literary 
capacities.  In  1817  its  rights  and  privileges  were 
ascertained  and  confirmed.  It  has  since  been  for  a 
long  period  of  years  under  the  superintendence  of 
the  rector  of  the  university,  the  privy-councillor, 
A.  A.  Prokopowitsch-Antonskj. 

(24)  The  Russian  Bible  Society,  in  respect  of  the  ex- 
tent of  its  operations,  is  only  secondary  to  the  Bri- 
tish.   In  the  year  1820  it  possessed  53  affiliated,  and 


94  THE  HISTORY  OF 

145  assistant  societies  ;  and  since  1813,  the  time  of  its 
foundation,  more  than  430,000  Bibles  and  New  Tes- 
taments had  been  printed  and  distributed  in  twenty- 
six  languages. 

(25)  This  society,  under  the  presidency  of  A.  E.  Is- 
mailoff,  printed  in  1802  and  1803  the  labours  of  its 
members,  under  the  title  of  The  Scroll  of  the 
Muses,  in  2  vols.;  and  in  1812  it  published  the 
St.  Petersburg  Messenger,  which  was  interrupted 
by  the  circumstances  of  the  time.  Its  sittings,  how- 
ever, were  continued. 

(26)  Under  the  presidency  of  P.  P.  Beketoff,  this  so- 
ciety published  a  part  of  the  Russian  Memorabilia, 
which  contains  costly  materials  for  the  Russian  his- 
tory. Many  of  the  labours  of  its  members  were  de- 
stroyed by  the  invasion  of  the  enemy. 

(27)  The  founder  and  director  of  this  society  was  Pro- 
fessor Fisher.  It  published  its  labours  under  the 
following  title :  Memorabilia  of  the  Society  of  Natu- 
ral Philosophy  at  the  Imperial  University  of  Mos- 
cow. In  Russian  and  French,  Moscow,  1809-1816, 
5  vols. 

(28)  Under  the  presidency  of  that  meritorious  profes- 
sor, and  active  councillor  of  state,  B.  M.  Richter. 

(29)  The  labours  of  this  society  appeared  in  the  year 
1817,  in  2  vols. 

(30)  The  Society  for  the  Lovers  of  the  Russian  Lan- 
guage was  established  in  1810,  by  the  exertions  of 
many  distinguished  writers,  among  whom  we  may  men- 
tion R.  Dershawin  and  A.  S.  Schischkoff.  It  con- 
sisted of  four  divisions,  of  which  each  had  a  president, 
active  members,  and  corresponding  members.  Be- 
sides these  it  had  four  conservators,  and  an  unli- 
mited number  of  honorary  members.  The  open 
sittings  of  the  society  took  place  monthly,  in  the 
house  of  the  revered  Dershawin,  in  a  splendid  hall 
built  on  purpose  for  these  meetings.     The  better 


i 


RUSSIAN  LITERATURE.  95 

classes  of  the  public  attended  these  assemblies,  in 
which  the  works  of  the  most  distinguished  Russian 
writers,  who  were  members  of  the  society,  were 
read.  These  essays  appeared  in  print,  in  twenty  single 
numbers,  Petersburg,  1811-1816.  The  sittings  of 
the  society  ended  with  the  life  of  Dershawin. 

(31)  This  society,  under  the  presidency  of  the  rector 
of  the  Moscow  University,  A.  A.  Prokopowitsch-An- 
tonskj,  contributed  very  significantly  to  the  advance- 
ment of  Russian  literature.  It  held  ordinary  and 
extraordinary  meetings,  in  which  the  works  of  the 
members  were  read  aloud ;  and  published  its  labours 
in  separate  numbers,  of  which  in  the  year  1822, 
twenty  had  already  appeared.  In  these  are  to  be 
found  some  useful  and  important  treatises,  which 
have  reference  to  the  history  and  theory  of  Russian 
literature,  as  well  as  some  masterly  poems. 

(32)  This  society  published  a  volume  of  its  labours  in 
the  year  1815. 

(33)  The  end  of  this  society  (the  director  of  which 
was  F.  N.  Glinka)  was  the  promotion  of  enlighten- 
ment and  general  philanthropy.  It  held  public 
and  private  sittings,  and  since  the  year  1818  has 
published  a  journal,  entitled,  The  Promoter  of  En- 
lightenment. The  money  derived  from  the  sale  of 
this  is  devoted  to  the  support  of  poor  and  merito- 
rious literati  and  artists.  The  most  flattering  re- 
sults have  attended  this  benevolent  undertaking. 

(34)  The  president  of  this  society  is,  or  was,  the  privy 
councillor  Baron  B.  J.  Vietinghof,  and  the  director 
of  it  the  professor  and  collegiate-councillor  L.  J. 
Pansner.  It  holds  weekly  sittings,  and  maintains 
scientific  relations  with  the  most  distinguished  mine- 
ralogists in  Europe.  In  1822  its  labours  had  not 
yet  been  published. 

(35)  Under  the  presidency  of  the  academician  and 
state-councillor  A.  J.  Scherer. 


96  THE  HISTORY  OF 

(36)  This  society,  under  the  presidency  of  Count  Tol- 
stoi, founded  and  supported  a  school  for  300  poor 
children,  at  St.  Petersburg,  and  has  contributed  to 
the  erection  of  similar  schools  in  different  parts  of 
the  empire. 

(37)  We  have  mentioned  in  part  the  arrangements 
made  for  the  ecclesiastical  establishment  in  Russia. 
In  the  year  1700  a  clerical  school  was  founded  at 
Tschernigow,  and  a  similar  one  at  Novogorod  in 
1706.  In  compliance  with  an  ecclesiastical  edict  of 
1721,  a  school  for  the  children  of  the  clergy  was 
established,  and  a  fixed  form  of  management  appointed 
in  each  eparchy.  Subsequently  to  this  the  follow- 
ing schools  were  erected: — atNishnej-Novogorod  and 
at  the  Cloister  of  Alexander-Newskj,  at  St.  Peters- 
burg, in  1721 ;  at  Rasan,  Twer,  and  Balgorod,  1722; 
atKasan,  Susdal,  Kolomna,  Wjiitka,  and  Cholmogorj, 
in  1723  ;  at  Wologda,  1724 ;  at  Wehkj-Ustjug,  1725; 
at  Irkutsk,  1726 ;  at  Smolensk,  Rostow,  Pskow,  and 
Tobolsk,  1728;  at  Astracan,  1729;  at  Woronesh, 
1731.  After  this  the  following  seminaries  were  in- 
stituted: — that  of  Alexander-Newskj,  1732;  at  Ka- 
san  and  Pskow,  1733;  at  Wjatka,  1739;  at  Nishnej- 
Novogorod,  Rasan,  Tobolsk,  Perejasslawl,  Welikj- 
Ustjug,  1738;  the  Krutinzkischian  one  at  Wasma, 
that  at  Twer,  Rostow,  1739;  at  Novogorod  and  Sus- 
dal, 1740;  at  the  Lawra"^  of  Troizk,  and  at  Ja- 
rosslawl,  1747;  atWladimir,  1750;  at  Kaluga,  1775: 
at  Astracan,  1777;  at  Sawsk  and  Wologda,  1778; 
at  Jekaterinosslawl,  Poltawa,  Irkutsk,  and  Tambow, 
1779;  atMogileff,  1788;  at  Minsk,  1793;  at  Kami- 
niez-Podolskj  and  Withan,  1797;  at  Shitomir,  1799; 
at  Perm,  Pensa,  and  Orenburg,  and  the  Armaisch 

■■  "  Luwru"  i.  e.  Cloister.  A  name  only  given  to  the  most  distin- 
guished and  important  of  the  monasteries ;  namely,  those  of  Kieff,Troisk, 
and  Alexander-Newskj, 


RUSSIAN  LITERATURE.  97 

Seminary  at  St.  Petersburg,  1800.  To  each  of  the  four 
academies  originally  mentioned.,  jurisdiction  was  given 
over  the  subordinate  ones  in  the  same  circle.  To 
the  St.  Petersburg  circle  belonged  the  seminaries  of 
Novogorod,  St.  Petersburg,  Pskow,  Twer,  Mogileff, 
and  Archangel ;  to  the  Moscow  one,  those  of  Moscow, 
Jarosslaw,  Rasan,  Kaluga,  Wladimir,  Wologda,  Tula, 
and  Kostroma ;  to  that  of  Kieff,  those  of  KiefF,  Je- 
katerinosslaw,  Tschernigow,  Minsk,  Podolsk,  Smo- 
lensk, Kursk,  Woronesh,  Orlowa,  Poltawa,  the  Vol- 
hynian-Shitomirshian,  and  the  Slobodo-Ukrainian ; 
to  that  of  Kasan,  those  of  Kasan,  Astracan,  To- 
bolsk, Nishegorod,  Wjatka,  Irkutsk,  Tambow, 
Perm,  Pensa,  and  Orenburg.  The  district  and 
parish  schools  within  each  particular  eparchy  were 
made  subordinate  to  the  eparchical  seminary.  The 
end  which  the  great  founder  of  these  establishments 
had  in  view, — the  true  enlightenment  of  the  people 
by  means  of  the  ministers  of  the  Russian  church, — has 
been  amply  fulfilled  in  its  fruits,  with  the  assistance 
of  divine  grace  from  above. 

The  Language. 

§  52.  When  we  come  to  give  an  account  of  the 
changes  which  have  taken  place  in  the  Russian 
language  in  the  nineteenth  century,  we  find  it  is 
absolutely  necessary  to  begin  with  the  end  of  the 
eighteenth.  In  the  last  years  of  Catherine's  reign, 
as  we  have  had  occasion  to  observe,  the  Russian 
prose  and  lighter  style  of  poetry  were  first  formed. 
Between  1770  and  1780,  Bogdanowitsch  sang  and 
Chemnizer  wrote  his  inimitable  fables.  Van  Wisin 
made  the  characters  in  his  comedies  talk  Russian ; 
but  this  was  only  a  weak  and  uncertain  experi- 
ment.    In  the  last  decenniura  but  one  of  the  eigh- 

H 


08  THE  HISTORY  OF 

teenth  century,  the  didactic  and  easy  style  of  Rus- 
sian prose  began  to  be  current  among  the  people 
of  Moscow,  whose  conversational  language  is  re- 
markably pure  and  correct.  At  this  period,  when 
all  felt  the  defects  of  the  language  which  had  hi- 
therto prevailed,  and  after  many  ineffectual  attempts 
had  been  made  to  improve  it,  and  to  get  rid  at 
once  of  the  roughness  of  the  common  dialect,  and 
the  rhetorical  bombast  of  the  book-language,  Ka- 
ramsin  appeared.  In  the  Moscow  Journal  the  pub- 
lic found  what  their  feelings  had  so  long  desired 
in  vain,  a  light,  agreeable,  and  accurate  language. 
All  read  this  prose  with  delight  and  interest;  the 
young  writers  with  ardent  emulation ;  the  adherents 
of  the  old  system,  in  spite  of  themselves.  Karam- 
sin  justly  preferred  the  English  and  French  con- 
struction to  the  long  Latin  and  German  periods, 
with  which  the  Russian  language  had  been  hitherto 
fettered.  He  saw  that  this  style,  which  is  as  free  in 
poetry  and  the  loftier  subjects  as  the  old  style  was 
contracted  and  stiff  in  didactic,  narrative,  or  con- 
versational prose,  was  equally  well  fitted  to  convey 
the  common  popular  expressions,  and  to  follow  the 
logical  construction  of  the  most  polished  European 
languages.  The  most  distinguished  allies  of  Ka- 
ramsin  in  his  efforts  for  this  purpose,  are  Muraw- 
jeff  and  Podschiwaloff.  His  success  created  an  im- 
mense crowd  of  imitators,  who  did  him  much  more 
harm  than  his  enemies  and  opponents.  They  copied 
only  his  weak  side,  and  exaggerated  his  faults. 
They  introduced  barefaced  Gallicisms,  and  exhibited 
whole  lines  of  French  words  in  pages  printed  in  the 
Russian  character.     The  Russian  language  became 


RUSSIAN  LITERATURE.  99 

full  of  strange  phrases  and  foreign  idioms.  At  this 
conjuncture  (1802)  appeared  Schischkoff's  book. 
Upon  the  Old  and  New  Style  of  the  Russian  Lan- 
guage, in  which  he  warmly  attacked  this  injurious 
fashion,  and  exposed  all  the  ridiculous  and  unsuit- 
able novelties  with  which  the  writers  of  the  time, 
in  their  attempts  to  follow  Karamsin,  disfigured  the 
language.  It  must  nevertheless  be  confessed,  that 
this  excellent  critic,  among  a  number  of  happy  re- 
marks, has  in  a  few  points  been  led  by  his  laudable 
zeal  to  drive  his  argument  a  little  too  far.  For  this 
controversy  two  regular  parties  arrayed  themselves 
among  the  Russians  ;  viz.  that  of  Moscow,  which 
followed  Karamsin  ;  and  that  of  St.  Petersburg, 
which  advocated  at  once  the  old  style  of  construc- 
tion, and  the  newly-coined  words.  The  hostilities 
on  both  sides  were  violent  and  incessant ;  in  the 
end  however  a  sort  of  compromise  seems  to  have 
been  made  between  the  parties.  The  new  style, 
introduced  by  Karamsin,  but  purified  from  the  spots 
with  which  the  imitators  of  that  prose-writer  had 
corrupted  it,  assumed  a  now  undisputed  pre-emi- 
nence in  the  Russian  language.  The  Sclavonic 
idioms,  the  expressions  of  SumarokofF,  the  barba- 
rous words  formed  and  terminated  by  caprice,  were 
at  once  rejected,  in  the  same  manner  as  the  mis- 
constructions of  a  Tredjakofskj  and  his  companions 
had  before  been  cast  out  of  the  melting-furnace, 
with  which  Lomonossoff  in  the  middle  of  the  eigh- 
teenth century  had  first  illumined  the  hitherto 
dreary  abode  of  Russian  literature.  The  Ian* 
guage  of  the  histories  of  this  period  give  an  exam- 
ple of  a  truly  Russian,  clear,  pure,  elevated,  and 

h2 


100  THE  HISTORY  OF 

agreeable  style.  At  this  time  the  Russian  language 
seems  only  to  have  wanted  still  the  dialogue  style 
used  in  genteel  comedy. 

At  the  same  period  that  Karamsin  was  working 
a  revolution  in  the  style  of  Russian  prose,  Dmitri- 
jefF  began  to  write  Russian  verse  in  the  narrative 
and  didactic  form.  His  tales,  fables,  satires,  and 
songs,  show  the  possibility  of  giving  to  Russian 
poetry  all  the  lightness  and  neatness  of  the  French. 
The  regularity  and  completeness  of  his  style  justly 
attracted  the  greatest  attention  to  his  poetical 
works. 

These  changes  had  already  received  their  im- 
pulse under  Catherine,  but  extended  their  influ- 
ence and  made  themselves  universally  known  under 
the  reign  of  Alexander,  which  became  a  new  and 
brilliant  era  in  the  history  of  the  Russian  language. 
The  elevation,  the  power,  the  lively  and  happy 
colouring  in  Oseroffs  tragedies,  the  delicacy  and 
feeling  in  Shukofskj's  poems;  the  elegiac  style,  the 
dignity  of  conception,  the  accurate  delineation  of 
nature  exhibited  in  BatjuschkofF's  works ;  the  sim- 
plicity, the  natural  turn,  and  the  wit  in  the  fables 
of  Kriiloff — all  these  found  materials  for  their  ex- 
pression in  the  Russian  language. 

The  high  diplomatic  style  received  at  the  be- 
ginning of  Alexander's  reign  new  life  from  the  pens 
of  eminent  statesmen.  From  the  time  of  the  or- 
ganisation of  the  different  public  offices,  a  striking 
change  took  place  in  the  ordinary  style  used  in 
mercantile  and  legal  transactions.  Clearness  and 
correctness  succeeded  to  the  former  confusion  and 
obscurity  of  the  chancery-language  (38). 


I 


RUSSIAN  LITERATURE.  101 

The  verse-metres  of  LomonossofF  and  Dersha- 
"win  had  prevailed  till  the  nineteenth  century.  In 
the  year  1801,  Wolstokoff  began  to  make  experi- 
ments with  the  metres  of  Sappho,  Horace^  and 
the  other  classics ;  but  the  ear  of  tlie  Russians^ 
accustomed  to  simple  iambics  and  cnoraios,  d-d  ' 
not  appreciate  these  novel  introductions.  In  the 
mean  time,  those  who  were  best  acquainted  with 
ancient  and  modern  literature,  perceived  that  for 
the  accurate  translation  of  the  works  of  antiquity 
into  Russian,  it  was  necessary  to  borrow  the  me- 
tres used  by  the  classics  themselves;  and  in  1813 
Gnaditsch  made  the  first  experiment  of  this  by  his 
translation  of  Homer  into  hexameters,  such  as  had 
formerly  been  used  by  Tredjakofskj.  This  attempt, 
assisted  by  a  favourable  review,  produced  a  bene- 
ficial result ;  and  in  spite  of  the  opposition  made 
by  the  admirers  of  monotonous  antiquity,  Russian, 
literature  inclined  itself  in  favour  of  the  Greek  me- 
tres. Shukofskj  and  Wojejkoff  supported  by  their 
labours  the  example  set  by  Gnaditsch». 

The  theory  of  the  language  continued  singularly 
in  the  rear  of  the  praxis.  Although  the  Russians 
possessed  distinguished  writers  in  the  different  styles 
of  poetry  and  prose,  yet  they  had  not  yet  a  regular 
grammar  adapted  to  the  high  position  on  which 
their  language  already  stood.  The  Russian  Aca- 
demy, by  the  publication  of  their  Grammar  in  1802, 
did  much  to  supply  this  deficiency*^.  The  labours 
of  a  WostokofF,  Sokoloff,  Born,  Nikolskj,  Heim, 
Linde,  Vater,  Tappe,  Puchmaier,  deserve  honour- 

1  A  third  edition  of  this  Grammar  appeared  in  1819^ 


102  THE  HISTORY  OF 

able  mention.     In  aesthetics  and  criticism,  the  fol- 
lowing names  are  distinguished  :  SchischkofF,  Ma- 
karofF,  Martinoff,  MerslakofF,  and  OstolopofF.     In 
'[<:'',  bibliography,;  SopikofF. 

:  ;  ;  ^';  (88);Th(;  nmriifestoes,  ukases,  and  other  public  docu- 
'  •" " '  "mefits,  published  since  the  accession  of  the  late  Em- 
peror Alexander,  may  be  cited  as  models  of  diplo- 
matic style.  Among  these  may  be  particularly  no- 
ticed: the  manifesto  for  establishing  the  rights  of 
the  nobility,  and  of  the  municipal  communities :  that 
upon  the  death  of  the  grand  Princess  Alexandra 
Pawlowna :  that  addressed  to  the  militia  in  1806, 
and  others.  In  these  the  pen  of  Messrs.  Speranskj 
and  Schischkoff,  is  easily  to  be  recognised.  Exam- 
ples of  a  pure,  correct,  elevated,  and  grammatical 
style  are  to  be  met  with  in  the  St.  Petersburg  Jour- 
nal (1804-1809),  which  was  issued  at  the  ministerial 
,     office  for  the  Interior. 

IV. 

Literature. 

§  53.  In  our  last  period  we  left  Russian  litera- 
ture at  the  point  when  the  exalted  legislatress  of 
Russia,  by  her  own  example,  and  by  the  encourage- 
ment of  the  nobles  of  her  court,  was  doing  her  best 
to  promote  its  advances.  Her  high-minded  exer- 
tions were  not  left  unrewarded.  The  Russian  na- 
tion well  responded  to  the  expectations  of  its  Em- 

/press.  In  Moscow  Russian  literature  flourished, 
and  through  the  beneficial  exertions  of  the^uni- 

l  versity  there,  made  considerable  progress.  This 
university  assumed,  from  the  date  of  its  firrt  esta- 
blishment, a  decided  Russian  character ;  and  while 


RUSSIAN  LITERATURE.        ,        103 

it  received  an  extended  acquaintance  with  the 
sciences  from  foreign  Sj^avants,  formed  in  the  de- 
partment of  hterature  distinguished  men  of  its  own. 
To  the  number  of  those  who  were  chiefly  instru- 
mental in  spreading  the  love  of  learning  and  en- 
lightenment in  Russia,  belongs  NowikofF,  who 
founded  a  typographical  society,  by  the  means  of 
which  he  published  a  vast  number  of  original  Rus- 
sian works  and  translations,  increased  ten-fold  the 
book-trade  in  Russia,  and  greatly  added  to  the  en- 
lightenment of  his  countrymen  by  the  influence  of 
the  Moscow  newspaper,  into  which  he  managed  to 
infuse  both  strength  of  matter  and  versatility  of 
style.  In  the  years  1791  and  1792  appeared  the 
Moscow  journal  of  Karamsin.  CheraskofF,  Der- 
shawin,  DmitrijefF  took  part  in  it.  The  new  and 
unaccustomed  prose  of  the  editor  attracted  the 
pubhc.  Nor  was  there  any  lack  of  imitators — as 
before  a  whole  legion  of  lyric  poets  attempted  by 
their  turgidity  and  bombast  to  equal  the  elevation 
and  sublimity  of  Dershawin,  so  in  the  present  time 
dull  prose  writers  sought  to  compare  their  morbid 
sensibility,  their  lachrymose  tales,  and  afiected  tone, 
with  the  simple,  natural,  and  agreeable  descriptions 
of  Karamsin.  Some  of  them  indeed  preferred  the 
level  road,  and  gradually  acquired  a  pure  and 
correct  taste  ;  but  others  remained  in  their  works 
a  solemn  lesson  to  young  writers,  how  Russian 
should  not  be  written.  At  the  end  of  the  eigh- 
teenth century,  the  political  horizon  was  overspread 
with  dark  clouds.  The  tempest  of  revolution  burst 
over  Europe,  and  the  peaceful  muses  concealed 
themselves.     Their  voice  was  now  seldom  heard. 


104  THE  HISTORY  OF 

With  the  first  blush  of  dawning  peace,  at  the  first 
^  year  of  the  nineteenth  century,  Alexander  ascended 
the  throne.  At  the  restoration  of  tranquilhty,  Rus- 
sian literature  took  a  new  spring,  through  the  re- 
newal of  its  commerce  with  foreign  countries,  and 
the  suppression  of  the  restrictions  of  the  press.  In 
1802  Karamsin  published  first  the  European  Mes- 
senger, which  diffused  a  mass  of  useful  information 
and  greatly  facihtated  the  improvement  of  taste 
and  the  cultivation  of  style.  In  1803  appeared 
Oseroff's  tragedies ;  their  new  and  striking  manner 
excited  a  powerful  sensation  among  his  contempo- 
raries, and  a  whole  host  of  imitators.  From  1805 
forward,  appeared  the  poems  of  Shukofskj  and  Bat- 
juschkofF,  which  opened  another  new  and  entirely 
unknown  path  on  the  Russian  Parnassus.  By  the 
force  of  their  talents,  these  writers  removed  from 
Russian  poetry  the  false  and  strained  sensibility  of 
former  times,  and  purified  the  public  taste  by  giving 
a  model  of  truly  good  taste  in  feeling,  in  thought, 
in  design,  in  arrangement,  and  in  style.  About 
this  time  the  Russian  writers  felt  the  necessity  of 
studying  the  classical  authors,  as  the  only  sure 
guides  in  the  field  of  literature  and  poetry.  When, 
soon  after  the  pohtical  storm  again  broke  out,  it 
checked  indeed  the  progress  of  Russian  hterature, 
but  was  unable  to  arrest  it  entirely.  In  1809  the 
society  for  encouraging  the  study  of  the  Russian 
language,  and  in  1810  the  society  of  the  lovers  of 
hterature  (see  above,  annot.  30,  31)  were  founded, 
the  first  at  St.  Petersburg,  the  other  at  Moscow. 
About  this  period  appeared  the  Fables  of  KriilofF. 
The  events  of  1812  and  1813  arrested  for  a  time 


RUSSIAN  LITERATURE.  105 

the  advance  of  literature.    All  the  Russian  authors, 
preferring  the  service  of  their  country  to  that  of 
the  muses,  abandoned  their  peaceful  occupations. 
One  part  of  them,  choosing  the  profession  of  arms, 
stood  in  the  ranks  of  the  champions  of  their  native 
land;  the  others  consecrated  all  their  power  to  the 
animation  and  increase  of  national  spirit  and  pa- 
triotism among  the  people.     After  the  restoration 
of  peace,  the   occupations  of  tranquil  times,  and 
amongst  them  literature  and  science,  were  resumed. 
The  friends  of  literature  founded  new  societies,  and 
resuscitated  the  spirit  of  the  old  ones.     The  fruits 
of  the  establishment  or  improvement  of  the  uni- 
versities by  Alexander  showed  themselves.     The 
upper  classes  of  the  Russian  population  took  an  in- 
terest in  the  success  of  their  native  literature,  and 
the  lower  orders  sought  to  ennoble  their  own  cha- 
racter by  participating  its  instructions.     The  bene- 
ficial results  of  these  exertions  and  of  this  zeal, 
could  not  be  doubtful.     To  express  in  few  words 
the  characteristics  of  the  Russian  literature  in  re- 
cent times,  it  might  be  said,  that  under  the  Em- 
press Elizabeth  the  sciences,  the  arts,  and  general 
literature  belonged  exclusively  to  the  court :  that 
under  Catherine   the    court   occupied   itself  with 
them,  because  it  was  anxious   to  convey  a  par- 
ticipation in  the  same  pursuits  to  the  people  by 
their  example  ;  but  that  at  the  present  day  the 
Russians  themselves  find  their  glory  and  their  en- 
joyment in  these  gifts  of  heaven,  and  bless  Alex- 
ander, who  had  the  magnanimity  to  furnish  them 
the  means  of  reaping  the  delicious  fruits  of  peace 
and  enlightenment. 


106  THE  HISTORY  OF 

The  Russian  church,  which  devotes  much  pains 
to  the  education  of  the  people  through  the  channel 
of  an  educated  priesthood,  reckons  many  distin- 
guished men  in  its  ranks,  who,  by  their  talents  and 
assiduity,  confer  honour  on  their  order,  and  glory 
on  their  country  The  eloquence  of  a  Filaret,  an 
Amwrossj,  and  many  other  ornaments  of  the  pulpit, 
at  the  same  time  that  it  edified  their  Christian 
hearers,  enriched  the  literature  of  their  country  by 
supplying  a  model  of  sublime  conception,  and 
beautiful  style. 

Russian  history  assumed,  especially  through  the 
exertions  of  Schlozer,  an  entirely  new  aspect.  This 
eminent  author  explained  to  the  Russians  the 
secret,  and  the  high  value,  of  historical  criticism. 
The  fables  vanished,  with  which  ignorance,  super- 
stition, and  false  national  vanity  had  been  accus- 
tomed to  adorn,  or  rather  to  invent,  the  history  of 
Russia,  since  Russia,  rich  in  really  great  deeds  and 
characters,  no  longer  stood  in  need  of  such  fables. 
The  work  of  Karamsin,  to  which  he  devoted  the 
greatest  part  of  his  life,  is  a  great  and  endurable 
monument  of  his  talents,  as  it  is  a  proof  of  the 
noble  love  of  truth  displayed  by  the  highminded 
Alexander.  One  of  the  highest  places  in  the  list 
of  writers  on  Russian  history  must  be  assigned  to 
the  excellent  Eugenj.  Special  notice  also  might 
well  be  claimed  by  the  labours  of  the  metropo- 
litan Sestrenzewitsch-Bogusch,  the  Count  Mussin- 
Puschkin,  of  Bantiisch-Kamenskj,  Malinofskj,  Kat- 
schenofskj,  Timkofskj,  Buturlin,  Richter,  S.  GHnka, 
Ewers,  Krug,  Lehrberg,  Adelung,  and  Wichmann, 
in   history ;  and   by  those   of  Storch,   Hermann, 


RUSSIAN  LITERATURE. 


107 


and  Sablofskj,  in  statistics.  The  Count  Rumanzoff 
earned  for  himself  an  imperishable  monument  in 
the  pantheon  of  Russian  history. 

The  Russian  theatre  witnessed  the  appearance 
of  singular  talents  in  the  person  of  Semenoff,  who 
having  had  no  prototype,  has  unhappily  left  no 
successor.  Yet  a  hope  may  be  expressed,  that 
Russia,  rich  in  talent  of  every  kind,  will  not  allow 
herself  to  be  reckoned  behind  other  nations  in  the 
cultivation  of  the  dramatic  art.  The  credit  of  the 
Russian  theatre  at  St.  Petersburg  is  materially  owing 
to  the  assiduity  of  the  distinguished  dramatic  writer 
Prince  Schachofskoj. 

Writers. 

§  54.  We  have  given  above  the  names  of  the 
writers  who  have  done  most  either  in  the  theory  of 
language,  or  in  the  departments  of  history.  In 
the  elegant  literature  of  the  present  century,  the 
following  claim  also  a  distinguished  position. 


1.  Karamsin. 

2.  Dmitrijeff. 

3.  murawjeff. 

4.    OSEROFF. 

5.  schischkoff. 

6.  podobadoff. 

7.  Dessnizki. 

8.  Drossdoff. 

9.  Protassoff. 
10.  Kruloff. 


11.  Shukofskj. 

12.  Batjuschkoff. 

13.  Wasemskj. 

14.  Schachofskoj. 

15.  Gnaditsch. 

16.  Merslakoff. 

17.  ismailoff. 

18.  wojejkoff. 

19.  puschkin. 


108  THE  HISTORY  OF 

Continuation. 

§  b6.  The  limits  of  this  short  history  do  not 
permit  the  author  in  this  place  to  give  a  detailed 
account  of  all  the  writers  who  have  been,  and  are 
illustrious  in  our  own  times  in  the  belles-lettres  and 
in  poetry.  We  must  confine  ourselves  to  merely 
enumerating  them  by  name.  In  lyrical  and  de- 
scriptive poetry  during  Alexander's  time,  the  fol- 
lowing obtained  well-merited  applause.  Panin, 
Pankratj,  Sumarokoff,  Burinskj,  MilonofF:  at  pre- 
sent the  most  distinguished  living  writers  in  the 
same  style  are  Dawiidoff,  Puschkin,  SchatrofF, 
Prince  Gortschakoff,  Bunina,  SchichmatofF,  Pana- 
jeff,  and  a  few  others  of  less  note.  In  dramatic 
poetry  Krukofskoj  follows  immediately  after  Ose- 
rofF.  LobanofF,  Kokoschkin,  Chmelnizkj,  Katenin, 
and  Wisskowatoff  are  distinguished  by  their  trans- 
lations. Il'jin,  Newachowitsch,  and  IwanofF  by  their 
dramas  in  prose.  Among  the  prose  writers,  ho- 
nourable mention  is  due  to  the  excellent  translators 
of  the  classics,  as  Murawjeff-Apostol,  Jastrebzoff, 
and  Destuniss.  The  chief  writers  on  military 
topics  are  F.  Glinka,  PissarefF,  Golownin,  and 
Bronefskj.  In  the  lighter  kinds  of  prose,  and 
especially  in  translations,  the  first  place  should  be 
given  to  W.  IsmailofF  and  to  Prince  SchalikofF. 

Conclusion. 

§  bO).  In  conclusion  we  should  have  wished  to 
give  a  general  review  of  the  present  state  of  Rus- 
sian literature  ;  but  it  would  be  in  vain.  Every 
day  the  Russian  language  is  enriched,  the  litera- 


RUSSIAN  LITERATURE.  *      109 

ture  adorns  itself  with  new  productions  of  Russian 
authors ;  as,  for  instance,  a  Bulgarin,  a  Gretsch, 
an  Oldekop,  a  Panajeff,  a  Raitsch,  a  Ssomoff,  and 
a  ZertelefF,  and  is  hastening  on  with  giant  strides 
towards  such  an  eminence,  as  will  make  it  truly- 
worthy  of  these  illustrious  names. 


THE  HISTORY 
OF  RUSSIAN  LITERATURE. 


BOOK  II. 
LEXICON  OF  RUSSIAN  AUTHORS. 


INTRODUCTION. 


Containing  a  review  of  the  different  hinds  of  productions 
of  the  Russians  in  prose  and  verse. 

A.  In  Prose. 

I.  Letters.  The  best  Russian  letters  extant  are 
those  of  Van  Wisin,  Karamsin,  and  MurawjefF. 

II.  Dialogues: 

1)  Dramatic:  chiefly  those  of  Van  Wisin  and  Krii- 
lofF. 

2)  Philosophical:  hut  few;  the  best  in  this  style  is 
the  dialogue  of  Karamsin,  Upon  Good  Fortune. 

III.  Descriptions  :  such  were  left  by  Karamsin ; 
for  instance.  Die  Troizer  Lawra,  or.  The  Con- 
vent of  Troizka,  and  -An  Account  of  the  Desert 
of  Arabia,  after  Buffon;  by  BatjuschkofF,  Sketches 
of  Finland,  and  On  the  Character  of  Lomonos- 
soff;  by  Martunoff,  in  imitation  of  Du  Paty,  The 
Death  of  Seneca,  and  The  Conflagration;  by 
Wasemskj,  Dershawin. 


112 

IV.  Historical  Works  : 

1)  Ldtopisse :  the  Russian  history  possesses  many 
Latopisse,  or  Chronicles  of  the  Old  and  Middle 
Ages  ;  beginning  with  Nestor. 

2)  Practical  History : 

a)  Biography :  this  is  very  rare  in  Russian  litera- 
ture. The  most  distinguished  Russian  charac- 
ters, as  Peter  the  Great,  Catherine  the  Second, 
SuwarrofF,  LomonossofF,  are  still  left  without 
their  biographers.  Van  Wisin  and  Podschiwa- 
lofl'  began  their  autobiographies,  but  did  not 
carry  them  on  to  the  end. 

b)  Political  and  National  History .  Before  all,  Ka- 
ramsin  is  distinguished.  Lomonossoff  was  the 
first  example  of  an  elegant  historical  style.  Still 
earlier  historians  are  TatischtschefF  and  Bol- 
tin.  Among  the  most  recent  may  be  reckoned, 
the  venerable  Eugenj,  Count  Mussin-Puschkin, 
Katschenofskj,  Olenin,  Malinofskj,  S.  N.  Glinka. 

c)  Sacred  and  Ecclesiastical  Histories.  As  speci- 
mens of  this  branch  we  may  mention,  Platon, 
Filaret,  Amwrossj. 

d)  Scientific  Histories.  To  this  class  belongs  Rich- 
ter's  History  of  Medicine  in  Russia. 

e)  Universal  History.  There  are  only  attempts  ; 
as  for  instance,  that  of  Kaidanoff;  further  than 
mere  translations. 

3)  Philosophical  History :  there  are  only  attempts 
under  this  head  likewise. 

V.  Instruction  Books  : 

1)  The  Manuals  of  Lomonossoff,  Rumofskj,  BarssofF, 
GurjefF,  Oserezkofskj,  Sewergin,  SewastjanofF, 
Gamaleja,  StrachofF,  Nikolskj,  PodschiwalofF, 
MerslakofF,  Born,  SokolofF. 


113 

2)  Treatises :  of  Lomonossoff,  Karanisin,  Muraw- 
jefF,  Filaret,  Shukofskj,  Gnaditsch,  BatjuschkofF. 

3)  Critiques,  or  Reviews :  of  Karamsin,  SchisclikofF, 
MakarofF,  Benizkj,  MerslakofF,  Katschenofskj. 

VI.  Orations  :  Russian  literature  is  rich  in  these 
of  every  description. 

1)  Clerical:  here  we  should  make  particular  and 
honourable  mention  of  Feofan  Prokopowitsch,  Ge- 
deon,  Platon,  Anastassj,  Georgj-Konifskj,  Lew- 
anda,  Augustin,  Michael  (Metropolitan  of  St.  Pe- 
tersburg), Filaret,  Amwrossj,  Eugenj. 

2)  Profane :  those  delivered  by  Lomonossoff  and 
Karamsin ;  and  the  academical  addresses  of  many 
professors  at  the  Moscow  University. 

VII.  Diplomatic  Documents  :  the  best  specimens 
of  style,  are  the  manifestoes  and  ukases,  etc. 
which  were  composed  by  Schischkoff,  Speranskj, 
WostokofF,  and  others. 

B.  In  Verse. 
a)  Lyrical  Poetry. 

I.  Odes  :  the  most  successful  writers  of  odes  among 
the  Russian  poets,  are  Lomonossoff,  PetrofF,  Der- 
shawin  ;  after  them,  come  DmitrijefF  and  Kap- 
nist.  Also  CherasskofF,  BobrofF,  MerslakofF,  and 
WostokofF,  wrote  odes  which  deserve  consider- 
able praise. 

II.  Hymns  :  such  as  were  written  by  LomonossofF, 
Dershawin,  DmitrijefF,  Karamsin,  ShukofFskj. 

III.  DiTHYRAMBics  I  the  Russiaus  possess  nothing 
worth  mentioning  in  this  class. 


114 

IV.  Lyrical-epic  poems  were  composed  by  Der- 
shawiii  and  DmitrijefF. 

V.  Songs  :  those  of  Dmitrijeff,  Neledinskj-Melezkj, 
Karamsin,  and  Shukofskj. 

VI.  Cantatas  :  nothing  particular. 

VII.  Elegies:  principally  by  Batjuschkoff,  and  Shu- 
kofskj. 

VIII.  Poetical  Epistles  :  those  of  DmitrijefF,  Ka- 
ramsin,  Batjuschkoff,  Wasemskj,  Shukofskj. 

IX.  Smaller  Lyrical  Pieces  : 

1)  The  Sonnet  is  peculiar  to  the  southern  nations  of 
Europe. 

2)  Triolets :  Karamsin  has  tried  this  style. 

3)  Rondos :  Anna  Petrowna  Bunina. 

4)  Epigrams :  chiefly  DmitrijefF,  Batjuschkoff,  Wa- 
semskj ;  besides  these,  W.  Puschkin,  Ruban,  Ka- 
ramsin, Neledinskj-Melezkj. 

b)  Epic  Poetry. 

I.  Heroic  Poetry:  Russian  literature  possesses  two 
heroic  poems  of  CherafskofF,  namely.  The  Ros- 
siad,  and  Wladimir.  LomonossofF  wrote  only 
the  two  first  cantos  of  his  Peter  the  Great.  The 
most  classical  translations  in  this  class,  are  Kos- 
trofF,  Gnaditsch,  and  WojejkofF. 

II.  Romantic  Epop^ia  :  to  this  head  must  be  as- 
cribed the  Psyche  of  Bogdanowitsch. 

III.  .Comic  Epop^ia  :  there  is  not  much  worth 
mentioning.  The  best  is  the  piece  called  Dressed 
Fur-hides,  by  Schachofskoj. 


115 

IV.  Poetical  Narratives  :  such  were  left  by  Dmi- 
trijeff,  Shukofskj,  Batjuschkoff,  P.  Sumarokoff. 
Besides  this,  the  Fables  of  Kriiloff,  IsmailofF,  and 
others. 

V.  Ballads  :  the  first  distinguished  ballad-writer 
among  the  Russians  was  Shukofskj,  who  intro- 
duced this  class  of  Russian  poetry. 

c)  Romantic  Poetry. 

I.  The  Romance  :  good  romances,  principally  his- 
torical, have  appeared  but  recently  among  the 
Russians.  Bulgarin's  I  wan  Wuishigin  is  among 
the  best.  Those  of  Kalaschnikoff,  Masskolskj, 
Sagoskin,  and  Sokoff,  deserve  perusal. 

II.  Prosaic  Narratives  :  by  Karamsin  and  Shu- 
kofskj ;  also  by  Benizkj. 

III.  Mahrchen,  or  Traditional  Tales:  before  all 
others  the  oriental  deserve  mention.  Some  mo- 
dern Russian  writers  have  successfully  imitated 
this  style  ;  for  instance,  DanilofF,  and  L'woff. 

d)  Dramatic  Poetry, 

I.  Tragedy  :  the  first  regular  tragedies  were  writ- 
ten by  Sumarokoff.  Knashnin  followed  next. 
But  the  best  writer  in  this  style  among  the  Rus- 
sians is  Oseroff. 

II.  Comedy:  the  best  comedies  are  those  of  Van 
Wisin,  Knashnin,  Prince  Schachofskoj,  and  Gri- 
bojedoff. 

III.  The  Drama  :  Il'in  and  Nenachowitsch  distin- 


guished themselves  in  this  branch. 


i2 


116 

IV.  Operas  : 

1)  Grand  Operas :  the  best  in  Russian  is  Ilja  Mur- 
omez,  by  Kriiloff. 

2)  Operettas  and  Vaudevilles :  to  this  class  belong 
The  Miller,  by  AblessimoiF;  and  sundry  ope- 
rettas and  vaudevilles  by  the  Prince  Schachofs- 
koj. 

3)  Melodramas :  there  are  none  worth  mentioning. 

e)  Descriptive  Poetry, 

I.  Descriptive,  or  Rural  Poetry  :  there  are  no 
original  Russian  poems  of  this  class.  Among  the 
translators  in  this  branch,  WojejkofF  is  the  most 
distinguished ;  likewise  Burinskj. 

II.  Idylls  and  Eclogues  :  MerslakofF,  Meschts- 
chefskj,  PanajefF,  have  written  these  sorts  of 
poems. 

f)  Didactic  Poetry. 

I.  Didactic,  or  Instructive  Poems:  Russian  litera- 
ture can  boast  no  very  great  performances  in 
this  line.  The  best  Russian  didactic  poem  is 
entitled  The  Fruits  of  Knowledge,  by  Cherass- 
koff.  WojejkofF  has  also  attempted  the  same 
style. 

II.  Gnomic  Poetry  :  the  Russians  found  the  model 
for  their  Gnomic  poems,  or  proverbs,  in  the 
Scriptures ;  some  good  specimens  are  scattered 
amongst  the  works  of  their  principal  poets  ;  but 
separate  poems  in  this  class  are  wanting.  The 
traditional  sayings  and  metrical  proverbs  of  the 
people  may  be  reckoned  among  this  class. 


117 

III.  Satires  :  in  this  class  Kantimir  and  DmitrijefF 
are  excellent.  After  them  follow  Marin,  Milo- 
nofF,  Kapniss,  and  WojejkofF. 

IV.  Fables  :  the  Russians  possess  a  rich  store  of 
beautiful  fables.  The  first  fable  poet  was  Suma- 
rokoff.  The  best  are  Chemnizer,  Dmitrijeff,  and 
Kriiloff. 


A  LEXICON 
OF  RUSSIAN  AUTHORS. 


[Ablessimoff  (Alexander  Anissimowitsch)  was  in- 
lebted  to  a  happy  accident  for  the  development  of 
his  genius ;  for  he  was  engaged  in  the  service  of 
SumarokofF,  and  by  being  often  employed  by  him 
to  write  out  fair  copies  of  his  poems,  he  began 
first  to  feel  in  himself  a  strong  turn  for  poetry. 
He   completed  several   smaller  poems,  as   fables, 
elegies,  epigrams,  and  the  like ;  but  the  most  re- 
markable of  his  productions  is  the  comic  opera 
called  The  Miller,  which  was  performed  for  the 
first  time  in  1779,  and  had  a  run  of  twenty-seven 
consecutive  nights  at  the   Moscow  theatre.     Its 
simplicity,    humour,    and   true    representation   of 
Russian   manners,    have   still   attractions   for   the 
Russian  public  ;  and  this  was  the  part  in  which  the 
celebrated  Russian  actor  Krutizki  (born  at  Moscow 
1754,  died  1803;  compare  Richter's  Russian  Mis- 
cellany, §  ix.  p.  145,)  was  so  inimitable.     Besides 
this  he  wrote  the  opera  called  Gain  through  Loss ; 
a  comedy,  entitled  The  Feast  of  the  Chancery- 
Clerks;    another,  called  Marching  from  Winter- 
Quarters  ;  and  a  dialogue,  named  The  Pilgrim,  for 
the  opening  of  the  new  Peter's  theatre  in  Moscow, 
in  1780.     Ablessimoff  was  also  a  soldier,  and  had 
the  rank  of  a  field-officer.     He  died  at  Moscow  in 
the  year  1784. 


120  A  LEXICON  OF 

Abraham  (Paliziin),  a  pater  of  the  Sergian  mo- 
nastery of  Troizka,  and  the  distinguished  co- 
operator  of  Kosma,  Minin,  and  Posharskj  in  the 
great  work  of  delivering  his  native  country  from  a 
foreign  yoke,  entered  the  monastical  order  at  the 
end  of  the  sixteenth  century,  and  died  between  the 
years  1621  and  1629.  A  description  of  his  politi- 
cal transactions  does  not  fall  within  the  province 
of  this  work.  He  wrote  the  history  of  the  un- 
happy, but  yet  glorious  times  for  Russia,  in  which 
he  lived,  in  the  following  work.  An  Account  of  the 
Siege  of  the  Sergian  Monastery  of  Troizka,  by  the 
Poles  and  Lithuanians,  and  of  the  Troubles  which 
broke  out  in  Russia  consequent  upon  it.  This  book 
was  published  at  Moscow  in  1784,  in  4to. 

AcHMATOFF,  author  of  a  Historical,  Chronologi- 
cal, and  Geographical  Atlas,  intended  as  a  compa- 
nion to  Karamsin's  History  of  the  Russian  Empire. 
The  first  part  was  published  at  St.  Petersburg  in 
1829,  and  the  Emperor  Alexander  contributed  a 
large  sum  to  help  to  defray  the  expenses.  The 
whole  work  will  contain  seventy-one  parts,  of  which 
thirty-six  are  included  in  the  first  volume.  Price 
fifty  rubles. 

Adelung,  councillor  of  state,  etc.  He  assisted 
Storch  in  the  composition  of  his  work  called  A 
Review  of  Russian  Literature  from  1801  to  1805, 
which  was  written  in  the  Russian  language,  and 
published  at  St.  Petersburg  in  1808. 

Agathon,  a  priest  of  the  church  of  Sophia  at 
Novogorod,  composed,  in  the  year  1540,  a  com- 
plete cycle  for  Easter  for  8000  years,  and  fifty- 
eight  tables,  with  copious  explanations,  which  shew 


RUSSIAN  AUTHORS.  121 

a  deep  acquaintance  for  those  times  with  the  prin- 
ciples of  mathematics,  and  the  computation  of 
calendars.  A  manuscript  of  these  is  preserved  in 
the  library  of  St.  Sophia. 

Alexijeff  (Peter),  an  arch-priest,  is  author  of  a 
Russian  Church-Lexicon,  which  was  printed  at  the 
University  of  Moscow  in  1773,  and  of  which  a  third 
edition  came  out  in  five  parts  at  St.  Petersburg, 
A.  D.  1817.  (Compare  Bacmeister's  Russian  Li- 
terature, vol.  ii.  p.  447.) 

Alipanoff,  a  Russian  serf,  distinguished  as  a 
writer  of  fables  in  verse.  The  Academy  of  St. 
Petersburg,  which  published  his  poems  in  1834, 
awarded  him  a  silver  medal  as  a  mark  due  to  his 
merit. 

Amwrossj  (Ambrosius),  Podobadoff,  metropoli- 
tan of  Novogorod,  senior  member  of  the  Holy 
Synod,  and  of  the  Commission  for  the  Clerical 
Schools,  also  knight  of  several  orders,  w^s  born 
on  the  30th  of  November,  1742,  in  the  govern- 
mental-department of  Wladimir,  and  derived  his 
education  from  the  seminary  of  Troizka,  where  he 
became  a  pupil  in  the  year  1764.  In  1768  he  took 
orders,  and  after  being  consecrated  a  hiero-mo- 
nach,  was  appointed  preacher  to  the  Clerical 
Academy  at  Moscow.  In  this  office  he  acquired 
universal  approbation,  and  made  himself  more  par- 
ticularly known  by  a  funeral  sermon,  which  he 
deKvered  over  the  body  of  the  archbishop  of 
Moscow  and  Kaluga,  Ambrosius  (Amwrossj). 
The  latter  was  born  Oct.  17th,  1708,  and  his  fune- 
ral was  celebrated  on  the  16th  of  Sept.  1771. 
He  had  been   put  to  death  by  the  populace  of 


132  A  LEXICON  OF 

Moscow.      In   the    same    year  that   this   sermon 
was   preached,   its   author  was   made   prsefect   of 
the   Academy,    and    in    1774    rector    and    archi- 
mandrite of  the   Saikonopaskish  Monastery.      In 
1775    he   attracted   the   particular   notice   of  the 
Empress  Catharine,  by  a  beautiful  discourse  which 
he  delivered  in   her   presence.     In    1778  he  was 
consecrated   bishop    of  Sawsk,   and   in    this   new 
office  he  displayed  a  warm  zeal  for  the  extension 
and  perfection   of  places  of  religious   education. 
In  1785  he  found  himself  appointed  to  the  arch- 
bishopric of  Kasan,  and  during  ten  years  he  con- 
tinued to  display  an  undiminished  assiduity  in  per- 
forming the  duties  of  the  eparchy   entrusted   to 
him.     In  1795  he  was  summoned  to  St.  Petersburg 
as  assessor  of  the  Holy  Synod ;  in  1799  he  was  no- 
minated archbishop  of  St.  Petersburg,  Esthonia,  and 
Finland  ;  and  in  1800  he  received,  in  addition,  the 
eparchy  of  No vogorod.     In  the  year  1801  he  was 
preferred  to  the  rank  of  metropolitan.     The  Em- 
peror Paul  rewarded  his  zealous  services  with  the 
order  of  St.  Alexander  and  St.  Andrew ;   and  in 
1808  the  Emperor  Alexander  presented  him  with 
the  order  of  St.  Wladimir,  CI.  I.,  on  the  happy 
termination  of  the  labours  of  the  committee  for  the 
building  and  improvement  of  clerical  schools.     In 
January,   1818,  on  his  own  request,  he  was  re- 
leased  from   the    administration    of   the    eparchy 
of  St.  Petersburg,  but  still  retained  that  of  Novo- 
gorod.    On  the  6th  of  May  he  came  to  Novogorod, 
and  died  there  on  the  27th  of  the  same  month,  in 
the  77th  year  of  his  age.     Of  his  writings  the  fol- 
lowing have  appeared  in  print :  1.  An  Introduction 


RUSSIAN  AUTHORS.  123 

to  the  Study  of  the  Holy  Scriptures,  both  of  the 
Old  and  New  Testament,  Moscow,  1779  ;  a  second 
and  improved  edition  at  St.  Petersburg,  1803.  2. 
A  Collection  of  Discourses  tending  to  edification, 
delivered  on  various  occasions,  three  parts,  Moscow, 
1810 ;  second  edition,  1816.  3.  A  Collection  of 
Tributary,  Congratulatory,  and  other  Ceremonial 
Discourses  delivered  at  different  times  in  the  pre- 
sence of  members  of  the  Imperial  Family,  Moscow, 
1810  ;  second  and  enlarged  edition,  1816. 

Amwrossi  (ProtassofF),  archbishop  of  Kasan 
and  Simbirsk,  and  knight,  wa^  born  in  the 
eparchy  of  Moscow,  1769.  He  received  his  edu- 
cation at  the  seminary  of  Troizka ;  from  the  year 
1790  he  became  a  pupil  in  the  academy  at  Moscow. 
In  1794  he  took  the  tonsure,  and  in  1797  was  ap- 
pointed praefect  of  that  academy.  In  the  year 
1799  he  was  called  from  the  Archimandrite-Sergian- 
Hermitage  to  be  rector  of  the  Alexander-Newskj  Se- 
minary; in  1804  he  was  made  bishop  of  Tula  and 
Balew,  and  in  1807  archbishop  of  Kasan  and  Sim- 
birsk. Different  sermons  and  discourses,  delivered 
by  this  prelate  during  his  official  service  at  various 
places,  are  to  be  found  singly  in  periodical  publi- 
cations— for  instance,  in  the  European  Messenger, 
and  in  The  Son  of  his  Country,  but  they  have  not 
yet  been  printed  collectively. 

IAnastassjewitsch  (Wassilj-Grigorjewitsch),  born 
at  Kieff,  1775,  is  known  by  his  translation  of  the 
Phaedra  of  Racine ;  by  his  editorship  of  the  journal 
called  The  Beehive,  in  the  years  1811  and  1812, 
as  well  as  by  many  critical  and  bibliographical 
articles  in  various  periodicals.     He  arranged  the 


I2i<  A  LEXICON  OF 

first  systematic  catalogue  of  Russian  books,  with 
an  alphabetical  classification  of  authors,  which  ap- 
peared in  print  at  St.  Petersburg  in  1820.  Com- 
pare the  article  Sopikoff. 

Anastassj  (Bratanofskj),  archbishop  of  Astra- 
can,  and  knight  of  the  order  of  St.  Anne,  CI.  I., 
member  of  the  Holy  Synod,  and  of  the  Russian 
Academy,  was  born  in  the  neighbourhood  of  KiefF, 
and  in  the  country  town  of  B  ryschewka,  the  16th 
of  October,  1761.  He  studied  at  the  seminary 
of  Perejaslawl ;  after  the  conclusion  of  his  course 
in  science  he  was  appointed  teacher  in  poetry  and 
rhetoric  at  several  seminaries,  and  last  of  all  in  the 
Alexander-Newskj  Seminary.  In  the  same  year, 
1790,  he  took  the  monastic  habit.  In  1792  he  was 
appointed  religious  teacher  to  the  Land  Cadet  Corps. 
He  was  next  made  archimandrite  to  the  monastery 
of  Selenez ;  in  1795  to  the  Sergian  Hermitage  of 
Troizka ;  and  in  1 796  to  the  Nowosposkischian 
Monastery  of  Moscow,  and  also  a  member  of  the 
Holy  Synod.  In  1797  he  received  the  dignity 
of  bishop  of  White  Russia,  and  the  order  of  St. 
Anne,  CI.  I.  In  1801  he  was  appointed  arch- 
bishop. In  1805  he  was  called  to  St.  Petersburg 
as  assessor  of  the  Holy  Synod,  and  at  the  end 
of  the  same  year  translated  to  Astracan,  where 
he  died  on  the  9th  of  December,  1816.  Of  his 
works,  the  following  have  appeared  in  print. 
1.  Discourses  tending  to  Edification,  held  at  dif- 
ferent times  and  places,  four  parts,  8vo.  The 
first  part  appeared  in  1796,  at  St.  Petersburg;  the 
second  part  in  1799;  the  third  part  in  1806;  and 
the  fourth  part,  1807,  at  Moscow.     2.  An  Intro- 


RUSSIAN  AUTHORS.  125 

duction  to  the  composition  of  Sermons,  written  in 
Latin,  and  entitled  Tractatus  de  concionis  disposi- 
tiojiibus  formandis,  printed  at  Moscow  in  1806,  in 
8vo.  Besides  this  he  translated  from  the  French, 
A  Caution  against  Infidelity  and  Ungodliness,  St. 
Petersburg,  1794.  2.  The  Lamentations  of  the 
Prophet  Jeremiah,  a  poem  of  Arnaud,  St.  Peters- 
burg, 1797.  3.  The  true  Messias,  or  Proofs  of 
the  Divine  Mission  of  Jesus  Christ,  and  his 
Divinity,  Moscow,  1801.  And  4.  An  Essay  on 
Perfectibility,  from  Formey,  St.  Petersburg,  1805. 
Anastassj  occupies  one  of  the  first  places  in  the 
list  of  Russian  preachers.  His  sermons,  in  point 
of  style,  are  the  best  which  had  appeared  up  to 
this  time.  He  softened  the  rough  language  which 
it  had  been  considered  proper  to  employ  till  his 
time  in  works  of  this  description,  and  approx- 
imated more  to  the  modern  Russian  language, 
used  in  polite  conversation.  His  best  sermons 
are  those  delivered  in  St.  Petersburg  from  1792  to 
1796,  and  make  up  the  first  part  of  his  Edifying 
Discourses. 

Andre  J  (LiislofF),  a  priest  of  the  town  of  Smo- 
lensk, lived  in  the  second  half  of  the  seventeenth 
century.  He  composed  a  History  of  Scythia,  in 
five  books,  and  employed  in  its  construction  Ro- 
man, Polish,  and  Russian  authorities.  He  himself 
deposited  a  copy  of  this  work  in  1692  in  the  pa- 
triarchal library,  and  remarked  in  the  title-page, 
that  he  had  first  written  it  in  the  Sclavonic-Polish, 
or  White-Russian  language,  and  afterwards  trans- 
lated it  into  Sclavonic-Russian.  This  history  was 
published  by  Nowikoff",  at  St.  Petersburg,  in  1770, 


126  A  LEXICON  OF 

and  afterwards  in  1787  at  Moscow,  in  three  vo- 
lumes. 

Arsenj  (Hieromonach),  lived  at  Moscow  in  the 
time  of  the  Czar  Michael  Feodorowitsch,  founded 
there  the  Greek  and  Latin  Sclavonic  school,  and 
introduced  the  use  of  fine  long-shaped  letters  in 
writing,  which  in  the  Moscow  synodal  typography- 
still  retain  the  name  of  the  Arsenjic  alphabet. 

Arsenj  (Satanofski).     See  Epiphanj. 

B. 

Bacmeister  (Hartman  Ludwig  Christian),  coun- 
cillor of  state,  and  knight;  was  born  in  1730,  in 
the  province  of  Ratzeburg,  lived  till  1778  as  inspec- 
tor of  the  Gymnasium  at  St.  Petersburg,  and  from 
1786  to  1801  as  councillor  in  the  office  for  expe- 
diting the  public  revenues.  From  1772  to  1789 
he  was  engaged  in  the  publication  of  the  well-known 
Russian  hbrary,  in  eleven  volumes ;  which  contains 
information  respecting  all  the  books  which  had  then 
appeared  in  Russia.  He  also  translated  into  Ger- 
man, The  Journal  of  Peter  the  Great,  and  The 
Biography  of  Count  B.  P.  Scheremetjeff,  written 
by  Miiller.  In  the  Russian  language  he  pub- 
lished at  St.  Petersburg  in  1771,  Topographical 
Notices  respecting  the  Empire  of  Russia,  in 
four  volumes.  He  died  in  1806,  aged  seventy-six 
years. 

^  Bacmeister  (Johann).  From  the  year  1756  li- 
brarian to  the  St.  Petersburg  Academy  of  Sciences. 
Among  other  things,  he  wrote  a  treatise  on  the 
librarv,  and  on  the  cabinet  of  curiosities  and  na- 
tural  history   of  the  said  Academy.      This  work 


RUSSIAN  AUTHORS.  127 

abounds   in  learned  and  interesting  information. 
He  died  in  1794. 

Baikoff  (Feodor  Issokijewitsch),  a  woywode  of 
Siberia,  was  sent  as  ambassador  to  China.  He 
wrote  a  diary  of  his  journey,  which  is  printed  in 
the  fourth  volume  of  the  Ancient  Russian  Library, 
and  in  the  second  part  of  the  Siberian  Messenger. 

BantiJsch-Kamensskj  (Nikolai  Nikolajewitsch), 
acting  councillor  of  state  and  knight,  director  of 
the  imperial  archives  at  the  college  of  the  foreign 
department  in  Moscow,  was  born  in  1738  at  Neshin, 
studied  at  the  academies  at  Kieff  and  Moscow, 
lived  afterwards  at  the  university  of  Moscow,  and 
after    retiring    from    it    in    1762,    presided    until 
his   death,   over   the   archives   of   Moscow.      He 
brought  into  order  the  valuable  materials  collected 
there   for   ancient  and   modern   Russian   history; 
described  the  efficiency  of  that  institution,  and  re- 
viewed a  considerable  portion  of  the  Russian  di- 
plomatic instruments.     Of  his  numerous  writings 
on  these  subjects,  the  only  one  printed  is  the  His- 
torical Notice,  respecting  the  existing  unions  in 
Poland,  published  at  Moscow  in   1795.     Besides 
this,  he  composed  several  books  of  instruction  for 
the  use  of  the  clerical  schools.     He  died  January 
20th,  1814.     Copious  information  respecting  him 
may  be  found  in  his  Life,  which  was  published  at 
Moscow  in  the  year  1818. 

,  Bantusch-Kamensskj  (Dmitrj  Nikolajewitsch),  a 
son  of  the  foregoing,  and  also  appointed  to  the  su- 
perintendence of  the  archives  at  the  college  of  the 
foreign  department,  published  the  following  works. 

1.   Travels   in   Moldavia,  Wallachia,   and  Servia, 


128  A  LEXICON  OF 

Moscow,  1810.  2.  The  Actions  of  the  most  cele- 
brated Generals  and  Ministers,  who  lived  during 
the  reign  of  Peter  the  Great,  two  parts,  Moscow, 
1812-1813.  3.  The  Life  of  the  Most  Reverend 
Ambrosius,  archbishop  of  Moscow  and  Columna, 
who  was  murdered  in  1771,  Moscow,  1813.  4.  A 
Historical  Catalogue  of  the  Distinguished  Knights 
of  the  Four  Imperial  Russian  Orders,  Moscow, 
1814. 

Baranowitsch.     See  Lasar. 

Barkoff  (Iwan  Semenowitsch),  translator  to  the 
Academy  of  Sciences,  died  in  the  year  1768,  at 
St.  Petersburg.  He  was  author  of  A  Biography  of 
Prince  Antiochus  Kantemir,  and  notes  to  his  Sa- 
tires, which  were  published,  together  with  the  Sa- 
tires themselves,  in  1672.  A  Sketch  of  Russian 
History  from  the  times  of  Rurik  to  those  of  Peter 
the  Great,  which  he  wrote,  has  never  been  printed, 
and  probably  is  not  deserving  of  publication  ;  for 
Barkoff  was  a  very  poor  judge  on  matters  of 
history,  and  completely  spoiled  the  first  edition  of 
Nestor,  the  editing  of  which  had  been  confided  to 
him  by  the  Academy.  Of  his  translations,  the  fol- 
lowing are  known :  1.  The  Satires  of  Quintus  Ho- 
ratius  Flaccus,  in  verse,  with  Notes,  St.  Petersburg, 
1763.  2.  Phsedrus' Fables,  with  the  original,  and  a 
Life  of  the  Author,  St.  Petersburg,  1 764.  3.  Hol- 
berg's  Universal  History,  from  the  Latin,  St.  Peters- 
burg, 1766;  second  edition,  1796.  4.  The  Peace 
of  the  Heroes,  a  Drama,  from  the  Italian,  St.  Pe- 
tersburg, 1766.  Barkoff  may  be  called  the  Scarron 
of  Russia. 

Barssoff  (Anton  Alexejewitsch)  professor  of  elo- 


\ 


RUSSIAN  AUTHORS.  129 

quence,  college-councillor,  and  knight,  was  edu- 
cated at  the  Clerical  Academy  at  Moscow,  and  at 
the  Academy  of  Sciences  at  St.  Petersburg,  under  Lo- 
monossofF.  In  1 755  he  became  assistant-professor 
in  the  university;  in  1761,  on  the  death  of  Popofskj, 
professor  of  eloquence,  he  succeeded  to  his  place, 
and  occupied  the  same  post  till  his  own  death,  which 
occurred  in  1791.  Besides  his  other  and  peculiar 
labours,  he  busied  himself  with  projecting  the  plan 
for  the  Foundling  Hospital  at  Moscow.  At  the 
command  of  Catherine  the  Second,  he  wrote  A 
Collation  of  the  Russian  Latopisses,  or  Chronicles, 
from  the  year  1224;  the  preparation  of  which  sup- 
plied him  with  plenty  of  useful  materials  on  the  sub- 
ject of  ancient  Russian  history.  BarssofF,  however, 
occupied  himself  particularly  with  The  Russian 
Grammar,  and  presented  it  reduced  to  a  complete 
and  regular  system,  to  the  commission  for  the  im- 
provmement  of  the  national  schools.  But  this 
work,  alas !  was  allowed  to  remain  unprinted.  He 
endeavoured  to  banish  the  letters  jerr,  ishe,  and 
schtscha,  from  the  Russian  alphabet ;  and  tried  hard 
to  introduce  several  similar  improvements.  On 
various  occasions  he  delivered  festival  and  pane- 
gyrical discourses,  which  are  to  be  found  printed  in 
the  Collection  of  Speeches  of  the  Moscow  Profes- 
sors. 

Baschiloff  (Semen),  a  distinguished  pupil  of 
Schlozer,  studied  at  the  University  of  Moscow ; 
first  served  as  a  teacher  at  the  Seminary  of  the 
Lawra,  or  Monastery,  of  Troizka;  afterwards,  1764, 
as  translator  to  the  Academy  of  Sciences  at  St.  Pe- 
tersburg.   He  was  employed  in  1769  in  the  commis- 

K 


130  A  LEXICON  OF 

sion  for  the  formation  of  a  new  statute-book ;  and 
in  1770  was  appointed  secretary  to  the  senate.  He 
died  in  1771,  only  thirty  years  old.  In  1767  he 
published,  under  the  direction  of  Schlozer,  the  first 
part  of  The  Russian  Chronicles,  from  the  manu- 
script of  Nikon ;  and  in  1768,  with  the  assistance 
of  Polanoff,  a  translator  to  the  Academy,  he  pub- 
lished the  second  part.  This  publication  deserves 
attention,  because  it  had  the  advantage  of  being 
edited,  in  the  first  instance,  under  the  regulation  of 
a  learned  critic. 

Batjuschkoff  (Konstantin  Nikolajewitsch),  impe- 
rial councillor  and  knight,  born  at  Wologda  on  i 
the  18th  of  May,  1787,  received  his  education  at  a 
school  in  St.  Petersburg,  and  began  first  to  interest 
himself  in  the  sciences  and  elegant  literature  under 
the  guidance  of  his  uncle,  M.  N.  MurawjefF,  who 
took  him  with  him  in  1805  as  his  secretary  in 
the  department  of  belles  lettres  at  Moscow.  The 
war  of  1806  called  him  away  from  the  civil  service, 
and  the  peaceful  occupations  of  poetry,  in  which  he 
had  already  begun  to  show  his  natural  powers  with 
the  most  flattering  success.  He  entered  the  defen- 
sive battahon  of  the  St.  Petersburg  militia,  marched 
with  that  corps  to  the  Prussian  war,  was  engaged 
in  the  battle  on  the  banks  of  the  Passarge,  and  re- 
ceived in  the  engagement  near  Heilsberg  a  serious 
wound  from  a  musket-ball  in  the  foot,  from  which 
he  suffered  a  long  time.  On  his  return  to  St.  Pe- 
tersburg he  was  decorated  with  the  order  of  St. 
Anne,  3rd  CI.  and  changed  into  the  regiment  of 
Jager-guards.  After  this  he  served  in  Finland, 
was  present  at  many  warm  engagements  ;  returned 


RUSSIAN  AUTHORS.  131 

at  the  conclusion  of  peace  to  St.  Petersburg,  and 
entered  the  civil  service  as  librarian  to  the  Im- 
perial Public  Library.  The  year  1812  approach- 
ed. Russia  armed  herself  as  one  man.  Mos- 
cow blazed  in  flames.  BatjuschkofF,  forgetting  his 
wound,  from  which  he  still  suffered  unremittingly, 
once  more  embarked  in  military  service,  as  staff 
captain  and  adjutant  to  general  Bachmetjeff,  and 
was  under  general  Rajefskj  in  all  the  events  of  the 
war  through  the  campaigns  of  1813  and  1814,  till 
the  taking  of  Paris.  His  zeal  for  the  service  was 
rewarded  by  his  being  moved  into  th^  Ismailoff 
regiment  of  guards,  and  by  the  order  of  St.  Anne, 
2nd  CI.  In  the  year  1816  he  abandoned  the  mili- 
tary profession,  and  in  1818  he  was  placed  by  go- 
vernment in  the  College  of  Foreign  Affairs,  and 
attached  to  the  embassy  at  Naples,  with  the  rank 

of  imperial  councillor. BatjuschkofTs  writings, 

which  had  been  published  in  various  periodicals, 
were  republished  together,  by  N.  P.  Gnaditsch, 
under  the  title  of  BatjuschkofTs  Poetical  and  Prose 
Works,  in  2  vols,  at  St.  Petersburg,  1817.  The  first 
volume  contains  335,  and  the  second  256  pages. 
In  the  first  part  his  prose  works  are  contained,  and 
in  the  second  his  poetry.  In  prose  Batjuschkoff 
wrote  among  other  things:  1.  Something  about 
Poetry  and  Poets.  2.  On  the  Character  of  Lomo- 
nossoff.  3.  On  the  Works  of  M.  N.  MurawjefT, 
Tasso,  and  Ariosto.  4.  Petrarch.  5.  An  Evening 
with  Cantemir.  6.  A  Walk  in  the  Academy  of 
the  Arts.  7.  A  Fragment  of  some  Letters  from 
Finland.  8.  Upon  the  best  qualities  of  the  heart. 
,9.  On  Morality  grounded  on  Philosophy  and  Re- 

k2 


IS2  A  LEXCION  OF 

ligion,  and  so  forth.     In  verse  BatjuschkofF  wrote 
elegies,  epistles,  the  fable  called  The  Traveller  and 
the  Stayer-at-home,  several  lyrical  pieces,  many  epi- 
grams, inscriptions,  and  the  like.    To  the  infinite  re- 
gret of  all  lovers  of  poetry  this  talented  writer  has 
limited  his  performances  to  the  essays  and  transla- 
tions which  are  contained  in  this  collection.    During 
the  whole  period  of  his  stay  in  Italy,  with  the  ex- 
ception of  a  few  simple  poems,  he  wrote  absolutely 
nothing.     Who  does  not  wish  that  the  propitious 
climate  of  the  native  land  of  a  Virgil,  a  TibuUus,  a 
Petrarch,  and  a  Tasso,  had  been  able  to  renovate 
the  health  of  this  son  of  song,  and  that  on  his  re- 
turn to  his  own  country  he  had  seized  again  the 
lyre  which  he  had  abandoned.     Plenty  of  details 
respecting  the  character  and  merit  of  his  works, 
may  be  found  in  PletnefF's  Universal  Characteris- 
tics of  Russian  Poets.     We  may,  however,  allow 
ourselves  room   in  this   place  to  introduce  what 
Alexander  Bestuscheff  says  so  happily  of  this  in- 
spired poet.     "  BatjuschkofF's  poetry  is  like  the 
jet  of  a  fountain,  which  for  a  time  flows  smoothly 
down,   but   presently,  if  a   storm   sweeps  by   it, 
scatters  its  waters  far  and  wide.     Then,  like  the 
light  of  the  sun  refracted  in  the  thousand  drops  of 
water  as  they  fall,  the  new  and  bold  brilliance  of 
his  thoughts  is  scattered  and  shines  over  his  poetry. 
Rivalling  Anacreon,  he  celebrates  the  enjoyments 
of  life.     A  delicious  far  niente,  and  the  living  in- 
spiration of  love,  are  the  alternate  objects  of  his 
praise,  and  communicate  themselves  like  the  elec- 
tric spark  to  the  heart  of  the  reader.     The  irre- 
sistible charm  of  harmony,  the  happy  choice  of 


RUSSIAN  AUTHORS.  133 

the  most  easy  yet  felicitous  expressions,  and  the 
general  fascination  of  his  style,  complete  his  tri- 
umph. The  graces  themselves  appear  to  lend 
him  his  colours,  and  the  finest  perception  and 
taste  to  guide  his  pen.  In  short,  Batjuschkoff  is 
and  will  remain  a  classical  poet,  and  would  have 
been  so,  had  he  never  written  anything  more  than 
The  Death  of  Tasso." 

Benizki   (Alexander    Petrowitsch),   born    1780, 
died  Nov.  30,  1809,  was  educated  at  Moscow,  at 
the  school  of  professor  Schaden.     After  this  he 
served  in  the  army,  left  it  again  as  lieutenant,  and 
at  last  was  employed  in  the  statute-commission  at 
St.  Petersburg.     In  1807  appeared  his  Thalia,  or  a 
Collection  of  Russian  Compositions  in  Verse  and 
and  Prose,  the  first  part.     Among  his  own  articles 
in  this  collection  are  the  following:    1.  The  Nar- 
rative of  Ibrahim  and  the  magnanimous  man.     2. 
The  Poem  of  Komala,  translated  into  metre  from 
Ossian.     And  3.  some  Fables.     In  the  year  1809 
he  edited,  together  with  A.  J.  Ismailoff,  a  monthly 
periodical,  called  the  Nosegay  (Zwetnik),  in  which, 
among  other  things,  he  was  the  author  of  the  tale 
called  The  new  Wessir,  several  powerful  criticisms, 
translations  of  lyrical  poems,  fables,  and  numerous 
writings  in  prose.     Benizki,  who  in  his  tales  af- 
forded a  most  perfect  model  of  a  prose  style,  earned 
himself  in  a  short  time  a  high  reputation,  as  one  of 
the  most  distinguished  names  in  Russian  literature. 
His  too  early  death,  occasioned  by  mental  suffer- 
ings,  deprived   Russia   of  the   brightest   expecta- 
tions, which  had  been  formed  of  this  accomplished 
writer. 


134  A  LEXICON  OF 

Berg  (Wassilj),  commander  of  the  Corps  of  Pi- 
lots to  the  imperial  fleet,  and  member  of  the 
learned  Board  of  the  Admiralty,  is  known  by  his 
numerous  and  meritorious  additions  to  the  History 
of  Russian  Literature.  The  two  first  volumes  of 
his  Collection  of  Letters  and  other  writings  of  Pe- 
ter the  Great,  addressed  to  various  persons,  toge- 
ther with  their  respective  answers — relating  chiefly 
to  the  concerns  of  the  Admiralty,  and  illustrating 
the  views  and  plans  of  the  Emperor  with  regard  to 
the  formation  of  the  Russian  marine — appeared  at 
St.  Petersburg  in  the  year  1829,  and  were  printed 
at  the  charge  of  the  Admiralty  chest.  Two  other 
volumes  were  to  follow  in  1830.  Berg  died  on  the 
3rd  of  January,  1835. 

Berunda.     See  Pamwa. 

Bestuscheff  (Alexander),  author  of  a  very  valu- 
able, concise,  and  luminous  General  Review  of  Rus- 
sian Literature,  and  editor  of  the  literary  annual 
called  The  Polar  Star.  This  much  admired  writer, 
whose  poems  also  deserve  the  highest  praise,  died 
in  the  present  year,  1837,  a  victim  to  the  climate 
of  the  Caucasus,  which  has  too  aptly  been  denomi- 
nated the  Sierra  Leone  of  Russia. 

Bobroff  (Semen  Sergejewitsch),  assessor  of  col- 
leges, received  his  education  at  the  University  of 
Moscow,  and  since  1784  has  made  himself  known 
by  his  poetry.  The  most  remarkable  of  his  poems 
is  The  Chersonese,  or  A  Summer's  Day  on  the 
Tauric  Peninsula;  St.  Petersburg,  1803.  His  lyrical 
poems  appeared  in  four  parts  at  St.  Petersburg  in 
1804,  under  the  title  of  The  Daybreak  of  the 
North.     In  the  years  1807-1809  he  published  the 


RUSSIAN  AUTHORS.  135 

poem  called  The  ancient  Night  of  the  Universe,  or 
The  Blind  Wanderer,  in  4  volumes.  This  poet,  who 
died  at  St.  Petersburg  in  1810,  had  a  fiery  imagi- 
nation and  a  deep  fund  of  feehng,  but  the  manner 
and  choice  of  his  expressions  is  not  always  clear  or 
happy,  and  his  sublimity  is  not  seldom  approaching 
to  bombast.  He  was,  however,  better  acquainted 
than  any  other  Russian  writer  with  the  treasures  of 
English  literature. 

BoGDANOwiTscH  (Hyppolit  Feodorowitsch),  col- 
legiate-councillor, and  member  of  the  Russian  Aca- 
demy, was  born  on  the  23rd  of  December,  1743,  in 
the  Little  Russian  town  of  Perewolotschna,  where 
his  father  held  an  office  under  government.  He 
received  his  education  principally  in  the  house  of 
his  forefathers,  and  in  1754  he  attended  the  Mathe- 
matical School  attached  to  the  comptoir  of  the  se- 
nate. His  strong  turn  for  the  dramatic  art,  which 
he  had  acquired  by  the  reading  of  dramatic  works, 
and  by  frequenting  the  theatre,  determined  him  at 
the  age  of  fifteen,  to  present  himself  to  M.  M.  Che- 
raskofF,  who  at  that  time  was  superintendent  of  the 
Moscow  theatre,  with  a  request  to  be  engaged  there 
as  an  actor.  CheraskofF,  perceiving  in  him  unusual 
abilities,  dissuaded  him  from  this  intention,  and 
taking  him  with  him  to  his  own  house,  introduced 
him  to  the  University,  where  he  soon  acquired  a 
rich  store  of  information  and  good  taste.  In  the 
year  1761  he  was  appointed  supervisor  of  the  classes 
of  the  University,  and  in  1 763  to  be  translator  on 
the  staff  of  Count  P.  J.  Panin.  In  1765  he  was 
made  translator  to  the  College  of  the  Foreign  De- 
partment, and  in  the  following  year  sent  as  secre- 


136  A  LEXICON  OF 

tary  of  legation  to  the  court  of  Dresden.  In 
1768  he  returned  to  St.  Petersburg,  and  continued 
to  be  employed  in  the  civil  service.  In  1780  he 
was  made  a  member,  and  in  1788  president  of 
the  Imperial  Archives.  In  1795  he  resigned,  and 
selected  first  the  town  of  Sumy,  and  in  1798  the 
town  of  Kursk,  as  his  place  of  residence.  In  the 
beginning  of  December,  1802,  he  fell  sick,  and  on 
the  6th  of  January,  1 803,  he  died,  at  his  own  coun- 
try-house near  Kursk.  Bogdanowitsch  began  when 
only  seventeen  years  old  to  write  poetry  in  the 
house  of  his  patron  CheraskofF.  In  the  year  1 763 
he  published  the  journal  called  Innocent  Pas- 
times, and  all  at  once  appeared  in  the  full  force  of 
his  genius.  He  translated  very  happily  the  poem 
of  Voltaire,  On  the  Destruction  of  Lisbon,  and 
wrote  numerous  delightful  poems  for  his  journal. 
In  1765  he  composed  a  little  didactic  poem,  in  three 
cantos,  entitled  The  Double  Good  Fortune.  After 
his  return  to  St.  Petersburg  in  1 768,  he  translated : 
1.  Vertot's  History  of  the  Revolutions  in  Rome, 
in  three  parts,  printed  at  St.  Petersburg,  1771- 
1775.  2.  Several  articles  from  the  Encyclopeedia. 
3.  The  Thoughts  of  the  Abbot  St.  Pierre  on  Eter- 
nal Peace.  4.  The  Ode  of  Michael  Angelo  Gia- 
netti  to  Catherine  the  Second,  which  afforded  him 
an  opportunity  of  being  presented  to  the  Empress. 
He  composed  originally  Historical  Representations 
of  Russia,  St.  Petersburg,  1777,  one  part;  and  from 
1778  he  edited,  for  the  space  of  about  sixteen 
months.  The  St.  Petersburg  Messenger.  In  1778 
appeared  his  romantic  poem  Duschinka,  the  most 
eminent  of  his  productions,  by  which  he  earned 


RUSSIAN  AUTHORS.  137 

an  immortal  wreath  on  the  Parnassus  of  Russian 
poetry.  After  this  Bogdanowitsch  wrote:  1.  A 
lyrical  comedy  called  The  Joy  of  Duschinka.  2.  A 
drama,  entitled  The  Sclaves,  St.  Petersburg,  1782; 
and  3.  two  small  pieces  upon  Russian  Proverbs. 
At  the  desire  of  the  Empress  Catherine  the  Second, 
he  published  at  St.  Petersburg,  in  1785,  a  Collection 
of  Russian  Proverbs,  in  3  vols.  Many  minor  poems 
of  his,  especially  songs,  are  printed  in  the  collec- 
tions of  the  Society  of  Friends  of  the  Russian 
Language.  They  are  distinguished  by  their  sim- 
plicity and  elegance.  Besides  this  Bogdanowitsch 
was  peculiarly  happy  in  his  translations  of  all  the 
poems  which  Voltaire,  Marmontel,  and  others,  had 
written  in  honour  of  Catherine.  Among  Bogda- 
nowitsch's  works,  Duschinka  occupies  the  first  place, 
and  to  this  day  is  without  an  equal  in  the  compass 
of  Russian  literature.  It  professes  to  be  a  trans- 
lation of  La  Fontaine's  fable  of  Psyche ;  but  the 
translation  is  worthy  of  the  original,  and  in  many 
parts  far  surpasses  it  in  real  poetical  beauty.  Bog- 
danowitsch moreover  is  the  first  writer  among  the 
Russians  who  clothed  poetic  narrative  in  a  light, 
hearty,  and  witty  style.  "  Lomonossoff,  Sumaro- 
koff,  and  CheraskofF,"  to  use  the  words  of  Karam- 
sin,  "  could  only  serve  as  his  models  in  the  other 
branches  of  the  art."  A  very  beautiful  criticism  on 
this  poem,  with  notices  respecting  the  life  of  the  au- 
thor, is  printed  in  the  eighth  volume  of  Karamsin's 
works.  The  Duschinka  drew  upon  its  author  the 
attention  of  Catherine,  and  the  regard  of  the  Rus- 
sian public.  The  Empress  covered  him  with  fa- 
vours;   all   the    lovers   of   literature    prized    and 


138  A  LEXICON  OF 

esteemed  him.  After  the  appearance  of  this  poem, 
Bogdanowitsch  wrote  comparatively  but  httle ;  "  as 
if  the  poet/'  as  Karamsin  says,  "  from  love  for  his 
favourite  Duschinka,  v^^as  v^^ilHng  to  leave  to  her 
the  honour  of  being  the  unique  and  superlative 
creation  of  his  genius.  The  works  of  Bogdano- 
witsch were  printed  at  Moscow  in  1809-1810,  in  6 
vols. ;  and  a  second  edition  in  1818,  in  4  vols. 

BojAN,  an  old  poet,  of  whom  mention  is  made  in 
the  heroic  poem  of  the  twelfth  century,  called  The 
Oration  to  the  Army  of  Igor  ;  where,  among  other 
allusions,  the  following  appeal  is  made  to  him  :  "O, 
Bojan,  nightingale  of  the  times  that  are  gone!  O, 
Bojan,  it  is  for  thee  to  sing  the  song  of  Igor ! "  All 
endeavours  to  find  any  of  his  works,  or  indeed  any 
information  about  him,  have  as  yet  been  in  vain. 

BoLCHowiTiNOFF.     See  Eugenj. 

BoLTiN  (Iwan  Nikititsch),  a  major-general,  and 
member  of  the  Russian  Academy,  was  born  at  St. 
Petersburg,  1 735,  and  died  the  6th  of  October,  1792. 
His  first  work  was,  A  Description  of  the  Mineral 
Waters  and  Baths  of  Sarepta;  St.  Petersburg,  1782. 
But  accident  soon  discovered  in  him  a  profound 
acquaintance  with  the  antiquities  of  his  native 
country,  especially  of  its  history.  For  as  he  was 
reading  the  Moral,  Municipal,  and  Political  History 
of  Old  and  New  Russia,  by  the  physician  Le  Clerc, 
which  had  been  published  at  Paris  in  1787,  in  five 
volumes,  he  wrote  merely  for  his  own  use,  a  series 
of  critical  notes  and  remarks  upon  it,  without  having 
the  slightest  idea  of  ever  having  them  printed.  But 
some  of  his  acquaintances,  and  especially  the  Prince 
Potemkin,  who  had  seen  at  his  house  some  of  these 


RUSSIAN  AUTHORS.  139 

critical  annotations,  encouraged  him  to  arrange, 
and  complete  them.  They  were  subsequently 
printed  by  the  desire  of  the  Empress  Catherine 
the  Second,  at  the  charge  of  the  cabinet,  in  the 
year  1788,  at  St.  Petersburg,  in  two  volumes  4to. 
In  these  commentaries  Boltin  convicts  Le  Clerc 
of  unwarrantable  untruths  and  mis-statements  with 
regard  to  Russia,  of  ignorance  of  the  Russian  his- 
tory, as  well  as  language,  and  the  foolish  presum- 
tion  of  asserting  facts  of  which  he  had  neither  oral 
nor  ocular  proof.  This  work  was  also  translated 
into  French.  The  subsequent  controversy  of  Bol- 
tin with  Prince  SchtscherbatofF,  and  the  polemical 
writings  of  each  on  their  respective  sides  of  the 
question,  are  mentioned  more  particularly  in  the 
biographical  notice  of  the  latter,  (see  article  Schts- 
cherbatofF.) In  all  these  writings  of  Boltin  are  to 
be  found  many  important  and  interesting  enquiries, 
and  explanations  of  the  most  difficult  passages  in 
ancient  Russian  history, although  manifest  errors  are 
interspersed  among  them,  as  may  be  seen  from  the 
remarks  of  Prince  SchtscherbatofF  upon  his  work. 
It  is  to  be  lamented  that  Boltin  not  unfrequently  in 
these  writings,  as  well  as  in  his  criticisms  on  Le  Clerc, 
allowed  his  philological  learning  to  be  made  the 
medium  of  conveying  personalities !  Besides  these 
critical  works,  Boltin  also  wrote  at  the  command  of 
the  Empress  Catherine  the  Second,  Remarks  upon 
her  own  Historical  Sketch  illustrative  of  the  Life 
of  Ruj'ik,  whic-h  were  printed,  together  with  that 
composition,  in  1 792,  at  St.  Petersburg,  in  large  4to., 
with  a  German  translation  by  the  side.  He  also 
took  a  prominent  part  in  the  translation  and  ex- 


140  A  LEXICON  OF 

planation  of  the  famous  Russian  Rights,  which  were 
published  at  St.  Petersburg  in  1792.  After  Bol- 
tin's  death,  the  Empress  purchased  from  his  heirs 
all  his  papers  and  books,  and  made  a  present  of 
them  to  Count  A.  J.  Mussin-Puschkin,  the  friend 
and  fellow-labourer  of  the  deceased.  He  left  be- 
hind him  a  hundred  chests  full  of  writings,  and 
amongst  them  were  found,  besides  numerous  other 
works  :  1 .  A  Translation  of  the  Encyclopaedia  as 
far  as  the  Letter  K ;  the  fair  copy  written  out  by 
his  own  hand.  2.  A  Historical  and  Geographical 
account  of  the  Governmental  Departments.  3. 
An  Explanatory  and  Copious  Sclavonic-Russian 
Dictionary ;  the  letter  A  entire,  and  an  immense 
quantity  of  materials  for  the  completion  of  this 
large  and  laborious  work.  4.  Extracts  for  the  Un- 
derstanding of  the  old  Chronicles,  with  an  expla- 
nation of  antiquated  and  obsolete  words,  and  Geo- 
graphical names,  which  are  used  in  the  old  Chro- 
nicles. From  these  miscellaneous  materials.  Count 
Mussin-Puschkin  made  a  selection,  and  arranged 
the  publication  of  it  with  additions  to  complete  the 
deficiencies  from  the  labours  of  other  authors,  by 
the  title  of  An  Account  of  the  Tribes,  Towns,  and 
Provinces,  which  is  printed  at  the  end  of  his  own 
book,  A  Historical  Enquiry  into  the  Situation  of 
the  ancient  Russian  Principality  of  Tmutarakan, 
St.  Petersburg,  1794.  With  the  assistance  of  the 
resources  contained  in  these  manuscripts,  he  also 
edited  three  parts  of  TatischtscheiF's  Russian  His- 
torical, Geographical,  Political,  and  Municipal  Lexi- 
con, in  the  year  1793,  at  St.  Petersburg.  This 
critic  had  manifold  and  extensive  learning  in  Ian- 


RUSSIAN  AUTHORS.  141 

guages  and  science,  a  penetrating  perspicacity,  and 
an  unequalled  industry,  which  he  devoted  to  the 
advantage  and  glory  of  his  native  country. 

Born  (Iwan  Martinowitsch),  councillor  of  state, 
and  knight,  tutor  to  the  Princes  of  Oldenburg  at 
Stuttgard,  pubhshed  in  1808,  A  Short  Introduc- 
tion to  Russian  Eloquence;  which  contains  a  gram- 
mar, short  rules  of  rhetoric  and  poetry,  and  a  his- 
tory of  Russian  literature.  Born  was  one  of  those 
who,  in  1803,  founded  the  St.  Petersburg  Society 
for  the  Friends  of  Literature,  Science,  and  the  Arts. 

Bratanofskj.     See  Anastassj. 

Bronefskj  (Wladimir  Bogdanowitsch),  inspector 
of  the  Alexander  School  at  Tula,  captain  of  the 
navy,  second  class,  and  knight,  was  born  at  Ba- 
lew  in  1786,  and  received  his  education  in  the 
Cadet  Corps  at  Moscow.  In  1802  he  became  an 
officer,  and  served  in  several  naval  expeditions. 
He  visited  Sweden,  Denmark,  Norway,  England, 
Portugal,  and  Turkey.  He  traversed  on  foot 
Austria,  Hungary,  and  Poland.  In  the  campaign 
against  the  Turks  in  1806,  he  was  severely  wounded, 
and  was  rewarded  with  the  decoration  of  the 
order  and  ribbon  of  St.  Wladimir;  but  in  1819 
he  received  the  order  of  St.  George,  for  having 
served  in  eighteen  campaigns.  The  Russian  pub- 
lic should  be  grateful  to  Herr  Bronefskj,  for  a 
complete  and  detailed  description  of  the  voyage  of 
the  celebrated  Russian  admiral,  Senawin,  which 
was  pubhshed  by  the  following  title  :  The  Log- 
Book  of  a  Naval  Officer  in  the  Expedition  in  the 
Mediterranean  Sea,  under  Vice-Admiral  D.  N.  Sena- 
win,  from  1805  to  1810;  St.  Petersburg,  1818-1820, 


U2  A  LEXICON  OF  ' 

four  parts.  In  this  journal,  as  BestuschefF  remarks, 
"  the  author  lays  before  us  the  shores  of  the  Me- 
diterranean as  in  a  panorama.  He  rivets  the  at- 
tention of  the  reader  by  the  variety  of  his  subjects, 
by  the  floridness  of  his  style,  by  his  glowing  de- 
scriptions of  land  and  sea  engagements,  and  by  the 
fire  with  which  he  describes  to  us  the  heroic  ex- 
ploits of  the  enemies,  the  allies,  and  the  sons  of  his 
country.  He  sustains  the  interest  throughout,  and 
never  falls  into  tediousness.  It  is  a  pity  only  that 
his  language  is  not  uniformly  correct  in  idiom." 

BuLGAKOFF  (Jakoff  Iwauowitsch),  an  acting  privy- 
councillor,  and  knight ;  honorary  member  of  the 
Academy  of  Sciences  at  St.  Petersburg ;  was  for  a 
long  time  Russian  ambassador  at  Warsaw,  and  Con- 
stantinople, and  died  at  Moscow,  July  7th,  1809. 
He  attracted  the  attention  of  the  Russian  public  by 
numerous  good  translations  of  important  works. 
For  instance,  the  following  were  among  the  number : 
The  Traveller  Round  the  World ;  from  the  Abbe 
de  la  Porte,  in  twenty-seven  parts,  St.  Petersburg, 
1778:  second  edition,  1780:  third  edition,  1803: 
and  fourth  edition,  1813.  2.  The  Orlando  Ina- 
morato ;  from  Ariosto,  in  three  books,  St.  Peters- 
burg, 1797  :  third  edition,  1800.  It  is  worthy  of 
remark,  that  most  of  these  translations  were  under- 
taken in  Constantinople. 

BuLGARiN  (Thaddseus  Wenediktowitsch),  a  lite- 
rary honour  to  Poland,  and  remarkable  for  the  spi- 
rit of  his  writings  in  the  Russian  language.  Gifted 
with  a  nicely  critical,  and  highly  original  taste,  and 
at  the  same  time  boldly  adopting  an  entirely  new 
style  of  his  own,  he  need  not  fear  to  compare  him- 


RUSSIAN  AUTHORS.  143 

self  with  the  proudest  names  in  Russian  literature. 
His  Sketches  in  Spain,  in  which  (as  A.  Bestuscheff 
remarks)  he  draws  as  an  eye-witness  many  spirit- 
stirring  scenes  from  the  national  war  of  the  Spa- 
niards with  the  French,  and  describes  that  highly- 
favoured  land  with  all  the  glowing  colours  of  a 
panorama,  have  been  read,  together  with  many 
other  articles  of  his  in  periodicals,  not  only  by  Rus- 
sians, but  by  the  whole  of  Europe,  with  the  greatest 
pleasure.  Besides  this,  he  is  the  editor  of  a  work 
published  at  St.  Petersburg,  called  the  Northern 
Archives,  which  carries  the  torch  of  archaeology 
into  yet  unexplored  mines  of  antiquity,  and  con- 
tains useful  materials  for  Russian  history,  and  im- 
portant extracts  from  the  most  recent  travels  both 
of  Russians  and  of  foreigners.  In  the  same  publica- 
tion appeared  Lelewel's  Critical  Review  of  Karam- 
sin's  History  of  Russia,  which  is  written  with  great 
impartiality,  correct  judgment,  and  sound  learning. 
The  Journal  of  Intelligence,  which  belongs  to  the 
Northern  Archives,  and  is  also  edited  by  Bulgarin, 
has  transplanted  the  Hermit  in  Paris  to  the  banks 
of  the  Neva,  and  affords  the  public  an  interesting 
and  amusing  course  of  reading,  in  which  the  au- 
thor sketches  with  great  terseness  and  spirit  the 
prevailing  manners  of  the  capital  and  busy  world. 
A  French  translation  of  this  Russian  Hermit  ap- 
peared under  the  title  of  Boulgarin,  Archippe 
Thaddeevitch,  ou  VHermite  Russe.  Tableau  des 
Mceurs  Russes  au  19  Steele.  Suivi  de  Melanges 
historiques  et  anecdotiques  sur  cette  nation ;  tra- 
duit  du  Russe.  Paris,  chez  Bossange,  1 828,  3  vols. 
avec  planches.      The  most  recent  productions  of 


144  A  LEXICON  OF 

this  witty  writer,  are  the  following  romances :  1 . 
Iwan  Wiishigin ;  of  which  the  whole  of  the  first 
impression  (2400  copies)  was  sold  off  in  the  space 
of  a  week.  Herr  Oldekop  has  given  us  a  German 
translation  of  it,  by  the  title  of  Iwan  Wuishigin  ;  a 
moral  and  satirical  novel,  by  Th.  Bulgarin.  Trans- 
lated by  Aug.  Oldekop  from  the  Russian  ;  St.  Pe- 
tersburg, by  Brieff,  and  Leipsic  byC.Cnobloch,1830, 
4  vols,  price  5  florins  51  kr.  Another  imitation  of 
this  romance  bears  the  title.  The  Strange  and  Ro- 
mantic History  of  Iwan  Wischyghin,  or  The  Rus- 
sian Gil  Bias,  by  Th.  Bulgarin ;  translated  into  Ger- 
man by  A.  Kaiser,  Leipsic,  1830,  by  Nauck,  3  parts, 
in  12mo.  2.  He  published  Dimitrj  Samoswanez, 
that  is.  The  False  Demetrius;  St.  Petersburg,  1830, 
4  vols.  8vo.  3.  Peter  Iwanowitsch,  a  picture  of 
Russian  character,  as  a  continuation  of  his  Iwan 
Wischyghin,  or  Russian  Gil  Bias  ;  translated  by  F. 
Stork,  Leipsic,  1834,  3  vols.  8vo. :  translated  into 
French  also,  and  published  at  Paris,  in  4  vols. 
12mo. 

BuNiNA  (Anna  Petrowna),  an  important  member 
of  the  Society  of  the  Friends  of  the  Russian  Lan- 
guage. She  occupies  an  elevated  position  in  the 
list  of  Russian  writers,  and  the  first  among  the 
authoresses  of  Russia.  She  has  principally  distin- 
guished herself  by  didactic  and  lyrical  poems.  A 
complete  collection  of  them,  under  the  title  of 
A  Collection  of  the  Poems  of  Anna  Bunina,  was 
printed  in  three  parts  at  St.  Petersburg,  in  1821.  In 
1806  she  published  the  Rules  for  Russian  Poetry, 
for  young  women,  from  the  Abbe  Batteux.  The 
Fall  of  Phaeton,  in  particular,  as  A.  BestuschefF 


I 


RUSSIAN  AUTHORS.  145 

remarks,  exhibits  great  elegance  and  variety  of 
conception. 

BuRiNSKJ  (Sachar,  or  Zacharias,  Alexijewitsch), 
M.  A.  and  under-librarian  in  the  Moscow  University, 
died  in  Moscow  in  1 808,  aged  twenty  years.  He  left 
behind  him  some  beautiful  poems ;  amongst  others. 
Praises  of  a  Country  Life,  imitated  from  the  Geor- 
gics  of  Virgil.     He  made  some  other  translations. 

BuRZEFF  (Wassilj),  secretary  to  the  Patriarch 
Filaret  at  Moscow,  was  the  author  of  an  ABC  book 
of  the  Sclavonic  language,  i.  e.  fundamental  rudi- 
ments for  the  instruction  of  children,  who  wished 
to  improve  themselves  by  the  reading  of  the  Holy 
Scriptures,  together  with  prayers,  the  ten  com- 
mandments of  Moses,  and  a  series  of  short  ques- 
tions on  the  creeds.  This  ABC  book  was  printed 
four  times  at  Moscow,  viz.  in  the  years  1637, 1657, 
1664,  and  1698. 

BusHiNSKJ.     See  Gabriel. 

BussLAJEFF  (Peter),  was  deacon  at  the  cathedral 
church  of  the  Ascension  in  Moscow,  and  wrote  a 
poem  in  two  cantos,  by  the  title,  A  Spiritual  Essay, 
in  verse,  upon  the  Departure  of  her  Excellence  the 
Baroness  Maria  Jakowlewna  StrogonofF  into  Eter- 
nal Life.  Printed,  with  notes  by  the  author,  at  St. 
Petersburg,  1734.  In  this  poem  some  fine  thoughts 
are  not  wanting,  and  there  are  some  brilliant  pas- 
sages. The  notes  show  that  the  author  was  well 
acquainted  with  the  classical  writers  of  antiquity. 

BuTURLiN  (Dmitrj  Petrowitsch),  aidecamp  to  the 
Emperor  Alexander  I.,  a  colonel,  and  knight  of  nu- 
merous orders.  Born  at  St.  Petersburg  in  the  year 
1790;  in  1808  entered  the  Achtirshian  regiment  of 

L 


146  A  LEXICON  OF 

hussars  as  cornet.  In  1809  served  in  the  campaign 
against  the  Austrians.  In  1810  was  moved  into 
the  regiment  of  horse-guards,  and  at  the  begin- 
ning of  1812  placed  upon  the  staff.  In  the  course 
of  those  memorable  military  proceedings  he  was  at 
first  attached  to  the  head-quarters  of  Prince  Bagra- 
tion,  afterwards  to  the  advanced  guard  of  General 
Wassiltschikoff,  and  at  the  end  of  the  same  year  he 
again  changed  into  the  regiment  of  horse-guards. 
In  1817  he  was  made  adjutant,  and  in  1819  a  colo- 
nel. Buturlin  occupied  himself  with  the  study  of 
military  history  in  general,  and  especially  that  of 
his  own  country.  In  1810  he  published  An  Ac- 
count of  the  Campaign  of  SuwarrofF  in  Italy  in  the 
year  1799,  Relation  de  la  Campagne  en  Italie,  at  St. 
Petersburg.  This  work,  in  spite  of  its  deficiencies 
in  point  of  style,  attracted  the  favourable  notice  of 
General  Moreau.  In  1815  his  Narrative  of  the 
Campaign  of  1813  in  Germany,  Tableau  de  la 
Campagne  de  1813  en  Allemagne,  was  printed  in 
Paris.  This  book,  which  was  ascribed  to  one  of 
the  first  military  writers  in  Europe,  was  published 
again  in  a  third  edition  in  1820.  In  1817  his  work 
called  A  Description  of  the  Events  of  the  late  War 
in  Spain,  Precis  des  Evenemens  militaires  de  la  der- 
niere  guerre  en  Espagne,  appeared  at  St.  Peters- 
burg. In  1820  he  finished  his  History  of  Napo- 
leon's Invasion  of  Russia.  This  book  we  believe 
was  printed  some  years  back  in  Paris.  The  grand 
performance  of  Buturlin  consists  in  the  composition 
of  A  History  of  the  Military  Movements  of  the 
Russians  in  the  eighteenth  century.  The  first  di- 
vision of  this,  comprising  four  volumes,  and  illus- 


RUSSIAN  AUTHORS.  147 

trated  with  numerous  charts  and  plans,  appeared  at 
St.  Petersburg  in  1820,  in  the  Russian  language.  In 
it  are  to  be  found  accurate  accounts  of  the  cam- 
paigns of  Peter  the  Great.  The  manuscript  of  this 
work  extends  to  the  Seven  Years'  War.  Herr.  Bu- 
turhn,  after  having  won  the  applause  of  all  the 
most  eminent  writers  on  miUtary  affairs  in  Europe, 
has  drawn  upon  himself  and  his  country  the  re- 
proachful inquiry,  why  he  wrote  most  of  his  works 
in  the  French  language  ?  This  reproach  is  in  part 
merited  perhaps,  but  he  may  plead  custom  as  his 
excuse ;  and  as  his  justification,  that  his  works 
being  written  in  this  form,  help  to  spread  the  glory 
of  Russia  into  other  lands. 


C. 

Chemnizer  (Iwan  Iwanowitsch)  collegiate  coun- 
cillor, member  of  the  Russian  Academy,  was  born 
in  the  year  1744.  His  father,  by  birth  a  Saxon,  was 
director  of  the  Provincial  Hospital  at  St.  Petersburg, 
and  an  upright,  disinterested  man.  He  was  anxious 
that  his  son  should  embrace  the  medical  profession, 
but  could  not  conquer  his  aversion  for  anatomical 
operations;  and  at  last,  in  the  year  1755,  found 
himself  compelled  to  let  him  enter  the  military 
service.  Young  Chemnizer  went  through  the  Prus- 

Isian  and  Turkish  campaigns  in  this  capacity,  but 
finding,  as  he  says  himself,  that  he  in  this  way  had 
only  exchanged  the  dissecting  room  for  a  much 
wider  anatomical  theatre,  he  left  the  army,  and 
from  having  been  lieutenant  became  superinten- 
l2 
L :_ ___'__.._■_..._ __._._ 


148  A  LEXICON  OF 

dant  of  the  cabins  of  the  Mining  Cadet  Corps.  In 
this  new  office  he  soon  won  the  regard  and  esteem 
of  his  superiors.  In  1776  he  made  a  journey  with 
some  of  his  kind  patrons  through  Germany,  France, 
and  Holland,  and  on  his  return  resumed  his  former 
situation  once  more.  In  1781  he  took  his  leave  on 
being  appointed  collegiate  councillor,  but  in  1784 
was  sent  out  as  consul  general  to  Smyrna.  His 
health  suffered,  however,  considerably  from  the 
change  of  climate,  and  on  account  of  his  wide  se- 
paration from  his  friends.  He  fell  into  a  state  of 
melancholy,  and  died  on  the  20th  of  March,  1784. 
Unbending  integrity,  goodness  of  heart,  modesty, 
industry,  devotedness  to  his  official  duties,  were 
the  distinguished  characteristics  of  his  nature. 
An  over-confidence  in  other  people,  and  extreme 
absence  of  mind,  make  him  resemble  his  pro- 
totype La  Fontaine.  Chemnizer  has  immorta- 
lised himself  by  his  Fables,  the  principal  merit 
of  which  consists  in  their  simplicity  and  truth  to 
nature.  Although  in  later  times  Dmitrijeff  and 
Kriiloff  have  surpassed  him  in  brilliance  of  thought, 
in  purity  of  style,  and  in  lightness  of  versification, 
naivete  remains  the  undisputed  property  of  Chem- 
nizer alone.  It  is  worthy  of  remark,  that  his  con- 
temporaries, who  were  nevertheless  delighted  with 
the  not  too  beautifully  written  allegories  of  Suma- 
rokoff,  could  not  appreciate  generally  Chemnizer's 
talents,  and  were  scarcely  acquainted  with  him.  In 
1778  he  first  published  some  of  his  Fables  anony- 
mously. In  1781  he  had  the  same  reprinted,  with 
the  addition  of  a  second  series,  but  still  without  any 
name.   In  the  mean  time  they  remained  almost  un- 


RUSSIAN  AUTHORS.  149 

noticed.  A  long  time  after  the  death  of  the  author, 
a  true  friend  to  literature  edited  the  collected  fa- 
bles in  three  parts,  and  pubhshed  them  with  the 
real  name  of  the  writer,  and  a  biographical  notice 
of  him  prefixed,  by  the  title.  Fables  and  Tales  of  J. 
J.  Chemnizer;  St.  Petersburg,  1799.  Since  that  time 
he  has  become  generally  known,  and  has  since  oc- 
cupied the  rank  which  properly  belongs  to  him 
among  the  Russian  writers.  The  last  edition  of 
his  Fables  was  in  1819,  in  3  vols,  at  St.  Petersburg. 
Compare  Richter's  Russian  Miscellany,  No.  V.  p. 
139. 

Cherasskoff  (Michael  Matwejewitsch),  acting- 
privy-councillor,  member  of  numerous  literary  and 
scientific  societies,  and  knight,  was  born  on  the 
25th  of  October,  1 733.  His  father  served  in  the  regi- 
ment of  body-guards.  Michael  Matwejewitsch  re- 
ceived his  education  in  the  Land  Cadet  Corps,  from 
which  he  was  moved  into  the  army  at  once  as  lieu- 
tenant, but  soon  changed  into  the  civil  service.  At 
the  time  of  the  establishment  of  the  Moscow  Univer- 
sity, he  was  among  the  number  of  its  most  useful 
servants  in  his  capacity  of  college  assessor.  In 
l76l  he  was  made  imperial  councillor,  in  1763 
director  of  the  University,  in  1770  vice-president 
of  the  Mining  College,  and  in  1778  curator  of  the 
University  of  Moscow,  with  the  dignity  of  an  acting 
councillor  of  state.  He  remained  in  this  post  till 
the  period  of  his  quitting  altogether  the  public  ser- 
vice in  1802,  and  while  so  occupied  received  the 
titles  of  privy-councillor,  and  acting-privy-council- 
lor, as  well  as  the  order  of  St.  Wladimir,  2nd  CI., 
and  of  St.  Anne,  1st  CI.     He  died  on  the  27th  of 


150  A  LEXICON  OF 

September,  1807,  aged  74.    His  writings  are  :  I.  In 
prose :  1 .  Cadmus  and  Harmonia,  an  ancient  story, 
two  parts,   Moscow,  1789.     A  translation  of  the 
first  book  of  this  is  to  be  found  in  Richter's  Rus- 
sian  Miscellany,  §  ii.     2.  Polydorus,  the   Son  of 
Cadmus  and  Harmonia,  three  parts,  Moscow,  1794. 
3.  Numa  Pompilius,  or  Rome  in  the  Bud,  Moscow, 
1793.     4.  The  following  dramas:  a)  The  Friend 
of  the  Unfortunate,  in  three  acts,     b)  The  Perse- 
cuted, in  three  acts,     c)  Milona,  with  music  and 
songs,  in  two  acts,     d)  The  School  of  Valour,  in 
five  acts,     e)  Justifiable  Jealousy,  in   three  acts. 
II.  In  verse:   1.  The  Rossiad,  an  epic  poem,  in 
rhyming  Alexandrines  of  six  feet,  twelve  cantos, 
Moscow,  1785 ;  together  with  a  Critical  Analysis 
of  Epic  Poetry.     2.  Wladimir,  an  epic  poem,  in 
eighteen  cantos,  Moscow,  1786.     Third  and  im- 
proved  edition,   1809.      3.  The   Pilgrims,  or  the 
Knights  Errant,  an  entertaining  poem,  on  account 
of  its  great  variety,  in  six  cantos,  and  in  various 
sorts  of  metre,  Moscow,  1795.     4.  The  Fruits  of 
Science,  a  didactic  poem,  in  three  cantos,  Moscow, 
first   edition,    1761.     5.  The   Universe,   in    three 
books.     6.  The  Battle  of  Tchesme,  a  poem,  in  five 
cantos,  printed  by  the  Imperial  Academy  of  Sciences 
in  July,  1771,  containing  fifty-seven  pages  in  8vo. ; 
of  this  a  French  translation  appeared  in  1772,  and 
a  German  one  in  1773.     7.  The  Czar,  or  Novogo- 
rod  delivered,  a  poetical  narrative,  in  seven  cantos, 
Moscow,  1800.    8.  Bachariana  (The  Forge  of  Lies) 
or  The  Unknown,  a  story  of  enchantment,  derived 
from  the  old  Russian  Mahrchen  or  Traditions,  in 
fourteen  cantos  in  various  metres,  Moscow,  1803. 


RUSSIAN  AUTHORS.  151 

9.  Selim  and  Selima,  a  short  poem,  St.  Petersburg, 
1770.  10.  The  followmg  tragedies:  a)  The  Ve- 
netian Nun,  in  three  acts,  1758.  b)  Marthesia  and 
Phalestra,  in  five  acts,  1765.  c)  BorislafF,  in  five 
acts,  1774.  d)  The  Cid,  in  imitation  of  Corneille, 
in  five  acts,  e)  Julian  the  Apostate,  in  five  acts. 
/)  The  Dehverance  of  Moscow,  in  five  acts,  &c. 
1 1 .  A  comedy  called  The  Man-Hater,  in  five  acts, 
1770.  12.  Various  Panegyrics,  and  Festival  Odes, 
tw^enty-one  in  number.  13.  Five  odes  and  reli- 
gious poems.  14.  Anacreontic  odes,  sixty-five  in 
number.  15.  Moral  odes,  sixty-two  in  number. 
From  this  enumeration  it  will  be  evident  to  the 
reader  that  CheraskofF  belongs  to  the  number  of 
the  most  prolific  writers :  but  impartial  posterity, 
who  will  allow  every  praise  due  to  his  industry,  his 
learning,  and  his  taste,  will  hesitate  before  it  con- 
fers upon  him  unconditionally  the  high  name  of 
poet.  The  most  distinguished  of  his  productions 
are  The  Rossiad,  and  Wladimir.  The  subject  of 
the  Rossiad  is  the  complete  subjugation  of  the  Ta- 
tars under  John  Wassiljewitsch  the  Second,  and  the 
re-conquest  of  Kasan.  "  And  because,"  as  the  author 
himself  says,  "  the  tranquillity  of  Russia,  her  glory, 
and  her  prosperity,  and  the  great  actions,  not  of  the 
Czar  alone,  but  of  the  Russian  warriors  in  general, 
and  in  short,  not  the  good  fortune  of  one  man,  but 
the  good  of  the  whole  community  is  the  moral  theme 
of  this  poem, therefore  is  it  called  the  Rossiad."  Com- 
pare Richter's  Russian  Miscellany,  §  i.  in  which  is  to 
be  found  a  translation  of  the  whole  of  the  first  canto. 
Chilkoff  (Prince  Andrej  Jakowlewitsch)  Sstol- 


152  A  LEXICON  OF 

nik'  to  Peter  the  Great,  was  sent  in  the  year  1700 
as  ambassador  to  Sweden,  In  the  beginning  king 
Charles  the  Twelfth  received  him  with  marked  fa- 
vour, but  after  the  breaking  out  of  the  war  between 
Russia  and  Sweden,  he  was  put  in-  arrest,  in  com- 
mon with  all  the  Russians,  about  a  hundred  in  num- 
ber, who  were  found  in  Sweden  at  the  time,  and 
died,  without  having  survived  his  captivity,  at  Wes- 
teras,  on  the  18th  of  October,  1718.  His  body  was 
afterwards  conveyed  to  St.  Petersburg,  and  depo- 
sited in  the  Newskj  monastery.  In  his  captivity  he 
wrote  The  Chief  Substance  of  Russian  History  from 
the  oldest  times  to  those  of  Peter  the  Great ;  to 
whom  he  also  dedicated  his  work  from  Westeras, 
April  7th,  1715.  This  Substance  of  Russian  His- 
tory, edited  by  Miiller,  and  printed  at  the  imperial 
University  of  Moscow,  at  the  cost  of  the  bookseller 
and  university  bookbinder,  Chr.  Rudiger,  in  1770, 
was  introduced  into  the  Russian  schools  ;  but  only 
for  the  want  of  some  better  Manual  of  the  same 
kind.  For  it  displays  little  historical  criticism,  much 
partiality,  and  a  difficult  and  unequal  style.  It  is 
asserted  by  some,  that  it  was  not  Prince  ChilkofF 
himself,  but  his  secretary,  who  really  wrote  the 
book. 

C-HMELNizKJ  (Nikolai  Iwanowitsch),  councillor  of 
state  and  knight,  was  born  at  St.  Petersburg  in 
the  year  1791.  He  received  his  first  instructions 
under  the  superintendence  of  his  own  relation,  who 

'  Sslolnik  was  the  name  used  in  those  times  for  a  high  officer  of  the  court, 
•who  resided  in  the  palace  of  the  Czar,  and  presided  over  the  arrangement 
of  the  Czar's  table. 


RUSSIAN  AUTHORS.  153 

was  known  to  the  literary  world  through  various 
publications,  the  acting  councillor  of  state,  N.  F. 
Emin.  After  this  he  perfected  his  education  in  the 
Mining  Cadet  Corps,  In  1808  he  was  placed  as 
translator  at  the  College  of  the  Foreign  Department, 
by  desire  of  the  Emperor,  to  co-operate  with  Count 
Bukshowden,  the  commander-in-chief  of  the  army 
of  Finland,  in  the  task  of  interpreting  and  arrang- 
ing the  foreign  correspondence.  In  1811  he  was 
moved  into  the  Department  of  the  Minister  of  Jus- 
tice. In  1 812  he  entered  the  army  of  St.  Petersburg, 
and  acted  as  aidecamp  to  the  late  general  field-mar- 
shal Prince  Kutusoff.  In  the  campaign  of  1813 
he  served  under  general  Oppermann,  chief  of  the 
staff  of  the  then  existing  Polish  army.  At  the  con- 
clusion of  the  war,  he  returned  again  to  his  former 
occupation.  From  the  year  1818  he  became  go- 
vernor-general of  St.  Petersburg.  Herr  Chmel- 
nizkj  has  distinguished  himself  most  particularly 
by  his  dramatic  works.  Of  his  translations  and 
imitations  the  following  are  the  best  deserving  of 
notice.  1 .  Selmira,  a  tragedy,  in  five  acts ;  ren- 
dered into  metre  from  the  French,  in  1811,  which 
was  his  first  attempt  at  dramatic  poetry.  2.  The 
Gossip,  a  comedy,  in  one  act,  in  verse,  after  Boissy, 
This  translation  may  be  cited  as  a  first-rate  per- 
formance. 3.  The  School  for  Wives,  a  comedy,  in 
five  acts.  In  imitation  of  Moli^re.  4.  The  FoUies 
of  the  Greeks,  or  Iphigenia  in  Tauris  reversed ;  a 
vaudeville-parody,  in  three  acts,  in  imitation  of  Fa- 
var.  5.  Marriages  are  made  in  Heaven,  or.  No 
Evil  without  some  Good ;  a  vaudeville,  in  one  act. 
6.  Castles  in  the  Air,  a  comedy,  in  one  act ;  in 


154  A  LEXICON  OF 

metre,  after  Collin  d'Harleville ;  and  many  others. 
The  original  compositions  of  Herr  Chmelnizkj  are 
the  following:  1.  Seven  Holidays  in  the  Week,  or 
The  Irresolute  Man  ;  a  comedy,  in  one  act,  in 
verse.  2.  Quarantine  ;  a  vaudeville,  in  one  act.  3. 
The  Players  among  Themselves,  or  The  First  Ap- 
pearance of  the  Actress  Trojepolskaja;  a  vaudeville, 
in  one  act.  This  last  vaudeville  was  written  by 
Chmelnizkj  in  conjunction  with  Herr  N.  W.  Wse- 
woloschkj.  All  these  pieces  have  been  represented 
on  the  boards  of  the  St.  Petersburg  theatre.  Only 
two  of  the  comedies  however  are  in  print,  viz.  The 
Gossip,  St.  Petersburg,  1817:  and  Castles  in  the 
Air,  1819. 

Chomjakoff.     See  Alexander  Puschkin. 

Chrapowizkj  (Alexander  Wassiljewitsch),  began 
service  in  1756.  In  1782  he  was  secretary  of  state 
and  of  the  cabinet  to  the  Empress,  and  occupied 
himself  with  the  amusements  of  literature.  He 
wrote  the  tragedy  of  Idamant ;  the  opera  Melo- 
mania ;  and  a  multitude  of  smaller  poems.  In  the 
year  1793  he  was  chosen  into  the  senate.  He  died 
on  the  29th  of  December,  1801. 

Chwostoff  (Count  Dmitrj  Iwanowitsch),  acting 
privy-councillor,  senator,  and  knight,  a  member 
of  the  Russian  Academy,  and  many  other  learned 
societies;  was  born  on  the  19th  of  July,  1757,  at 
St.  Petersburg ;  and  educated  at  Moscow,  in  the 
private  school  of  professor  Liitke,  afterwards  at  the 
Moscow  University,  and  lastly,  under  the  parental 
roof.  He  commenced  service  by  entering  the 
guards  in  1772.  In  1777  he  was  raised  from  being 
second  lieutenant  of  the  guards  to  be  at  the  head 


RUSSIAN  AUTHORS.  155 

of  the  commissariat,  and  in  1783  was  named  an 
imperial  councillor.  In  1788  he  served  under  Su- 
warrofF,  with  the  rank  of  lieutenant-colonel.  In 
]  795  he  was  appointed  chamberlain;  in  1797  upper 
procurator  of  the  senate;  and  in  1799  he  was  ap- 
pointed in  the  same  capacity  to  the  Holy  Synod, 
and  received  the  order  of  St.  Anne,  first  class.  In 
the  year  1800  he  found  himself  made  privy-coun- 
cillor; in  1802  permission  was  given  him  to  adopt 
the  title  of  a  Sardinian  count ;  and  in  1807  he  ob- 
tained leave  to  take  up  his  residence  at  the  senate- 
house.  Count  Dmitrj  Iwanowitsch  began  in  the 
year  1779  to  write  poetry,  and  continued  through- 
out to  cultivate  the  muses  in  every  department  of 
verse  with  unabated  ardour.  In  his  youth  he  wrote 
comedies  in  prose  and  verse  ;  later,  however,  lyri- 
cal and  didactic  poetry,  and  translations  from  the 
French  classical  poets,  formed  the  chief  object  of 
his  studies.  It  is  difficult  to  decide  in  what  branch 
he  is  most  successful ;  his  odes,  however,  must  se- 
cure to  him  incontestible  laurels.  A  complete  col- 
lection of  the  works  and  translations  which  he 
achieved  appeared  at  St.  Petersburg  in  1817,  in  4 
vols.  In  the  first  volume  are  contained  his  lyrical 
poems  ;  in  the  second,  epistles  ;  in  the  third,  alle- 
gories ;  and  in  the  fourth,  translations — as  The  Art 
of  Poetry,  of  Boileau  ;  and  the  Andromache,  of  Ra- 
cine, with  many  notes  of  different  critics,  and  of 
the  translator  himself.  A  new  edition  of  the  works 
of  Count  Dmitrj  Iwanowitsch  has  lately  been  pre- 
pared, which  is  to  contain  all  the  poems  written  by 
him  since  the  year  1817.     At  the  beginning  of  the 


156  A  LEXICON  OF 

year  1830,  this  veteran  of  the  Russian  Parnassus 
presented  a  poem.  On  the  Peace  of  Adrianople,  to 
the  imperial  field-marshal  Count  Diebitsch  Sabal- 
kanskj.  Numerous  Russian  and  foreign  societies 
have  elected  this  writer  into  the  number  of  their 
members.  Many  of  his  poems  have  been  trans- 
lated into  foreign  languages.  Impartial  critics,  in 
foreign  as  well  as  domestic  journals,  have  set  a 
high  value  on  his  works,  and  promised  him  a 
literary  immortality.  ChwostofF  died  at  the  end  of 
the  year  1835. 

Cyprian  ;  metropohtan  of  Kieff,  and  of  all  Rus- 
sia, by  birth  a  Servian,  was  consecrated  to  this  dig- 
nity at  Constantinople  in  1376.  After  this,  he 
came  to  Kieff,  received  from  the  Grand  Prince 
Dmitrj  Iwanowitsch  a  summons  to  Moscow,  and 
died  in  1 406.  This  ecclesiastic,  a  learned  and  pious 
man,  may  be  denominated  as  the  first  restorer  of 
lost  enlightenment  in  Russia.  He  brought  to  Rus- 
sia numerous  translations  of  different  church-books, 
w^hich  had  been  preserved  among  the  Sclavonic 
tribes  dwelling  on  the  banks  of  the  Danube,  and 
hence  resulted  the  introduction  of  several  Ser- 
vian expressions  into  the  Russian  language.  Al- 
most all  the  most  important  manuscripts  of  these 
works,  which  have  descended  to  our  own  time,  be- 
long to  the  age  of  Cyprian.  He  selected  for  his  re- 
sidence a  property  of  his  own  at  Golenischtschewo, 
not  far  from  Moscow,  between  the  rivers  Setuna 
and  Ramenka,  and  occupied  himself  there  in  the 
composition  and  translation  of  ecclesiastical  works, 
and  in  the  collection  and  compilation  of  the  Rus- 


RUSSIAN  AUTHORS.  157 

sian  laws.  Of  his  works,  two  have  been  preserved 
in  the  Stufen-biicher *,  or  step-books:  viz.  The 
Life  of  the  Metropolitan  Peter:  and  A  Farewell 
Discourse,  which  he  wrote  four  days  before  his 
death,  and  which  was  read,  according  to  his  desire, 
over  his  grave  at  his  funeral.  Some  annalists  have 
ascribed  to  him  the  Stufen-biicher,  but  this  has  by 
no  means  been  proved. 

Cyril  (St.),  bishop  of  Turow,  lived  in  the  time 
of  the  Grand  Prince  Andrej  Bogolubskj,  surnamed 
the  Fearer  of  God,  who  died  in  A.  D.  1174,  and 
with  him  maintained  the  most  intimate  relations. 
He  left  behind  him  some  fine  discourses,  sermons, 
and  charges.  Herr  Kalaidowitsch  found  them  in 
different  libraries,  and  superintended  the  publica- 
tion of  them  at  Moscow,  in  a  book  which  bears 
the  title.  Memorials  of  Russian  Literature  in  the 
Twelfth  Century,  published  at  the  expense  of  Count 
N.  P.  Rumanzoffin  1821. 

Cyril,  metropolitan  of  Kieff  and  all  Russia,  a 
Russian  by  birth,  was  consecrated  at  Nicasa  in  1255, 
and  died  in  1281,  at  Susdal,  or  Peresslawl-Salesskj. 
After  the  conquest  and  overthrow  of  Kieff  by  Batu, 
he  retired  from  Kieff  to  Wladimir,  on  the  Kliasma, 
which  was  then  the  residence  of  the  Grand  Princes. 
In  1274  he  called  together  at  Wladimir  an  assem- 
bly of  the  church,  at  which  were  drawn  up  Twelve 
Instructions  relative  to  the  State  of  the  Church, 
and  for  the  Improvement  of  the  Clergy.  These  in- 
structions are  printed  in  the  first  part  of  the  Rus- 

t  The  Stiifen-bvcher  contain  the  genealogy  of  the  Russian  monarchs 
from  Rurik  to  John  Wassiljewitsch,  and  derive  their  name  from  the  cir- 
cumstance of  their  embracing  seventeen  steps  or  degrees  of  descent. 


158  A  LEXICON  OF 

sian  Memorabilia.  Of  his  writings,  only  those  ad- 
dresses have  been  preserved  which  he  delivered  at 
the  opening  and  closing  of  this  council  of  the 
church,  and  which  are  distinguished  by  their  power- 
ful feeling  and  eloquence. 

Cyril  (Tranquillion),  a  hieromonach  (see  ap- 
pendix) and  preacher  at  the  subterranean  monas- 
tery at  KiefF;  was  afterwards  archimandrite  at 
Tschernigow,  and  wrote  many  ecclesiastical  works, 
as  sermons,  panegyrical  discourses,  etc.  On  the 
language  and  style  of  this  preacher,  some  sensible 
criticisms  may  be  met  with  in  the  essay  of  Herr 
Katschenofskj,  called,  A  Glance  at  the  Progress  of 
Russian  Eloquence,  which  is  to  be  found  printed 
in  the  first  part  of  Von  Gretsch's  Manual  of  Rus- 
sian Eloquence,  p.  380  ;  (see  Katschenofskj). 

Cyriloff  (I wan),  upper  secretary  to  the  senate, 
and  councillor  of  state;  although  born  in  very  hum- 
ble condition,  attracted  the  notice  of  Peter  the 
Great,  and  was  at  first  employed  in  the  chancery 
office  of  the  senate-house.  By  his  natural  taste  for 
mathematics,  and  natural  history,  he  was  led  to 
collect  geographical  information  respecting  the  Rus- 
sian dominions,  and  afterwards  prepared  from  them 
a  Russian  atlas,  with  a  general  chart,  which  was 
printed  by  himself  in  1734,  and  which  was  besides 
published  by  the  Academy  of  Sciences  in  1745.  At 
his  suggestion  two  expeditions  were  sent  out — the 
scientific  expedition  to  Kamschatka,  and  the  com- 
mercial expedition  to  Orenburg.  In  the  latter  he 
himself  took  a  part  (in  1734),  and  laid  the  first  plan 
of  the  outline  of  Orenburg.  He  died  in  1 738,  at 
Samara. 


RUSSIAN  AUTHORS.  159 

D. 

Daniel,  a  Russian  igumen  (see  appendix),  pro- 
bably born  at  Tschernigow,  made,  in  the  beginning 
of  the  twelfth  century,  a  journey  through  Constan- 
tinople and  the  Archipelago,  to  Palestine;  and  after 
having  lived  there  for  sixteen  months,  wrote  a  de- 
scription of  the  Holy  Land,  as  it  was  in  those  times. 
Manuscript  copies  of  this  journey,  under  the  title 
of  The  Travels  of  the  Russian  Abbot  Daniel,  are 
preserved  in  the  library  of  the  cathedral  of  St.  So- 
phia, at  Novogorod ;  but  notwithstanding  that  it 
so  much  deserves  it,  it  has  not  yet  appeared  in 
print.  His  style  has  great  similarity  to  that  of 
Nestor. 

Daniloff  (Kirscha"),  an  author  as  well  as  com- 
piler of  Russian  history ;  born  at  KiefF,  and  as  to 
his  condition  in  life  a  cossack,  served  in  Siberia  at 
the  beginning  of  the  eighteenth  century.  The  his- 
tories collected,  and  in  part  composed  by  him,  were 
published  for  the  first  time  at  Moscow,  in  1804, 
and  again  with  considerable  additions,  at  the  ex- 
pense of  the  chancellor  of  the  empire.  Count  Ru- 
manzoff,  at  the  same  place  in  1818.  Daniloff,  who 
was  a  contemporary  of  Peter  the  Great,  appears  to 
have  borrowed  the  subjects  of  most  of  his  poems 
from  old  national  and  traditionary  songs,  which  he 
altered  to  suit  his  purpose.  These  ancient  Russian 
poems  are  for  the  most  part  filled  with  the  deeds 
of  Wladimir  the  Great,  and  his  famous  heroes  ;  as 
for  instance,  Dobryna,  Nikititsch,  Ilja  Muromez 

"  KirscAa  is  a  Russian  diminutive  of  Cyril. 


160  A  LEXICON  OF 

(see  Kriiloff),  Iwanowitsch,  Aljoscha,  Popowitsch, 
and  others.  Von  Biisse's  Wladimir,  and  his  Tafel- 
Runde,  or  Round  Table,  Leipsic,  1819,  8vo.,  are 
most  likely  taken  from  these  old  Russian  poems  of 
DanilofT.     Compare  article  L'woff. 

Danilowitsch  (Gerassim),  composed  an  Intro- 
duction on  the  Use,  Importance,  and  Sacredness  of 
the  Holy  Scriptures,  to  be  prefixed  to  the  Ostrogian 
edition  of  the  Sclavonic  Bible,  in  1581.  Together 
with  this  introduction,  his  Slavonic  verses,  written 
in  the  syllabic  metre,  have  been  printed. 

Daschkowa  (Princess  Katherina  Romanowna), 
originally  Countess  of  WoronzofF,  was  born  in  1744, 
married  in  her  fifteenth  year,  and  was  a  widow  in 
her  eighteenth.  In  1762  she  received  the  appoint- 
ment of  lady  of  state,  and  was  presented  with  the 
order  of  St.  Catherine.  The  sciences  and  belles- 
lettres  were  her  favourite  occupations.  In  1782  she 
was  made  directress  of  the  Academy  of  Sciences,  and 
in  the  following  year,  at  the  institution  of  the  Rus- 
sian Academy,  she  was  named  its  president.  Nu- 
merous learned  societies,  both  Russian  and  foreign, 
adopted  her  as  a  member  of  their  body.  Her 
numerous  writings,  both  in  prose  and  verse,  are 
printed  in  the  following  journals  :  The  Innocent 
Pastime,  in  the  year  1763;  and  A  Companion 
for  the  Friends  of  the  Russian  Language,  in 
1783.  She  took  part  in  the  preparation  of  the 
Dictionary  of  the  Russian  Academy,  and  contributed 
greatly  to  the  completion  and  publication  of  that 
useful  work.  Besides  this,  she  wrote  the  comedy 
Toissiokoff ;  and  the  drama.  The  Marriage  of  Fa- 
bian, or  Avarice  Punished.     In  1796  she  gave  up 


RUSSIAN  AUTHORS.  161 

the  offices  which  she  had  held,  and  died  in  1810, 
at  Moscow. 

Dawijdoff  (Deniss  Wassiljewitsch),  a  major-ge- 
neral, and  knight,  was  born  at  Moscow  on  the 
16th  of  July,  1784,  and  educated  under  the  pa- 
rental roof.  In  his  earliest  days  he  gave  evidence 
of  a  leaning  towards  the  military  profession,  and 
this  inclination  was  increased  in  the  year  1793  by 
the  unexpected  attention  shown  to  him  by  Count 
Suwarroff-Rimniskj,  who  at  a  review  of  the  hght  ca- 
valry regiment  of  Poltawa,  which  happened  at  the 
time  to  be  commanded  by  Dawiidoff,  the  father, 
remarked  the  spirited  boy,  and  making  the  sign  of 
the  cross  upon  him,  said,  "  Thou  wilt  one  day  win 
three  glorious  battles."  In  the  year  1801  he  com- 
menced service  in  the  regiment  of  horse-guards, 
and  after  he  was  promoted  to  the  rank  of  major- 
general  (1815)  occupied  a  variety  of  posts  in  the 
army,  and  was  engaged  in  almost  all  the  campaigns 
in  which  Russia  took  part,  from  the  year  1 805.  Thus 
in  1808  he  made  the  campaign  of  Finland,  in  the 
advanced  guard  of  the  celebrated  Kuljneff;  in  1809 
he  served  in  the  army  stationed  on  the  other  side 
of  the  Danube, under  Prince  Bagration;  and  in  1810 
he  was  again  one  of  KuljnefF's  advanced  guard. 
Under  the  command  of  this  distinguished  warrior, 
he  finished  the  course  of  service  in  the  advanced 

I  and  out-posts,  which  he  had  already  begun  in  Fin- 
land. In  the  Russian  campaign  of  1812,  he  com- 
manded as  far.  as  Borodino  the  first  battalion  of  the 
Achtirschian  regiment  of  hussars,  and  first  drew  at- 
tention to  the  advantages  to  be  derived  from  send- 
ing out  detatched   parties  in  different  directions. 


162  A  LEXICON  OF 

After  this,  he  was  himself  sent  out  with  130  cos- 
sacks,  moved  about  with  them  for  ten  days,  and 
being  reinforced  by  600  more  cossacks,  engaged 
several  times  with  the  enemy  in  the  neighbourhood 
of  Wasma,  shared  the  glory  of  Count  OrlofF-De- 
nissofF,  captured  a  cavalry  depot  3000  men  strong, 
and  extended  his  excursions  as  far  as  the  banks 
of  the  Niemen.  At  Grodno  he  surprised  a 
strong  detachment  of  4000  men,  sent  from  Hun- 
gary under  the  command  of  general  Frohlich,  and 
took  that  town.  In  Germany  he  first  got  posses- 
sion of  one  half  of  the  town  of  Dresden,  which 
was  defended  by  the  corps  of  Marshal  Davoust, 
and  continued  his  operations  as  far  as  the  banks  of 
the  Rhine.  In  France  he  commanded  in  Blucher's 
army  the  regiment  of  Achtirschian  hussars,  and  after 
one  engagement,  in  which  all  the  generals  of  the 
second,  now  the  third,  division  of  hussars,  had  been 
either  killed  or  wounded,  he  commanded  as  colonel 
for  two  days  the  entire  division.  After  this,  he 
took  the  command  of  a  brigade  of  hussars,  and 
marched  with  it  through  Paris.  Dawiidoff  had  al- 
ready in  his  earliest  years,  before  he  became  a  sol- 
dier, felt  a  strong  predilection  for  poetry.  The 
Aonides,  a  collection  of  poems  published  by  Ka- 
ramsin,  had  produced  a  peculiar  effect  upon  him. 
At  that  time  he  first  began  to  write  verses,  and 
even  through  the  stormy  times  which  ensued,  he 
did  not  relinquish  the  practice.  Amid  the  whizzing 
of  bullets,  the  thunder  of  cannon,  and  the  flashing 
of  sabres,  he  still  brought  offerings  to  his  gentle 
muse.  A  number  of  beautiful  elegies,  songs,  epis- 
tles, and  small  poems,  display  intelligence,  feeling. 


RUSSIAN  AUTHORS.  1G3 

taste,  and  a  rare  talent  for  poetry.  The  praise  of 
military  achievements,  and  the  joyous  refreshment 
of  love  and  friendship  in  arms,  form  the  subject  of 
the  greater  part  of  his  poetical  works.  Some  of 
these  have  been  printed  in  different  journals,  most 
of  them  however  continue  still  to  be  circulated  only 
in  manuscript.  Like  all  poets  of  real  talent,  he 
has  drawn  after  him  a  crowd  of  copyists,  who  in 
part  plagiarise  and  in  part  imitate  his  poems.  In 
the  Memorials  of  the  Country,  a  work  edited  and 
published  by  Herr  Swinjin,  is  to  be  found  his  descrip- 
tion of  the  partisan  excursions  which  he  made  in 
1812.  Afterwards  he  occupied  himself  with  a 
Theory  of  Partisan,  or  Detached,  Movements  in 
War. 

Delwig  (Baron),  editor  of  the  Pocket  Annual 
called  Flowers  of  the  North,  St.  Petersburg,  1826. 
It  contains  the  first  attempt  at  a  history  of  the  fine 
arts  in  Russia.  See  Tappe's  German  work  on  the 
History  of  Russia,  taken  from  that  by  Karamsin, 
vol.  I.  p.  352,  where  there  is  to  be  found  a  short 
account  of  the  contents  of  this  Pocket  Annual. 

Dershawin  (Gabriel  Romanowitsch),  acting  pri- 
vy councillor,  and  knight  of  several  orders,  mem- 
ber of  almost  all  the  learned  and  scientific  societies 
in  Russia,  was  born  on  the  3rd  of  July,  1 743,  in 
Kasan.  He  received  the  first  rudiments  of  educa- 
tion in  his  parents'  house,  and  in  private  schools, 
but  was  afterwards  at  the  Gymnasium  of  Kasan. 
In  1760  he  was  admitted  into  the  Engineer  Corps, 
and  in  1761,  on  account  of  his  great  progress  in 
mathematics  and  drawing,  as  well  as  of  his  descrip- 
tion of  the  Bulgarian  ruins  on  the  Wolga,  he  was 

m2 


164  A  LEXICON  OF 

placed  as  soldier  in  the  regiment  of  the  Preobra- 
shenskj-guard.  From  the  year  1762  forwards,  he 
ran  through  all  the  degrees  of  inferior  military  ser- 
vice, and  in  1772  he  was  promoted  to  the  rank  of 
ensign  in  the  guards.  In  1774  he  became  lieute- 
nant, and  distinguished  himself,  in  the  expedition 
on  which  he  was  sent  to  take  prisoner  the  insur- 
gent PugatschefF,  by  his  prudence  and  spirit.  In 
1777  he  was  appointed  a  collegiate  councillor,  and 
executor ""  in  the  first  department  of  the  senate. 
In  1779  he  was  engaged  in  the  office  for  expedit- 
ing the  collection  of  the  revenues  of  the  empire. 
In  1782  he  became  a  councillor  of  state,  in  1784 
an  acting  councillor  of  state,  and  governor,  first  of 
Olonez  and  afterwards  of  Tambow.  In  1791  the 
Empress  Catherine  selected  him  to  be  her  secretary 
of  state.  In  1793  he  was  promoted  to  the  dignity 
of  being  privy  councillor  and  senator,  and  in  1794 
he  was  chosen  president  of  the  College  of  Com- 
merce. In  1800  he  was  appointed  imperial  trea- 
surer, with  the  dignity  of  acting  privy  councillor ; 
having  given  up  this  appointment  in  1801,  he  was 
made,  in  1802,  minister  of  justice;  and  in  1803  pen- 
sioned with  the  amount  of  his  entire  salary,  and  an 
allowance  for  his  table  besides.  He  died  on  the 
6th  of  July,  1816,  at  his  landed  estate  Swanka, 
on  the  Wolchow,  in  the  governmental  department 
of  Novogorod.  Dershawin  wrote  lyrical,  didactic, 
and  dramatic  poetry.  His  collected  works  were 
published  at  St.  Petersburg  in  1810,  in  four  parts ;  a 

X  Executor. — ^This  is  the  term  used  for  the  person  in  a  tribunal  or 
court,  who  has  the  superintendence  of  the  interior  arrangements,  and  of 
the  officers  and  servants  connected  with  it. 


RUSSIAN  AUTHORS.  165 

fifth  part  was  added  in  1815.  He  occupies  the 
first  place  among  the  poets  of  Catherine's  time, 
and  may  be  fairly  ranked  on  an  equality  with  the 
most  distinguished  lyrical  poets  of  all  nations.  Of 
his  numerous  poems  it  will  be  sufficient  to  name 
here.  The  Odes  to  God,  To  Felix,  On  the  Birth  of 
the  Emperor  Alexander,  On  the  Death  of  Mescht- 
scherskj.  On  the  Conclusion  of  Peace  with  Sweden, 
The  Fountain,  The  Waterfall,  The  Autumn,  his 
Anacreontic  Songs,  and  so  forth  ^  Of  his  prose 
works,  independently  of  his  official  labours,  the 
following  are  best  known :  1.  A  Discourse,  deli- 
vered before  the  Nobles  of  Kasan,  to  the  Empress 
Catherine.  2.  A  Topographical  Account  of  the 
Government  of  Tambow.  3.  A  Discourse  on  the 
Opening  of  the  Normal  School  at  Tambow,  which 
last  was  delivered  on  the  22nd  of  September,  1786, 
and  in  the  same  year  printed  in  several  foreign 
languages,  at  St.  Petersburg.  4.  A  Treatise  on 
Lyrical  Poetry,  which  is  inserted  as  the  fourteenth 
Lecture  in  the  second  book  of  the  Lectures  for  the 
Society  of  the  Friends  of  the  Russian  Language ; 
printed  at  St.  Petersburg,  1811.  An  excellent  cha- 
racter of  Dershawin  has  been  written  by  a  poet 
(Prince  Wasemskj)  who  knows  how  to  appreciate 
the  talents  and  merit  of  the  poet.  Herr  Mersla- 
koflfs  critique  upon  him  deserves  especial  notice, 
in  which,  from  other  passages,  we  may  select  the 
following :  "  Among  the  immortal  memorials  of 
the  age  of  Catherine,  the  poems  of  Dershawin  may 
without  dispute  claim  place."     His  song  will  con- 

»  Compare  the  note  at  article  OseroflF.  " 


166  A  LEXICON  OF 

tinue  to  be  dear  to  the  Russians,  so  long  as  they 
treasure  the  glory  of  a  Catherine  herself,  or  that  of 
a  Rumanzoff,  an  OrlofF,  a  Suwarrow,  or  other  dis- 
tinguished men  of  the  time.  Perhaps  it  may  be 
said  of  Dershawin,  as  Quintilian  says  of  Ovid,  that 
he  was,  Nimius  sui  ingenii  amator.  He  appears 
sometimes  to  have  allowed  himself  to  be  carried 
away  by  the  power  of  his  own  imagination.  His 
pictures  are  clear  and  lively,  but  not  always  ar- 
ranged by  a  delicate  hand,  nor  always  in  keep- 
ing, and  in  perfect  harmony.  Many  of  his  odes, 
nevertheless,  exhibit  a  perfect  model  of  purity 
and  regularity.  He  wrote  sacred,  heroic,  and  ana- 
creontic odes.  In  all  the  works  of  Dershawin  are 
to  be  found  new  words  of  his  own  coining,  which 
are  particularly  sweet  in  their  effect  in  his  own 
verses,  but  very  ridiculous  in  those  of  his  imitators. 
He  incorporated  anew  a  number  of  sonorous  and 
pecuhar  Russian  words  which  had  fallen  into  dis- 
use, or  which  had  been  regarded  as  unfit  for  poetry, 
but  which,  however,  give  a  characteristic  freshness 
to  the  poems  in  which  he  has  used  them.  "  Lomo- 
nossofF  is  always  the  slave  of  his  subject;  Der- 
shawin treats  it  just  as  it  may  suit  his  fancy.  The 
former,  still  resembles  himself  in  all  his  flights; 
the  latter,  falls,  like  the  lightning's  flash,  di- 
rectly down  on  the  point  he  chooses ;  and  with  a 
rapidity  which  the  reader  is  not  always  able  easily 
to  follow.  The  one  may  be  compared  to  a  majes- 
tic river,  which  flows  tranquilly  along  between  its 
sloping  banks ;  the  other  resembles  rather  the  wa- 
terfall, which  he  himself  has  so  beautifully  described, 
which  dashes  its  towering  waves  through  the  chan- 


RUSSIAN  AUTHORS.  167 

nel  of  conflicting  rocks,  and  lends  to  the  otherwise 
peaceful  aspect  of  nature  a  wildness  and  a  spell. 
Lomonossoff"  is  in  point  of  style  pure,  rounded, 
careful,  and  consistent ;  Dershawin  florid,  various, 
and  luxuriant.  He  elevates  the  spirit  of  his  reader, 
and  at  every  minute  displays  the  power  and  rich- 
ness of  his  own." "  In  the  flights  of  inspiration 

of  the  most  exalted  order,"  says  Bestuscheff"  of  this 
writer,  "  Dershawin  attained  to  a  height  which  no 
one  had  ventured  to  aim  at  before  his  time.  At 
once  a  lyrical  poet  and  a  philosopher,  he  possessed 
the  art  of  placing  the  truth  before  princes  with 
an  unembarrassed  countenance,  and  discovered 
the  secret  of  exalting  the  sentiment  and  fasci- 
nating the  hearts  of  his  readers,  at  one  moment 
by  his  depth  of  feeling  and  sublimity  of  expression, 
at  the  next  by  the  glowing  colours  of  his  sketches. 
His  muse,  however,  not  seldom  overleaps  the 
strict  rules  of  language  in  her  ecstatic  flights,  and 
in  the  midst  of  a  thousand  beauties  a  few  faults 
have  stolen  in."  In  the  decline  of  life  Dershawin 
wrote  much  that  was  weak  and  unworthy  of  him, 
yet  even  here  the  sparks  of  genius  may  be  seen  to 
scintillate,  and  not  only  the  present  generation,  but 
posterity,  must  ever  wonder  at  the  giant  talents  of 
the  Russian  Pindar,  the  bard  of  the  Odes  to  God, 
The  Waterfall,  and  others."  Specimens  of  his 
poetry  in  the  German  language  may  be  found  in 
Borg's  Poetical  Illustrations  of  the  Russian  Nation. 
Bowring's  Russian  Anthology  gives  many  other 
specimens  in  English.  His  poems  also  appeared 
in  four  volumes  in  the  English  language  in  1808. 
His  Ode  to  God  has  been  translated  into  Latin  and 


168  A  LEXICON  OF 

Chinese,  and  printed  by  order  of  the  Emperor  of 
China  in  gold  letters  on  silk  paper,  and  hung  up  in 
a  hall  of  the  Imperial  Palace. 

Dessnizkj  (Semen  Jefimowitsch),  professor  of 
the  Roman  and  Russian  Laws,  and  member  of  the 
Russian  Academy,  studied  first  at  the  Moscow,  and 
afterwards  at  the  Glasgow  University.  In  1768  he 
was  made  extraordinary,  and  in  1773  ordinary  pro- 
fessor of  laws.  In  1787  he  took  his  leave  of  the 
University,  and  died  in  1789.  This  professor  de- 
serves the  gratitude  of  posterity  for  having  first  in- 
troduced in  Russia  the  practice  of  lecturing  on 
Russian  jurisprudence,  which  he  commenced  in 
1783 ;  and  for  having  thereby  contributed  much  to 
the  improvement  of  the  nobility  in  information  on 
this  subject,  and  prepared  them  for  entering  with 
greater  fitness  upon  their  offices  in  the  service  of 
the  state.  At  the  express  desire  of  the  crown  he 
undertook  the  translation  of  Blackstone*s  Commen- 
taries on  the  English  Law  into  Russian,  (three 
parts,  Moscow,  1780-1782,)  and  wrote  originally 
many  Essays,  Lectures,  and  Treatises. 

Dessnizkj.     See  Michael. 

Destuniss  (Spiridon  Jurjewitsch),  collegiate  coun- 
cillor and  knight,  consul  general  at  Smyrna,  was 
born  in  1783,  in  the  island  of  Corfu,  studied  first 
of  all  at  his  native  town,  and  afterwards  at  the 
University  of  Moscow.  He  conferred  a  great  boon 
upon  Russian  literature  by  his  translation  of  Plu- 
tarch's Lives  of  Illustrious  Persons,  accompanied 
by  historical  and  critical  notices  of  his  own,  which 
was  published  at  St.  Petersburg  in  the  years  1814- 
1820,  in  13  vols. 


RUSSIAN  AUTHORS.  169 

DiMiTRj  (St.  baptized  by  the  name  of  Daniel), 
metropolitan  of  Rostow,  was  born  in  1651,  at  the 
little  town  of  Makarow,  in  the  neighbourhood  of 
Kieff,  where  his  father,  named  Saffa  Tuptalo,  was 
chieftain.  He  received  his  education  at  the  mo- 
nastery of  the  Manifestation  of  Christ  at  Kieff,  and 
in  his  eighteenth  year  took  holy  orders.  In  1669 
he  was  consecrated  a  hieromonach  (see  Appendix), 
and  appointed  preacher  at  the  cathedral  of  Tscher- 
nigow.  He  discharged  his  duties  there  with  infi- 
nite credit,  visited  many  of  the  towns  of  Little 
Russia  and  Lithuania,  and  by  his  talents  and  infor- 
mation obtained  in  a  short  time  the  highest  re- 
nown. In  1684  he  was  commissioned  by  Warlaam 
Jassinskj,  archimandrite  of  the  Subterranean  Mo- 
nastery at  KiefF,  to  assist  in  the  collection  and  im- 
provement of  The  Legends  of  the  Saints,  a  work 
which  his  predecessors,  Peter  Mogila  and  Inokentj 
Gisel,  had  not  succeeded  in  completing.  Dimitrj 
used  in  the  compilation  of  these  books  the  Greek 
Biographies  of  the  Saints  by  Simeon  Metaphrast,  a 
number  of  historical  writers  of  the  eastern  and 
western  empires,  and  the  great  work  on  the  Le- 
gends of  the  Saints,  Tschetj  Minei,  (see  Appendix) 
of  the  metropolitan  Makar.  In  1689  he  made  a 
journey  to  Moscow  in  company  with  the  hetmann 
of  Little  Russia,  Iwan  Mazeppa ;  was  presented  to 
the  Czars  John  and  Peter  Alexijewitsch,  and  to  the 
Czarina  Sophia  Alexijewna,  and  there  was  re-ani- 
mated by  the  encouragement  of  the  Patriarch  Joa- 
chim to  complete  the  work  in  which  he  had  em- 
barked. In  1689  he  finished  the  first  part  of  The 
Legends  of  the  Saints;  the  second  part  in  1695; 


170  A  LEXICON  OF 

the  third  part  in  1699 ;  and  the  last  part  in  1705 ; 
all  of  which,  as  they  were  severally  completed, 
were  immediately  put  to  press.  During  this  inter- 
val Dimitrj  saw  himself  promoted,  first  to  the  ar- 
chimandrite of  the  Monastery  of  the  Ascension  at 
Tschernigow,  and  afterwards  of  the  Subterranean 
Monastery  at  Novogorod-Sawersk.  It  1701  Peter 
the  Great  summoned  him  to  Moscow,  and  ap- 
pointed him  archimandrite  of  Tobolsk  and  Siberia ; 
but  Dimitrj,  through  dread  of  that  severe  climate, 
preferred  retaining  his  eparchy  at  Moscow.  In 
1702  he  was  made  metropolitan  of  Rostow  and  Ja- 
rosslaw,  and  from  that  time  forth  he  continued  to 
reside  at  Rostow.  His  spiritual  administration  of 
this  province  was  wise  and  beneficent.  He  ex- 
horted his  clergy  by  pastoral  letters  to  the  sedulous 
fulfilment  of  their  duties,  founded  a  seminary  at 
Rostow,  held  there  lectures  himself,  and  endea- 
voured, by  the  employment  of  gentle  Christian 
means  to  root  out  the  destructive  heresy  of  the 
Rasskolniks^  who  kept  themselves  concealed  in 
the  Briinskischian  forests.  With  this  end  in  view 
he  composed  his  work  called,  A  Close  Inquiry 
into  the  Creed  of  the  Briinskischian  Rasskolniks, 
and  sent  copies  of  it  into  all  the  eparchies.  Be- 
sides this  he  wrote  sermons  for  the  people,  com- 
posed many  exhortations  and  reflections,  and  com- 
piled a  sort  of  Biblical  History,  under  the  title  of 


*  Rasskolniks,  i.  e.  The  followers  of  the  old  faith,  or  dissidents,  who 
separated  themselves  from  the  government  of  the  established  church,  be- 
cause they  would  not  embrace  the  improvements  of  the  ancient  Sclavonic 
books  of  the  church,  which  were  introduced  A.  D.  1606.  They  after- 
wards branched  out  into  several  minor  sects. 


I 


RUSSIAN  AUTHORS.  171 

Chronicles.  The  metropolitan  Dimitrj  died  at  Ros- 
tow  on  the  28th  of  October,  1709.  In  1752  his  bones 
were  found  in  perfect  preservation,  and  the  Russian 
church  reckoned  him  among  the  number  of  her 
saints.  The  most  important  works  of  this  holy 
man  are  the  following:  1.  Tschetj  Minei,  or  Bio- 
graphies of  the  Saints  who  are  esteemed  worthy  of 
reverence  by  the  Russian-Greek  Church,  in  four 
parts,  divided  into  the  order  of  the  twelve  months, 
in  folio.  This  was  several  times  printed,  both  at 
KiefF  and  Moscow.  2.  The  Clerical  Alphabet,  or 
moral  exhortations,  arranged  in  alphabetical  orden 

3.  The  Inquiry,  that  is,  a  testing  by  proofs  of  the 
Briinskischian-Rasskolnik  Creed,  and  of  the  doc- 
trines and  practices  of  that  sect,  in  three  parts.  In 
the  first  part  he  shows  that  their  profession  of  faith 
is  false ;  in  the  second  that  their  doctrines  are  de^ 
structive  to  the  soul ;  and  in  the  third  that  their 
works  must  be  displeasing  to  God.  The  first  edi- 
tion of  this  work  came  out  at  Moscow,  in  1745. 

4.  Chronicles,  called  by  himself  Chronicles  of  the 
Cell.  In  this  work  he  intended  to  have  illustrated 
the  complete  Bible  Church  History,  but  could  not 
proceed  beyond  3600  years  from  the  creation  of 
the  world.  This  was  first  printed  at  Moscow,  in 
the  year  1784.  5.  Lectures  for  Edification,  con- 
sisting of  theological  tracts,  and  several  minor 
essays,  which  were  in  part  printed  at  Moscow, 
(1786  and  1805-1807,)  and  in  part  remain  still  in 
manuscript  in  the  Library  of  St.  Sophia  at  Novo- 
gorod.  St.  Dimitrj  also  composed,  during  his  resi- 
dence in  Little  Russia,  several  dramas  on  sacred 
subjects,  in    rhyming  syllabic   metre :    as   for   in- 


17^  A  LEXICON  OF 

stance.  The  Birth  of  Christ,  The  Penitent  Sinner, 
Esther  and  Ahasuerus,  The  Resurrection  of 
Christ.  These  dramas  were  represented  at  his  own 
house,  and  at  Rostow.  One  of  them,  Esther  and 
Ahasuerus,  was  once  played  before  the  Empress 
EHzabeth  Petrowna,  at  the  theatre  of  the  court, 
during  the  time  of  Lent*.  Manuscripts  of  these 
dramas  are  to  be  found  in  the  different  Hbraries. 
Besides  these  compositions  he  was  the  author  of  a 
number  of  spiritual  songs,  psalms,  and  hymns ;  as. 
Lord  Jesus,  thee  I  love  the  best ;  On  God  I  build 
my  hope,  &c.,  which  are  well  known  and  in  use 
throughout  Russia,  and  for  the  most  part  printed. 
This  distinguished  churchman  was  adorned  with  a 
rare  depth  of  learning,  and  with  all  the  Christian 
virtues.  His  entire  income  he  gave  away  to  the 
sick  and  the  poor.  His  works  are  clear,  correct, 
and  agreeable  to  read,  and  are  inimitable  specimens 
of  the  beauty  which  may  be  discovered  in  the  Rus- 
sian church-language. 

DiMiTRj  (Satschenoff),  metropolitan  of  Novogo- 
rod,  and  president  of  the  Synod,  was  born  on  the 
6th  of  December,  1708,  and  baptized  at  the  font, 
Daniel.  He  studied  at  the  Moscow  Academy,  at 
which  he  afterwards  became  a  teacher,  and  after 
entering  holy  orders,  he  was  appointed  archiman- 
drite of  the  Swijaschian  Monastery  at  Kasan.  In 
1742  he  was  consecrated  bishop  of  Nishney-Novo- 
gorod,  in  1752  he  was  made  member  of  the  Synod, 
and  bishop  of  Rasan,  and  in  1757  he  was  preferred 
to  the  archbishopric  of  Novogorod.  In  1 762  he  per- 

»  See  a  notice  by  the  author  on  the  subject  of  the  Russian  theatre  in 
the  Breslauer  Zeitung  for  June  22,  1826. 


RUSSIAN  AUTHORS.  173 

formed  the  ceremony  of  the  coronation  of  Cathe- 
rine the  Second,  and  was  raised  to  the  dignity  of  a 
metropohtan.  He  died  at  Moscow  on  the  30th  of 
June,  1767.  This  prelate  made  himself  famous  by 
his  sermons,  which,  for  the  time  at  which  they 
were  written,  are  unrivalled  in  clearness  of  style, 
and  in  power  and  acuteness  of  thought.  Still  very 
few  of  them  have  ever  been  printed.  He  assisted 
Catherine  the  Great  in  many  of  her  magnificent 
projects,  and  enjoyed  the  distinction  of  her  especial 
favour.  Karamsin  thus  speaks  of  him  in  his  Pan- 
theon of  Russian  Authors :  "  The  merit  of  Di- 
mitrj's  sermons  consists,  not  in  the  display  of  rhe- 
torical art,  but  in  the  Christian  tone  of  their  doc- 
trines, and  their  bold  exposure  of  worldly  wicked- 
ness. He  reproved,  in  the  presence  of  the  court, 
with  a  loud  voice  the  time-serving  and  adulatory 
nobles,  shewing  them  how  small  in  reality  are  the 
advantages  to  be  derived  from  the  idol  which  they 
worshipped.  His  own  irreproachable  life  gave  him 
a  right  to  be  independent  and  severe  in  his  lan- 
guage from  the  pulpit.  His  sermon  on  the  day  of 
the  Annunciation  of  the  Virgin  deserves  especial 
notice,  in  which  he  portrays  the  condition  of  reli- 
gion and  its  ministers  in  Russia  before  the  time 
when  Elizabeth  Petrowna  ascended  the  throne. 

DiMiTRj  (Soograf),  probably  an  ecclesiastic  trans- 
lated in  1385,  or,  according  to  others,  in  1402, 
from  the  Greek  into  Russian,  an  iambic  poem, 
called  The  Creation,  by  George  Pissid,  metropoli- 
tan of  Nikomedia,  (who  lived  in  the  seventh  cen- 
tury). This  translation  is  mentioned  in  the  old 
Russian  Latopisses,  as  an  extraordinary  perform- 


174  A  LEXICON  OF 

ance.  Manuscript  copies  of  it,  bearing  the  title  of 
A  Glorification  of  God  in  relation  to  his  Creation 
of  the  World,  by  the  exceedingly  wise  George  Pis- 
sid ;  a  translation  of  the  same  by  Dimitrj  Soograf, 
are  preserved  in  the  synodal  library,  in  the  library 
of  St.  Sophia  at  Novogorod,  in  that  of  Alexander- 
Newsky,  and  the  Academy  of  Sciences  at  St.  Pe- 
tersburg. 

DiwoFF ;  the  continuer  of  Karamsin's  History  of 
the  Empire  of  Russia. 

Dmitrijeff  (Iwan  Iwanowitsch),  acting  privy 
councillor,  and  knight,  member  of  numerous 
learned  societies,  was  born  in  1760,  at  the  estate  of 
his  father,  in  the  governmental  department  of  Sim- 
birsk, and  was  educated  at  Kasan,  and  afterwards 
at  Simbirsk,  in  private  seminaries.  But  this  course 
of  instruction  was  interrupted,  and  only  continued 
indeed  till  his  twelfth  year ;  since  the  troubles  at 
the  time  of  PutgatschefF's  insurrection  compelled  his 
father  to  fly  from  city  to  city,  with  all  his  property 
and  effects ;  and  after  his  arrival  in  Moscow,  to 
wait  from  day  to  day  for  better  times,  in  order  to 
return  home  in  tranquillity.  Under  these  circum- 
stances he  resolved  to  send  his  son,  then  but  four- 
teen years  old,  to  St.  Petersburg,  to  have  him  en- 
rolled as  a  soldier  in  the  regiment  of  Semenofiian- 
guards ;  where,  after  he  had  continued  to  attend 
the  regimental  school  for  a  period  of  only  seven 
months,  he  entered  on  active  service,  in  which  he 
remained  till  he  attained  the  rank  of  captain.  At 
the  accession  of  the  Emperor  Paul  he  received,  at 
his  own  request,  permission  to  retire  from  the  army 
with  the  rank  of  colonel ;  and  after  some  months 


RUSSIAN  AUTHORS.  175 

entered  into  the  civil  service,  in  which  he  became 
subsequently  upper  procurator  to  the  senate.     He 
then  solicited  his  discharge,  which   he  obtained, 
together    with    the    rank    of    a    privy-councillor 
and  the  grant  of  a  pension.     Under  the  reign  of 
-    the  Emperor  Alexander,  he  discharged  the  duties 
of  a  senator ;    he  afterwards  became  minister  of 
justice,  and  was  decorated  with  the  order  of  St. 
Anne,  first  class,  and  that  of  St.  Alexander.     After 
he  had  filled  the  latter  office  for  four  years,  he 
again  took  his  leave,  but  the  retirement  of  his  pri- 
vate life  did  not  banish  his  memory  from  the  noble 
heart  of  his  most  gracious   master.    He   was  ap- 
pointed on  the  commission  then  named  for  the  re- 
lief of  the  desolated  town  of  Moscow,  and  received 
the  rank  of  acting  privy  councillor,  and  the  order 
of  St.  Wladimir,  first  class.     DmitrijefF  began  even 
in  early  life  to  occupy  himself  with  poetry ;  and  in- 
serted his  poems  in  many  periodical  journals,  espe- 
cially in  the  Moscow  Journal  of  1792-1793.    Later 
he  published  some  of  his  productions  separately, 
by  the  title.  More  of  my  Trifles,  Moscow,  1795. 
The  third  complete  edition  of  his  writings  appeared 
in  1804,  in  three  parts,  at  Moscow;  a  fourth  edi- 
tion in  1814  ;  and  a  fifth  in  1818.     Still  more  re- 
cently, a  sixth,  improved  and  cheaper  edition,  has 
been  prepared  for  the  use  of  the  St.  Petersburg 
Free  Society  for  the  Friends  of  Russian  Eloquence. 

I  The  poems  of  his  composition  are  sacred  odes, 
epistles,  satires,  tales,  fables,  songs,  epitaphs,  epi- 
grams, and  other  smaller  trifles.  In  these  poems 
intelligence  and  feeling  speak  in  a  pure,  agreeable, 
— 


176  A  LEXICON  OF 

is  light  and  natural,  correct  and  clear.  Amongst 
those  whose  language  may  be  regarded  as  a  pure 
model  of  Russian  writing,  he  may  be  classed  in  the 
same  rank  with  Karamsin.  Of  them  the  same  ob- 
servation may  be  made  which  is  applicable  to  the 
sun  in  spring,  that  it  not  only  warms  the  earth,  but 
that  it  elicits  from  it  also  its  own  native  heat,  which 
had  remained  through  the  winter  buried  in  the 
snow.  Of  his  fables,  Herr  MerslakofF  thus  speaks : 
"  Sumarokoff  found  them  familiarised  among  the 
simple  and  lower  class  of  the  people ;  Chemnizer 
transplanted  them  into  the  town;  Dmitrijeff  opened 
to  them  the  door  of  admission  into  elegant  and  en- 
lightened  society,  distinguished  by  good  taste  and 
refinement  of  language."  Herr  MakarofF  has  writ- 
ten a  general  review  of  the  works  of  Dmitrijeff, 
which  begins  with  the  words,  "Who  does  not  know 
the  Russian  La  Fontaine  ?" 

DoBROwsKj  (Joseph),  properly,  Daubrawsky  ye 
Solnii,  Abbe — born  of  Bohemian  parents,  the  17th 
of  August,  1753,  at  Jyermet,  near  Rrab,  in  Hun- 
gary, became  a  Jesuit  at  Briinn,  and  was  tutor  in 
the  well-known  family  of  Count  Nostitz,  at  Prague, 
in  the  year  1786 ;  afterwards  appointed  theological 
censor  and  vice-rector  of  the  Prague  Seminary ; 
later  still  of  the  seminary  at  Olmiitz  :  travelled  in 
company  of  Count  Joachim  Sternberg  to  Sweden, 
and  in  1792  to  St.  Petersburg  and  Moscow,  for  the 
purpose  of  making  collections  of  the  Sclavonic  lite- 
rature. From  1819  to  1822  he  was  engaged  in 
writing  his  Sclavonic  Grammar,  by  the  title  of  In- 
stitutiones  Linguae  Sclavicce  Dialecti  Veteris,  quce 
quum  apud  RussoSj  servos  aliosque  ritus  Greedy  turn 


RUSSIAN  AUTHORS.  177 

apud  Dahnatos,  GlagoUtas  ritm  Latini  Sclavos,  in 
Ubris  sacris  obtinet,  8vo.  Vindobona3,  1822,  Anton 
V.  Schmidt.      It  contains  an   introduction   of  se- 
venty-eight pages,  and  other  matter  to  the  amount 
of  seven  hundred  and  twenty  pages :  price  3  Pr. 
thalers,  8  groschen.     This  grammar  has  since  been 
used  as  the  common  instruction  book  among  the 
Poles  and  Russians.     Besides  this,  which  may  be 
considered  his  masterpiece,  he  wrote  in  reference 
to  the  Sclavonic  nations:  1.  Die  Bildsamkeit  der 
Sclavishen  Sprache :  The  Construction  of  the  Scla- 
vonic Language,  Prague,  1799.     2.  Cyrill  und  Me- 
thiid;  der  Sclavens  Apostel :   Cyril  and  M^thiid ; 
The  Apostles  of  the  Sclaves,  Prague,  1823.    3.  Ent- 
wiirf  zu  einem  Algemeinen  Etymologicon  der  Scla- 
wischen  Sprachen :  An  Attempt  at  a  Universal  Ety- 
mology of  the  Sclavonic  Languages,  Prague,  1833, 
second   edition.      4.   Slawm,   Prague,    1806-1834, 
price  2  Pr.  thalers,  18  gr.;  a  work  containing  all 
the  results  of  the  enquiries  instituted  by  Prussia  on 
the  subject  of  Sclavonic  hterature.     5.  Sloivanka, 
for  the  better  knowledge  of  the  old  and  new  Scla- 
vonic literature ;  the  philosophical  construction  of 
the  language  in  all  the  different  dialects,  its  his- 
tory, and  antiquities  ;  2  vols,  with  two  engravings, 
and  a  musical  appendix,  8vo.  Prague,  1814-1815, 
intended   as   a  companion   to  Slawin,  see  above. 
6.  Historisch-Critisch  Untersiichung,  woher  die  Scla- 
ven  ihren  iiamen  erh alien  haben :  A  Historical  and 
Critical  Enquiry  into  the  Origin  of  Sclavonic  Names; 
to  be  found  in  the  sixth  vol.  of  the  Records  of  the 
Literary  Society  of  Bohemia,  from  the  268th  to  the 
298th  page  :  Prague,  1784,  8vo.     7.    Uber  die  Be- 

N 


178  A  LEXICON  OF 

grdbniss-art  der  alien  Slawen  iiberhaupt,  und  der 
Bohmen  insbesondere :  On  the  Mode  of  Interment 
practised  by  the  ancient  Sclaves  in  general,  and  by 
the  Bohemians  in  particular :  Prague,  1 786,  4to. 
8.  Uber  eine  stelle  im  neunzehnten  Brief e  des  Hei- 
ligen  Bonassarius,  die  Slawen  unde  ihre  Sitten  be- 
treffend :  On  a  Passage  in  the  nineteenth  letter  of 
St.  Bonassarius  relating  to  the  Sclaves  and  their 
Customs;  Prague,  1787,  4to.  A  most  classical  mo- 
del for  all  grammarians  of  the  Sclavonic  language 
is  to  be  found  in  his  System  of  the  Bohemian  Lan- 
guage, Prague,  1819,  large  8vo. ;  (see  Buchmayer). 
Late  in  the  autumn  of  1828  this  patriarch  of  Scla- 
vonic literature  came  to  Vienna,  and  from  thence 
undertook  a  scientific  journey  to  Cracow  ;  but 
on  the  6th  of  January,  1829,  died  at  Briinn,  in  the 
77th  year  of  his  age.  A  complete  list  of  his  works 
may  be  found  in  Dunder's  catalogue  of  Sclavonic 
books. 

DoLGORUKi  (Prince  I  wan  Michailowitsch),  privy- 
councillor  and  knight,  member  of  numerous  Rus- 
sian learned  societies,  born  at  Moscow  in  1764,  re- 
ceived the  first  rudiments  at  home,  and  afterwards 
completed  his  education  at  the  University  of  Mos- 
cow. After  finishing  his  three  years'  studies  at  that 
place,  he  entered  the  military  profession  as  ensign  in 
the  Moscow  infantry  regiment,  and  was  at  the  same 
time  appointed  by  King  Stanislaus  Augustus  a  colo- 
nel of  the  Polish  guards.  He  was  engaged  in  the 
campaign  of  the  Crimea,  and  soon  afterwards  was 
promoted  into  the  guards.  After  the  conclusion  of 
the  peace  with  Sweden,  1793,  he  rose  at  once  from 
being  captain  in  the  guards  to  the  rank  of  brigadier. 


RUSSIAN  AUTHORS.  179 

and  was  appointed  vice-governor  of  Pensa.  Under 
the  Emperor  Paul  the  First  he  was  admitted  to  the 
college  of  the  Chamber,  was  made  an  acting  coun- 
cillor of  state,  and  became  the  senior  member  of 
the  Upper  Salt-works  Directory  at  Moscow.  After 
the  accession  of  the  Emperor  Alexander,  he  re- 
ceived, on  the  suggestion  of  the  legislative  senate, 
in  the  year  1802,  the  appointment  of  civil  governor 
of  Wladimir;  and,  after  having  held  this  office  for 
ten  years,  relinquished  it  in  1812.  During  this  ser- 
vice he  gained,  besides  other  distinctions,  the  order 
of  St.  Anne,  first  class.  The  learning  of  the  Latin 
language,  and  assiduous  reading  of  books  on  sacred 
subjects,  awoke  in  him  the  slumbering  talent  for 
poetry,  which  was  improved  and  directed  under 
the  guidance  of  a  Schuwaloff  and  CheraskofF,  the 
worthy  professors  of  the  Moscow  University.  His 
first  attempt  was  a  poem  on  the  death  of  general 
Soritsdi,  1787.  His  writings,  in  three  separate 
editions,  of  which  the  last,  in  1819,  is  dedicated  to 
the  University  of  Moscow,  were  published  with  the 
title  of  Poems  of  Prince  I.  M.  Dolgorukj.  This 
author  exhibits  his  talent  chiefly  in  philosophical 
odes,  and  epistles  written  in  a  familiar  strain. 
Acute  thoughts,  fiery  and  deep  feeling,  and  simple 
but  happy  expressions,  are  his  most  observable  ex- 
cellencies ;  and  a  lasting  value  must  ever  be  at- 
tached to  his  Perhaps ;  The  Fire-side ;  To  My 
Neighbour  ;  and  The  Testament.  ^ 

DoMASCHNEFF  (Scrgj  Gcrassimowitsch),  gentle- 

•»  Note  by  the  Translator, — Prince  Dolgorukj  is  now,  in  his  74tli 
year,  governor-general  of  the  governmental  department  of  Wilna. 

n2 


180  A  LEXICON  OF 

man  of  the  privy-chamber,  and  knight  of  the 
Swedish  order  of  Vasa,  received  his  education  in 
the  Land  Cadet  Corps,  and  afterwards  travelled 
for  a  long  time  in  different  countries  of  Europe. 
From  1775  till  1783  he  was  director  and  vice-pre- 
sident of  the  Academy.  At  the  quinquagenarian 
jubilee  of  the  Academy  in  1776,  he  delivered  a  dis- 
course On  the  Duty  of  Learned  Societies  to  unite 
Moral  with  Physical  Researches.  In  1777  he  pro- 
posed to  the  Academy  to  compose  and  publish 
A  Universal  Geographical,  Historical,  Political, 
Physical,  and  Economical  Account  of  Russia.  A 
select  committee  was  appointed  for  this  purpose, 
and  in  1778  an  exact  specification  of  all  the  sub- 
jects of  this  work  was  published ;  but  alas  !  it  has 
to  this  day  remained  unaccomplished.  Domasch- 
neff  died  in  the  year  1796. 
Drosdoff.     See  Philaret. 


E. 

Emin  (Feodor  Alexandrowitsch),  was  born  in 
Poland,  1735,  educated  at  Kieff,  and  afterwards 
visited  Turkey.  At  that  time  he  was  induced  to 
embrace  the  Mahommedan  faith,  and  to  enter  the 
corps  of  Janizaries.  At  last  he  resolved  to  go  to 
London,  where  he  lived  for  some  time  under  the 
name  of  Mahomed  Emin.  In  1758  he  presented 
himself  before  the  Russian  embassy  in  that  metro- 
polis, and  was  baptized  anew  in  the  ambassador's 
private  chapel.  In  1761  he  travelled  to  St.  Peters- 
burg, and  was  at  first  appointed  a  teacher  in  the 


i 


RUSSIAN  AUTHORS.  181 

Cadet  Corps,  and  afterwards  translator  to  the  Col- 
lege for  Foreign  Affairs  and  the  Cabinet.  He  died 
the  18th  of  April,  1770.  Emin  was  possessed  of 
no  ordinary  abilities ;  a  fiery  imagination,  quick 
comprehension,  and  penetrating  intelligence.  He 
had  a  thorough  acquaintance  with  many  of  the 
European  and  Asiatic  languages.  But  all  these 
talents  were  neither  accompanied  by  prudence,  nor 
built  upon  a  foundation  of  solid  learning.  He 
wrote — 1.  Some  romances,  viz.  The  Fortunes  of 
Lisark  and  Sarmanda,  1763;  The  Caprices  of  For- 
tune, or  the  Adventures  of  Miramond,  1766;  The 
Fate  of  Themistocles,  1763.  2.  A  book  of  Moral 
Fables,  1764.  3.  A  theological  work,  called  The 
Way  to  Salvation,  or  Godly  Tracts,  which  contain 
the  most  important  rules  for  a  general  knowledge 
of  religious  truths.  This  work  was  first  printed  in 
1780,  ten  years  after  the  death  of  the  author,  and 
has  since  passed  through  several  editions.  4.  An 
Account  of  the  Ancient  and  Modern  State  of  the 
Ottoman  Empire,  1764,  and  many  others.  The 
most  considerable,  however,  of  all  his  works  is — 5. 
A  History  of  Russia  to  the  time  of  Wsewolod  the 
Third,  or  the  year  1213,  which  was  printed  in 
the  years  1767,  1768,  and  1769,  in  three  parts,  at 
the  cost  of  the  Academy  of  Sciences.  This  book 
was  held  for  some  time  by  the  Russians  in  great  es- 
teem ;  but  after  Schlozer  and  other  real  historians 
had  enhghtened  the  field  of  Russian  history  with 
the  torch  of  true  criticism,  it  lost  all  its  value.  Its 
author  had  availed  himself  of  the  most  exception- 
able sources,  fabricated  events  which  had  never  oc~ 


182  A  LEXICON  OF 

curred,  and  referred  to  books  for  authority  which 
never  had  existed  in  the  world. 

Epiphanj  (Slawinezk  or  Slawanizkj),  a  hieromo- 
nach  in  the  Monastery  of  KiefF,  educated  himself 
at  the  KiefF  Academy,  and  at  other  Polish  places 
of  instruction,  at  the  beginning  of  the  17th  century, 
and  received  the  tonsure  subsequently  at  the  Sub- 
terranean Monastery  at  KiefF.  The  bojar  Theo- 
dor  Michailowitsch  RtischtschefF,  so  distinguished 
for  his  piety  and  patriotism,  resolved  to  found  a 
learned  society  for  the  translation  of  numerous  use- 
ful and  clerical  books  into  the  Sclavonic  language, 
at  the  Hermitage  of  the  Manifestation  of  Christ, 
which  he  had  built  in  the  neighbourhood  of  Moscow 
in  the  year  1648.  With  this  end  in  view,  in  1649, 
he  drew  Epiphanj  and  a  number  of  other  learned 
monks  out  of  their  cloisters,  and  assigned  them  a 
suitable  lodging  and  provision.  This  society  trans- 
lated several  books  from  the  Greek,  as — 1.  The  Life 
of  St.  John  Chrysostom.  2.  His  six  Discourses  on 
the  Priesthood.  3.  Thirty  different  Discourses  of 
Bt.  Gregory  of  Nazianzus.  4.  Eleven  Homihes  of 
St.  Basil  the  Great.  5.  Four  Discourses  of  St. 
Anastasius  of  Alexandria  against  Arius.  6.  Hea- 
ven, or  the  Setting  Forth  of  an  Orthodox  Faith,  by 
the  venerable  John  of  Damascus.  These  transla- 
tions were  printed  at  Moscow  in  the  years  1664- 
1665.  Many  other  translations  were  also  executed 
by  him,  or  under  his  superintendence,  which  have 
been  preserved  among  the  manuscripts  in  the  Pa- 
triarchal Library.  He  also  compiled — 1.  A  Com- 
plete Graeco-Latino-Sclavonic   Lexicon,  in   2  vo- 


RUSSIAN  AUTHORS.  183 

lumes ;  and  2.  A  Philosophical  Lexicon,  or  a  Com- 
parison of  Several  Passages  from  the  Greek  Fa- 
thers, &c.  Neither  of  these  works  is  in  print.  The 
first  is  preserved  in  MS.  in  the  Synodal  Library, 
and  a  copy  of  the  last  is  in  the  possession  of  the 
Society  of  the  Friends  of  Literature.  After  the 
lapse  of  some  years  he  was  made  corrector  of  the 
press  at  the  Moscow  Printing-house,  and  after- 
wards appointed  by  the  Patriarch  Nikon  to  be  a 
teacher  in  the  Patriarchal  School  at  the  Monastery 
of  Tschudow.  There  he  occupied  himself  in  the 
correction  and  improvement  of  the  Sclavonic 
church  books.  His  most  important  work  was  un- 
dertaking to  translate  the  entire  Bible  from  Greek 
into  the  Sclavonic  language;  The  Czar  Alexej 
Michailowitsch  engaged  him  in  this  labour,  under 
the  supervision  of  the  metropolitan  Pawel  (Paul) 
of  Sarez,  who  about  this  time  succeeded  to  the  pa- 
triarchal chair.  Several  learned  men  of  the  eccle- 
siastical profession  were  appointed  his  coadjutors  in 
the  work.  To  assure  them  stillness  and  tranquil- 
lity while  engaged  in  this  occupation,  a  retired 
dwelling  was  assigned  to  them  some  way  out  of 
Moscow,  at  Krutizi,  in  a  lonely  and  picturesque 
vicinity.  They  began  first  with  the  New  Testa- 
ment, and  translated  it  in  the  rough.  This  great 
undertaking,  however,  was  interrupted  suddenly  by 
the  death  of  the  excellent  metropolitan  Pawel,  who 
died  September  the  9th,  1676.  Epiphanj  delivered 
a  funeral  discourse  over  his  remains,  wrote  an  epi- 
taph in  Greek  verse  for  his  monument,  but  soon 
after,  the  19th  of  November  in  the  same  year, 
followed   him   also   into  eternity.     Epiphanj   was 


184  A  LEXICON  OF 

highly  esteemed  by  all  his  contemporaries  for  his 
learning,  talents,  activity,  and  piety.  Of  his  coad- 
jutors in  the  translation  the  best  known  are  the 
hieromonach  Arsenj  Satanofskj",  who  also  trans- 
lated the  Uves  of  many  of  the  saints,  and  a  monk 
of  the  Monastery  of  Tschudow  at  Moscow,  named 
Euthimj,  who  gave  a  new  translation  of  all  the 
works  of  St.  Dionysius  Areopagites. 

EuGENj  (Ewgenj  BolchowitimofF),  archbishop  of 
Pskow,  Livonia,  and  Courland,  knight  of  several 
orders,  member  of  the  Russian  Academy,  of  several 
universities,  and  other  learned  societies,  was  born 
the  19th  of  December,  A.  D.  1767.  From  the 
year  1778  he  was  educated  at  the  seminary  of  Wo- 
ronesh,  and  afterwards  studied  at  the  Clerical  Aca- 
demy at  Moscow,  and  at  the  University  of  the  same 
place.  From  1 788,  after  his  return  to  Woronesh, 
he  served  at  the  seminary  of  the  same  place  as 
teacher  to  several  classes ;  after  that  as  prefect, 
and  till  1799  as  teacher  in  theology,  church  history, 
and  hermeneutics.  During  his  discharge  of  these 
duties  he  filled  the  office  of  protoijerej  of  the  town 
of  Pawlowsk.  In  1799,  after  he  had  become  a 
widower,  Amwrossj,  at  that  time  metropolitan  of  St. 
Petersburg,  called  him  to  the  Alexander  Academy, 
and  on  the  19th  of  March  in  the  same  year  he  re- 
ceived the  tonsure  at  the  Lawra  of  St.  Alexander 
Newskj,  and  was  appointed  prefect  and  teacher,  first 
of  philosophy,  and  afterwards  of  theology,  in  the 
above-mentioned  academy.    On  the  6th  of  January, 


•=  In  Strahl's  Work,  Learned  Russia,  may  be  found  full  particulars  re- 
specting Euthimj  and  Arsenj. 


RUSSIAN  AUTHORS.  185 

1804,  he  was  promoted  to  the  highest  rank,  and 
on  the  18th  of  the  same  month  was  consecrated 
bishop  of  Old  Russia,  and  vicar  of  Novogorod.     In 
1808  he  was  translated  to  Wologda;  in  1813  to  Ka- 
luga; and  in  1816  was  made  archbishop  of  Pskow. 
Of   his   works    the   following   are   published:    1. 
Eight  Historical  and  Theological  Dissertations  on 
various  subjects,  and  some  Sermons,  which  were 
published  singly  between  1793  and  1806,  at  Mos- 
cow, at  Woronesh,  and  St.  Petersburg.     2.  An  Ac- 
count of  the  Life  and  Actions  of  the  most  venerable 
Bishop   Tichon    Sadonskj,    St.  Petersburg,   1796; 
second   edition,   Moscow,   1820.     3.  A  Historical 
Account  of  Grusia,  in  regard  to  its  political,  eccle- 
siastical,  and   scientific   relations,    St.  Petersburg, 
1802.     4.  The  Church  Calendar,  with  various  His- 
torical Annotations,  Moscow,  1803.     5.  Three  His- 
torical Discourses  on  the  Antiquities,  Sacred  and 
Profane,  of  Novogorod,  Moscow,  1808.     6.  A  His- 
torical Lexicon  of  Writers   of  the   Ecclesiastical 
Profession  belonging  to  the  Russian-Greek  Church, 
in  two  parts,  St.  Petersburg,  1818.    A  German  ver- 
sion of  this  Lexicon  was  published  by  professor 
Strahl,  under  the  title  of  Learned  Russia,  Leipsic, 
by  Fr.  Fleischer,   1828.     Many  of  his  essays  on 
historical  and  literary  subjects  are  to  be  found  in 
the  Journals — The  Friend  of  Enlightenment,  The 
European  Intelligencer,  The  Friend  of  Eloquence, 
The   Son  of  his  Country,  Patriotic  Memorabiha, 
and  several  others.     The  venerable   Eugenj   also 
took  a   part  in   the   compilation    of   the   History 
of  the  Russian  Hierarchy,  which  was  published  by 
Amwrossj,  bishop  of  Old  Russia,  at  Moscow,  in  the 


186  A  LEXICON  OF 

years  1807-1815,  in  seven  parts.  He  published 
further — 1.  The  Posthumous  Works  of  the  most 
venerable  Herr  Tichon  Sadonskj,  St.  Petersburg, 
1799.  2.  Select  Sermons  of  Innocentj,  bishop 
of  Woronesh,  Woronesh,  1799;  and  3.  A  Collec- 
tion of  Sermons  and  Discourses  by  Amwrossj, 
metropolitan  of  St.  Petersburg,  three  parts,  Mos- 
cow, 1810.  Some  translations  of  his  from  the 
Greek,  Latin,  and  French  languages  are  extant. 

EuTHiMj  (Euthimius).     See  Epiphanj. 

Ewers  (Johann  Phihp  Gustavus),  acting  coun- 
cillor of  state,  and  professor  of  Russian  History, 
Geography,  and  Statistics  at  the  University  of  Dor- 
pat,  was  born  on  the  4th  of  July,  1781,  in  a  village 
of  the  bishopric  of  Corvei ;  received  his  earliest 
education  from  the  village  priest.  Afterwards,  from 
the  year  1796,  at  the  Gymnasium  of  Holzmiinden, 
and  finally,  in  1799,  at  the  University  of  Gottingen, 
where  he  frequented  chiefly  the  lectures  of  Schlo- 
zer  and  Heeren.  In  1803  he  received  an  appoint- 
ment as  private  tutor  in  a  noble  Finlandish  family, 
and  there  first  began  to  occupy  himself  seriously 
with  statistics  and  Russian  history.  Finding  his 
interest  in  these  studies  increase,  he  now  resolved 
to  devote  all  his  leisure  to  these  pursuits.  In  1808 
he  continued  his  investigations  at  Moscow,  under 
the  advice  and  with  the  assistance  of  Karamsin. 
In  1810  he  was  made  professor  ordinarius  at  the 
University  of  Dorpat,  and  in  1818  rector  magni- 
ficus  at  the  same.  The  works  of  Ewers,  which 
have  earned  for  him  a  high  place  among  the  list 
of  Russian  historical  writers,  are  the  following  :  1. 
Von  Ursprung  des  Riissischen  Staats ;  On  the  Rise 


RUSSIAN  AUTHORS.  187 

of  the  Russian  Empire ;  Riga  and  Leipsic,  1808. 
2.  Kritische  Vorarbeiten  zur  Geschicte  der  Russen : 
Critical  Materials  for  a  History  of  the  Russians ; 
Dorpat,  1814,  first  vol.  3.  Geschicte  der  Russen: 
A  History  of  the  Russians;  Dorpat,  1816,  first  vol. 
4.  Des  Herzogthums,  Ehrten-Ritter  und  Landrecht  : 
The  Jurisdiction  of  the  Dukedom,  the  Honourable 
Order  of  Knights  and  Provincial  Courts,  Dorpat, 
1821.  5.  Das  alt  est  e  Recht  der  Russen,  in  seiner 
gesJiict lichen  Entwickelung  dagestelt :  The  most  an- 
cient Forms  of  Law  among  the  Russians,  considered 
in  relation  to  their  Historical  development,  Dor- 
pat, 1829.  Neumann  s  Entwickelung  des  Russischen 
Recht  es  nach  der  erst  en  his  zur  zweiter  Prawda. 
Aus  den  studien  zur  grundlichen  kenntniss  der  vor- 
zeit  Russlands,  von  Ewers.  See  Neumann's  Ex- 
planation of  the  Russian  Law,  as  it  existed  from 
the  time  of  the  first  to  the  second  Prawda.  Taken 
from  the  Studies  for  a  Fundamental  Knowledge  of 
Russian  Antiquity,  by  Ewers,  Dorpat,  1830. 

F. 

Feodor  (MaximofF),  a  hypo-deacon,  and  author 
of  a  Sclavonic  grammar,  which  appeared  in  print  in 
1725. 

Feophan  Prokopowitsch,  archbishop  of  Novo- 
gorod,  presiding  member  of  the  Holy  Synod,  held  a 
distinguished  station  in  the  ranks  of  the  great  fel- 
low-labourers of  Peter  the  Great.  He  was  born  at 
Kieff,  the  8th  of  July,  1681,  lost  his  parents  whilst 
of  very  tender  years,  and  was  educated  by  his  uncle, 
the  hieromonach  Feophan.     He  received  further 


188  A  LEXICON  OF 

instructions  at  the  Academy  of  Kieff,  and  at  the 
Lithuanian  schools,  and  finally  completed  his  sci- 
entific studies  at  Rome.  After  this  he  entered  the 
monastery  of  Potschajeff,  in  Volhynia,  and  in  1704 
undertook  the  post  of  lecturer  in  poetry,  at  the 
KiefF  Academy.  In  1706,  at  the  arrival  of  Peter 
the  Great  at  that  place,  to  lay  the  foundation  of 
the  excavated  fortress  there,  he  undertook  to  sa- 
lute him  with  a  gratulatory  address,  which  received 
the  entire  approbation  of  the  emperor.  In  1711  he 
accompanied  Peter  in  the  Turkish  campaign ;  after 
his  return,  entered  on  the  office  of  rector  and 
teacher  of  theology  at  the  Kieff  Academy,  and  by 
his  devoted  attention  to  his  duties,  brought  this 
place  of  education  to  a  high  degree  of  perfection. 
In  1716  he  was  summoned  to  St.  Petersburg,  was 
consecrated  there  bishop  of  Pschow  and  Narwa, 
and  chosen  by  Peter  to  be  his  assistant  in  the  re- 
formation of  the  Russian  hierarchy.  In  1719  ap- 
peared under  his  direction  the  Rules  for  the  Clergy, 
and  many  other  well-known  enactments  of  Peter 
the  Great  on  these  subjects.  In  1721  he  was  raised 
to  the  rank  of  archbishop,  and  appointed  second 
vice-president  of  the  Holy  Synod.  In  1724  he 
crowned  the  Empress  Catherine  at  Moscow,  and 
at  the  death  of  Peter  dehvered  a  funeral  oration 
over  his  grave,  which  is  still  esteemed  a  model  of 
true  eloquence.  In  1728  he  crowned  the  Emperor 
Peter  the  Second,  and  in  1730  the  Empress  Anne, 
by  whose  side  he  stood  firm  against  the  High  Coun- 
cil, who  made  the  attempt  to  control  and  limit  the 
imperial  power.     Feophan  died  at  St.  Petersburg, 


RUSSIAN  AUTHORS.  189 

the  8th  of  September,  1736,  and  was  buried  in  the 
cathedral  of  St.  Sophia,  at  Novogorod.  This  arch- 
prelate,  who  obtained  the  name  of  the  Russian 
Chrysostom,  was  justly  considered  the  most  en- 
lightened man  of  his  time.  An  enumeration  of  his 
writings  must  excite  our  astonishment  at  the  mul- 
tiphcity  and  variety  of  his  occupations.  He  com- 
posed theological,  historical,  pohtical,  and  prag- 
matical works ;  sermons,  panegyrical  and  funeral 
discourses ;  and  also  wrote  verses,  in  which  the  un- 
common acuteness  of  his  understanding  appears. 
His  oratorical  compositions,  written  with  strict  at- 
tention to  all  the  rules  of  rhetoric,  shine  in  every 
line  with  a  brilliance  of  talent  which  makes  the 
reader  forget  the  roughness  and  impurity  of  style, 
which  was  the  peculiar  and  necessary  fault  of  the 
time  in  which  he  wrote.  His  compositions  in  Latin 
are,  in  point  of  language,  much  more  pure  than 
those  in  Russian.  His  name  will  ever  be  remembered 
with  that  of  the  great  monarch  whom  he  under- 
stood and  appreciated  better  than  all  his  contempo- 
raries, and  better  even  than  many  of  his  suc- 
cessors. Further  information  respecting  him  in 
his  literary  capacity,  may  be  found  in  Katschen- 
ofskj's  Glance  at  the  Progress  of  Eloquence  in  the 
first  half  of  the  last  Century  (in  Russian). 

FiLARET.     See  Philaret. 

FiLiMONOFF,  published  a  very  successful  transla- 
tion of  Horace. 

Feodoroff  (Boris),  a  dramatic  poet.  His  Julius 
Caesar  gives  evidence  of  a  strong  talent  for  tra- 
gedy. 


li. 


190  A  LEXICON  OF 


G. 


Gabriel  (Bushinskj),  bishop  of  Rasan  and  Mu- 
rom, born  in  Little  Russia,  studied  at  the  Academy 
of  Kieff,  and  became  teacher  at  the  Academy  of 
Moscow.  In  1707  he  took  the  monastic  order, 
and  in  1714  was  made  prefect  at  the  same  academy. 
In  Moscow  he  soon  acquired  celebrity  by  his  preach- 
ing. Peter  the  First  invited  him  in  1719  to  St. 
Petersburg,  and  appointed  him  upper  hieromonach 
to  the  fleet.  In  this  capacity  it  often  became  his 
duty  to  preach  in  presence  of  the  Emperor,  and 
on  all  these  occasions  he  met  with  distinguished  ap- 
probation. In  1721  he  was  promoted  to  the  rank 
of  archimandrite,  was  made  a  member  of  the  di- 
recting synod,  director  and  patron  of  all  the  cleri- 
cal schools  and  printing-houses;  and  in  1726  he 
received  the  rank  of  bishop.  He  died  at  Moscow, 
in  1731.  Katschenofskj,  in  his  treatise  called  A 
Glance  at  the  Progress  of  Russian  Eloquence  in 
the  first  half  of  the  last  Century,  has  given  us  a 
complete  critique  on  the  style  and  matter  of  his 
Sermons,  which  were  printed  and  published  at 
Moscow,  in  1784.  Peter  the  Great  frequently 
commissioned  him  to  translate  foreign  works,  of 
which  the  following  were  printed  :  1.  PufFendorf's 
Introduction  to  the  History  of  the  States  of  Eu- 
rope, St.  Petersburg,  I7l8.  2.  On  the  Duties  of 
Men  and  Citizens,  by  the  same  author,  St.  Peters- 
burg, 1726.  3.  Stratteman's  Theatre,  or  Historical 
Drama,  representing  the  history  of  the  world  and 
of  the  Bible,  St.  Petersburg,  1724.  Gabriel  was 
also  appointed  to  revise  Moreri's  translation  of  the 


RUSSIAN  AUTHORS.  191 

Great  Historical  Lexicon,  which  was  begun  by 
order  of  Peter,  in  the  year  I7l6  ;  but  only  427 
sheets,  comprising  the  letters  from  A  to  N,  have 
been  preserved  in  the  Synodal  Library. 

Gedeon  Krinofskj,  bishop  of  Pskow,  was  born 
at  Casan  in  1726,  and  studied  in  the  seminary  of 
that  place.     Having  completed  his  course  of  phi- 
losophy there,  he  was  appointed  a  teacher  in  the 
same  academy,  and  took  the  tonsure.     In  1750  he 
asked  permission  of  the  synod  to  finish  his  scien- 
tific studies  at  the  Academy  of  Moscow.     Here  he 
attended  theological  lectures,  and  himself  preached 
some  sermons  in  public,  which  soon  attracted  ge- 
neral attention  by  their  clearness  of  thought,  depth 
of  feeling,  and  animation  and  correctness  of  style. 
When  the  Empress  Elizabeth  Petrowna,  during  her 
visit  to  Moscow  in  1753,  had  heard  the  merits  of 
Gedeon  spoken  of  in  high  terms  by  Schuwaloff,  she 
desired  Gedeon  to  preach  in  her  presence,  and  im- 
mediately appointed  him   preacher  to  the  court, 
with  commands  to  attend  her  to  St.  Petersburg. 
He  discharged  this  office  to  the  entire  satisfaction 
of  the  Empress,  who  not  unfrequently  suggested 
to  him  the  subject  for  his  sermons.     In  1755  he 
was  appointed  archimandrite  of  the  monastery  of 
Sawin  Storoschew,  and  promoted  to  be  a  member 
of  the  Holy  Synod.     In  1759  he  became  archi- 
mandrite of  the  Sergian  monastery  of  Troizka,  but 
still  continued  to  perform  the  office  of  preacher  to 
the  court.     At  the  time  of  the  coronation  of  Ca- 
therine the  Second  he  was  in  Moscow,  and  on  the 
7th  of  October,  1762,  he  was  consecrated  to  the 
dignity  of  bishop  of  Pskow.     He  died  on  the  22nd 


192  A  LEXICON  OF 

of  June,  1763,  on  a  journey  which  he  was  making 
through  his  eparchy.  His  sermons  were  printed  at 
the  desire  of  the  Empress,  in  1760,  in  two  volumes. 
Gedeon  selected  as  the  model  of  his  imitation,  the 
Peloponnesian  bishop,  Elias  Minatz,  (whose  writings 
at  that  time  had  not  yet  been  translated  into  the 
Russian  language,)  and  frequently  borrowed  whole 
passages  from  his  works.  On  his  style  some  criti- 
cal remarks  may  be  found  in  the  work  of  Katsche- 
nofskj,  mentioned  in  our  notice  of  Gabriel ;  (see  last 
article).  Herr  Karamsin,  in  his  Pantheon  of  Rus- 
sian Writers,  speaks  of  him  in  the  following  terms : 
"  The  sermons  of  Gedeon  have  obtained  a  high 
reputation,  and  they  deserve  it.  They  abound  in 
Christian  piety,  original  observations,  moral  truths, 
and  rhetorical  ornament.  Their  style  is  not  always 
equal,  but  always  clear ;  and  on  the  whole  is  very 
euphonious.  Gedeon  loved  much  to  select  his  il- 
lustrations from  history,  or  from  nature,  and  it  is 
evident  that  he  was  a  great  reader  of  the,  ancient 
historians  and  Pliny.  He  also  knew  well  how  to 
introduce  into  the  right  place  in  his  sermons,  quo- 
tations from  the  old  fathers  and  doctors  of  the 
church.  He  was,  in  one  word,  a  learned  man ;  had 
much  natural  acuteness,  and  a  peculiar  turn  for 
eloquence.  The  name  of  the  second  Feophan  has 
been  aptly  given  to  him  ;  and  indeed,  as  far  as  na- 
tural qualifications  go,  he  cannot  be  considered  his 
inferior.  Gedeon  also  was  in  the  habit  of  turning 
to  account  the  events  of  the  day  in  his  discourses, 
and  the  dreadful  earthquake  at  Lisbon  served  him 
as  the  subject  for  one  of  his  best  sermons." 

Gennadj  (archbishop  of  Novogorod  and  Pskow), 


RUSSIAN  AUTHORS.  193 

a  celebrated  partizan  of  the  doctrines  of  the  true 
faith,  against  the  judaizing  heresy,  was  conse- 
crated archbishop  in  the  year  1485,  and  died,  after 
he  had  gained  himself  many  enemies  by  his  intem- 
perate zeal,  secluded  in  the  Tschudow  Monastery 
(of  Miracles)  at  Moscow,  the  14th  of  December, 
1506.  Gennadj  left  many  circulars  addressed  to 
his  clergy  against  heretical  sects  and  doctrines,  and 
supported  his  arguments  not  only  by  appeals  to 
and  quotations  from  the  fathers  of  the  church,  but 
also  by  mathematical  computations  of  the  Paschal 
cycle.  These  manuscripts  are  to  be  found  in  dif- 
ferent libraries.  In  his  circulars,  which  were 
printed  in  the  Ancient  Russian  Library,  a  special 
zeal  is  observable  for  the  promotion  of  school 
building. 

Georgj  Konisskj,  archbishop  of  White  Russia, 
and  member  of  the  Holy  Directing  Synod,  was 
born  at  Naschin,  the  20th  of  November,  1717. 
From  1728  to  1743  he  continued  to  study  at  the 
Academy  of  Kieff.  In  1744  he  entered  the  mo- 
nastic order;  in  1745  was  appointed  lecturer  in 
poetry  in  the  above  named  university ;  and  in 
1747  teacher  of  the  philosophical  class,  and  prefect 
of  the  Academy.  In  1751  he  was  made  rector  and 
reader  in  theology,  and  in  1752  archimandrite  of 
the  Monastery  of  Brothers,  at  Kieff.  In  1755  he 
received  consecration  as  bishop  of  Mohilew,  and 
in  1783  was  elected  to  the  dignity  of  archbishop 
and  member  of  the  Holy  Synod.  He  died  at  Mo- 
hilew on  the  23rd  of  February,  1795.  Of  his  writ- 
ings the  following  are  best  known  :  1.  A  Discourse 
in  the  Latin  language,  delivered  on  the  27th  of 

o 


194  A  LEXICON  OF 

July,  1765,  at  Warsaw,  before  the  newly-elected 
King  of  Poland,  Stanislaus  Poniatowskj,  upon  the 
Persecutions  suffered  by  the  Polish  Professors  of 
the  Russian  Greek  Faith '^.  2.  The  Rights  and 
Privileges  of  the  Inhabitants  of  Lithuania  and  Po- 
land, who  profess  the  Greek  Faith,  in  the  Polish 
language,  printed  at  Warsaw,  1767.  3.  Histori- 
cal Notices  respecting  the  Eparchy  of  Mohilew, 
printed  in  the  New  St.  Petersburg  Calendar  for 
the  year  1775.  4.  On  the  Duties  of  Parish  Priests, 
St.  Petersburg,  1776.  5.  Discourses  for  Edifica- 
tion, printed  at  the  press  which  he  himself  estab- 
lished at  Mohilew.  Of  his  gratulatory  addresses 
the  following  are  extant :  1.  A  Discourse  delivered 
by  him,  29th  of  September,  1762,  before  Catherine 
the  Second,  after  her  coronation  at  Moscow.  2. 
Two  orations  pronounced  in  the  year  1787  in  pre- 
sence of  the  same  Empress,  on  the  occasion  of  the  < 
journey  which  she  made  through  the  governmental 
department  of  Mohilew. 

Geougj,  a  monk  of  the  Sergian  Monastery  of 
Troizka,  lived  at  the  beginning  of  the  sixteenth 
century.  He  composed  a  Russian  Chronicle,  which 
reaches  to  the  year  1533,  and  which  is  now  pre- 
served in  the  Synodal  Library  at  Moscow. 

GisEL.     See.Innokentj. 

Glagoleff  wrote  in  the  year  1818  a  treatise  On 


<•  A  translation  of  this  sermon  is  to  be  found  in  the  fourteenth  number 
of  the  European  Messenger  for  the  year  1804.  The  modest  answer  de- 
serves notice  which  he  made  to  King  Stanislaus,  who  asked  him,  after 
having  listened  attentively  to  the  discourse,  "  Are  there  many  men  in 
Russia  as  learned  as  yourself?"  "  I  am  the  least  of  all,"  replied 
Georgj. 


RUSSIAN  AUTHORS.  195 

the  Natural  Characteristics  of  the  Popular  Songs  of 
the  Russians,  which  is  to  be  found  in  the  eleventh 
volume  of  the  Records  of  the  University  of  Mos- 
cow, published  by  the  Society  of  the  Friends  of  Rus- 
sian Literature.  Another  essay  On  the  Old  Fest- 
sp'iele,  or.  Sports  usual  upon  Feast-days,  appeared  in 
the  European  Messenger  at  Moscow,  1821. 

Glinka  (Feodor  Nikolajevvitsch),  called  also 
Glinka  the  First,  was  colonel  in  the  IsmailofF- 
guard,  and  knight  of  several  orders,  president  of  the 
St.  Petersburg  Free  Society  of  the  Friends  of  Rus- 
sian Literature,  principal  coadjutor  of  the  president 
of  the  Society  for  the  Erection  of  Schools  on  the 
system  of  mutual  instruction,  and  member  of  many 
other  learned  societies,  was  born  in  the  govern- 
mental department  of  Smolensk,  in  the  year  1788. 
From  the  year  1799  he  received  his  education  in 
the  first  Cadet  Corps :  in  1803  he  became  an  officer, 
and  in  1 805  made  the  Austrian  campaign.  After 
this  he  took  leave  of  the  army,  and  retired  to  his 
estates  situated  in  the  department  of  Smolensk,  to 
occupy  himself  there  with  literature  and  scientific 
pursuits.  In  1810  he  travelled  through  the  entire 
districts  of  Smolensk  and  Tver,  and  part  of  that 
of  Moscow,  in  boats  upon  the  Wolga.  In  1811  he 
visited  Kieff.  In  1812,  when  the  enemy  suddenly 
approached  his  property,  he  mounted  his  charger, 
and  hastened  to  join  the  army.  As  far  as  Ta- 
rutin  he  was  a  spectator  of  the  campaign,  but 
after  this  he  again  entered  the  service,  and  was 
appointed  aidecamp  to  Count  Miloradowitsch  till 
the  end  of  the  campaign  of  1814.  In  1815  he 
exchanged  into  the  guards,  and  was  aidecamp  to 

o2 


196  A  LEXCION  OF 

the  chief  of  the  staff  of  the  Corps  of  Guards. 
After  that  he  was  aidecamp  to  the  head  of  the 
war  department  at  St.  Petersburg,  but  he  became 
imphcated  in  some  of  the  reported  conspiracies, 
and  receiving  his  dismissal  on  that  account,  was 
banished  to  Petrosawodsk,  where,  in  the  capacity 
of  collegiate  councillor,  he  may  probably  be  em- 
ployed in  some  department  of  the  civil  service. 
Glinka  takes  a  leading  position  among  the  mili- 
tary writers  of  Russia.  The  following  works  of 
his  pen  are  best  known :  1.  Letters  of  a  Russian 
officer  regarding  Poland,  Austria,  Prussia,  and 
France,  with  a  detailed  account  of  the  campaign  of 
the  Russians  against  the  French  in  the  years  1805 
and  1806,  as  well  as  of  the  war  in  and  out  of  Rus- 
sia from  1812  to  1815,  in  eight  parts,  Moscow, 
1815-1816.  The  two  first  parts  of  these  Letters, 
which  contain  the  account  of  the  war  of  1805,  were 
printed  at  Moscow  in  1808.  2.  Letters  to  a 
Friend, containing  remarks, thoughts,  and  reflections 
on  several  subjects,  in  three  parts,  St.  Petersburg, 
1816-1817.  3.  Passages  in  the  Life  of  Thaddaus 
Kosciuski,  St.  Petersburg,  1815.  4.  A  short  ex- 
tract from  the  Military  Journal,  which  was  edited 
from  1817  to  1819  by  the  Adjutant-General  Si- 
paghin,  St.  Petersburg,  1817.  5.  Reflections  on  the 
Necessity  of  an  Active  Life,  of  Literary  Occupa- 
tions and  Reading,  St.  Petersburg,  1818.  6.  Luke 
and  Maria,  a  tale,  St.  Petersburg,  1818.  7.  Si- 
nowoj  Bogdan  Chmelnizki,  or  the  Deliverance  of 
Little  Russia,  two  parts,  St.  Petersburg,  1818.  8. 
A  Present  to  Russian  Soldiers,  St.  Petersburg,  1818. 
Many  poems,  distinguished  by  their  exalted  senti- 


RUSSIAN  AUTHORS.  197 

meiit  and  noble  tone  of  thought,  and  written  in  a 
fiery  and  exciting  style,  as  well  as  several  treatises 
in  prose  from  the  pen  of  this  esteemed  author,  are 
to  be  found  in  the  above-mentioned  Mihtary  Jour- 
nal, in  the  publications  of  the  Moscow  Society  for 
the  Friends  of  Russian  Literature,  in  The  Son  of 
his  Native  Country,  and  elsewhere. 

Glinka  (Sergj  Nikolajewitsch),  a  major  out  of 
service,  and  knight,  was  born  in  the  governmental 
department  of  Smolensk,  in  the  year  1774.  When 
the  Empress  Catherine  the  Second,  in  her  tour 
through  White  Russia  in  1788,  visited  his  parents' 
house,  she  inscribed  his  name  with  her  own  hand 
in  the  list  of  the  Land  Cadet  Corps.  In  1796  he 
left  that  institution  to  enter  the  army  as  a  lieute- 
nant. In  1 799  he  took  leave  of  the  profession  with 
the  rank  of  major ;  and  after  he  had  given  up  the 
entire  patrimony  which  he  had  inherited,  as  a  dowry 
to  his  sister,  he  went  into  the  Ukraine  as  a  teacher, 
where  he  staid  in  that  capacity  three  years.  Since 
that  time  he  has  lived  principally  at  Moscow,  occu- 
pying himself  with  literature,  and  in  the  education 
of  young  people.  His  literary  productions  are  :  1 . 
Natalia,  the  Bojar's  Daughter,  a  drama  in  four  acts, 
brought  out  at  St.  Petersburg  in  1 805.  2.  Young's 
Night  Thoughts,  Moscow,  1806.  3.  Prince  Mi- 
chael of  Tschernigow,  a  tragedy,  in  five  acts,  in 
verse;  played  first  at  Moscow,  in  the  year  1807. 
4.  Sumabeka,  or  the  Subjugation  of  Casan,  a  tra- 
gedy, in  five  acts,  in  verse ;  brought  out  first  at  St. 
Petersburg,  1807.  5.  The  Zarina  Natalia  Cyri- 
lowna,  a  Russian  novel,  in  verse,  in  ten  cantos. 
'Moscow,  1808.     6.  The  Fair  Olga,  an  opera,  in 


198  A  LEXICON  OF 

three  acts,  produced  at  Moscow,  1808.  7.  The 
New  Mirror  of  Paris,  Moscow,  1809.  8.  Minin, 
a  drama,  in  three  acts,  performed  at  Moscow, 
1809.  9.  A  History  of  Russia,  for  the  use  of 
youth,  10  volumes,  Moscow,  1817-1818;  a  new 
edition  came  out  in  1822,  in  14  vols.  10.  Russian 
Tales,  Moral  and  Historical,  three  parts,  Mos- 
cow, 1818.  11.  The  Life  of  Suworroff,  supposed 
to  have  been  written  by  himself,  Moscow,  1819. 
12.  New  Lessons  for  Children,  twelve  parts, 
Moscow,  1821.  From  1808  to  1820  he  occu- 
pied himself  in  the  editing  of  the  Russian  Mes- 
senger, which  contains  some  very  important  mate- 
rials for  the  composition  of  Russian  History.  In 
1812  he  was  decorated  with  the  order  of  St.  Wla- 
dimir,  CI.  4,  in  compliment  to  his  useful  and  popu- 
lar labours. 

Gluck  (Ernst),  a  Livonian  parish  priest,  was  taken 
prisoner  in  the  year  1703  at  Marienburg,  and  con- 
ducted with  his  whole  family  to  Moscow.  Peter 
the  Great,  who  honoured  his  learning  and  acquire- 
ments, and  especially  his  familiarity  with  the  Rus- 
sian language,  submitted  to  his  superintendence  the 
foundation  of  a  school  for  the  common  people  in 
Moscow.  At  the  opening  of  the  same  Gliick  wrote 
a  programme  for  its  future  plan  of  proceeding,  and, 
for  the  use  of  the  different  classes,  translated  into 
Russian,  among  other  things,  Luther's  Catechism, 
A  German  Grammar,  The  Vestibule,  or  a  Lexicon 
for  the  learning  of  the  Russian,  German,  Latin,  and 
French  languages;  The  Visible  World  of  Komenius; 
A  Key  to  Languages ;  and  A  Key  to  Geography. 
Whilst  he  was  living  at  Marienburg,  Gliick  trans- 


RUSSIAN  AUTHORS.  199 

lated  the  entire  Bible  into  Russian,  of  which  how- 
ever the  manuscript  was  destroyed  or  lost  in  the 
taking  of  that  town.  It  is  well  known  that  the 
Empress  Catherine  the  First  was  educated  in  the 
house  of  Gliick. 

GiNADiTSCH  (Nicolaus),  imperial  councillor  and 
knight,  librarian  to  the  Imperial  Pubhc  Library, 
and  member  of  the  Russian  Society  of  Sciences, 
was  born  at  Poltawa  the  2nd  of  February,  1784. 
From  the  year  1793  he  received  his  education  at 
the  seminary  of  that  place.  After  its  suspension 
he  visited  the  College  of  CharkofF,  and  from  1800 
to  1803  was  at  the  Moscow  University.  After  this 
he  was  employed  in  the  Bureau  of  Public  Instruc- 
tion, and  in  1811  appointed  to  superintend  the  Im- 
perial Public  Library.  Gnaditsch,  who  occupied 
himself  principally  in  advancing  the  interests  of  Rus- 
sian literature,  published,  with  this  object  in  view, 
the  following  works:  1.  Lear,  a  tragedy,  in  five 
acts,  from  Shakspeare,  in  prose,  St.  Petersburg, 
1809.  2.  Tancred,  a  tragedy,  in  verse,  from  Vol- 
taire, played  for  the  first  time  in  1810,  appeared  in 
print  at  St.  Petersburg,  1816.  3.  Thoughts  upon 
the  Causes  which  have  chiefly  promoted  the  Pro- 
gress of  Enlightenment  in  Russia,  prefixed  to  an 
important  collection  pubhshed  from  the  Imperial 
Public  Library,  January  2nd,  1814.  4.  The  Birth 
of  Homer,  a  lyrical  poem,  in  two  cantos,  St.  Peters- 
burg, 1817 ;  in  which,  to  use  the  phrase  of  Bestu- 
scheff,  "  all  the  glories  of  the  Grecian  heaven 
shine."  5.  A  translation  of  Homer's  Iliad.  Gna- 
ditsch determined  at  first  to  complete  the  work 


200  A  LEXICON  OF 

which  had  been  begun  by  Kostroff  in  1786%  and 
which  had  only  reached  to  the  end  of  the  sixth 
book  in  1787  (St.  Petersburg);  and  accorduigly, 
in  the  year  1810,  he  translated  into  Alexandrine 
verse  the  seventh,  eighth,  ninth,  tenth,  and  ele- 
venth books  of  the  Iliad.  In  the  year  1811  the 
continuation  of  KostrofF's  translation,  comprising 
the  seventh,  eighth,  and  half  the  ninth  book,  was 
found  and  printed  in  the  European  Intelligencer 
for  the  year  1811.  This  rival  work  was  far  from 
bringing  any  disadvantage  to  the  labours  of  Gna- 
ditsch ;  but,  on  the  contrary,  raised  their  value. 
The  public,  although  naturally,  and  from  old  pre- 
possessions, inclined  to  favour  the  works  of  de- 
ceased writers,  could  not  help  acknowledging  the 
superiority  of  the  new  performance,  and  encouraged 
him  to  the  completion  of  his  task.  In  the  year  1813 
C.  C.  UwarofF,  at  that  time  president  of  the  Aca- 
demy of  Sciences,  and  a  distinguished  lover  of  the 
writings  of  the  ancient  classics,  proposed  to  him  to 
translate  the  entire  Iliad  into  the  metre  of  the  ori- 
ginal. An  attempt  of  the  kind,  which  Gnaditsch 
made  in  the  sixth  book,  and  which  was  read  aloud 
before  an  open  meeting  of  the  Society  of  the  Friends 
of  the  Russian  Language,  attracted  the  universal 
attention  of  the  Russian  literary  world,  and  de- 
cided the  best  writers  of  the  day  to  declare  them- 
selves  in  favour  of  the  ancient  metre.      It  was 


*  It  was  said  that  Kostroff  had  translated  six  more  books,  which,  how- 
ever, he  committed  to  the  flames,  because  the  bookseller,  to  whom  he 
presented  the  work  for  sale,  refused  to  bid  him  more  than  150  roubles  for 
the  MS. 


RUSSIAN  AUTHORS.  201 

thus  that  the  hexameter  verse  was  first  introduced 
into  the  Russian  language.  His  Majesty  the  Em- 
peror Nicholas  rewarded  the  merits  of  the  author 
in  having  enriched  the  literature  of  Russia  with  his 
excellent  and  now  completed  Russian  translation 
of  the  Iliad,  with  a  pension  of  3000  roubles  per 
annum.  In  1805  Gnaditsch  published  a  small  col- 
lection of  modern  Greek  national  songs,  at  St.  Pe- 
tersburg, 8vo. ;  and  pointed  out  in  the  preface  the 
resemblance  of  the  modern  Greek  to  the  Russian 
popular  poetry.  The  Northern  Bee  contains  a  no- 
tice, that,  in  the  cemetry  of  the  Newskj  Monastery 
at  St.  Petersburg,  a  monument  has  recently  been 
erected  to  him,  consisting  of  a  granite  obelisk  with 
a  marble  basso-relievo  of  the  deceased.  The  me- 
dallion containing  the  portrait,  bears  the  superscrip- 
tion, "  Gnaditsch,  who  enriched  the  literature  of 
Russia  by  his  translation  of  Homer."  Under  the 
medallion  is  a  verse  of  the  Iliad,  selected  bv  Shu- 
kooskj : 

"  ToD  j^tev  a-tto  y'Kua-a^i;  fjieKiTOi;  yXvKtav  piev  atSij,"  k.  t.  X. 

"  Dem  von  der  Zung'  ein  Laut  wie  des  Honiges  Siisse  daher 
floss." 

"  From  whose  tongue  the  words  flowed  sweeter  than  honey;" 
applied  to  Nestor  in  the  Iliad,  A.  249. 

Further  below,  "  By  his  friends  and  admirers."  On 
the  reverse  are  recorded  the  day  and  year  of  his 
baptism,  and  the  hour  of  his  death. 

GoLATOFSKj.     See  Johannikj. 

GoLiKOFF  (Iwan  Iwanowitsch),  imperial  council- 
lor, born  in  1735,  at  Kursk,  had  only  learnt  to 
read  and  write,  and  in  his  youth  was  engaged  in 


202  A  LEXICON  OF 

trade.  In  the  meantime  he  acquired  a  love  for 
literatm*e  and  history,  and  having  picked  up  some 
memorable  anecdotes  and  incidents  of  the  life  of 
Peter  the  Great,  began  to  collect  a,ll  the  informa- 
tion respecting  that  monarch  which  he  could  ob- 
tain. In  the  year  1780  he  was  involved  in  a  cri- 
minal process,  lost  almost  everything  that  he  pos- 
sessed in  the  world,  and  his  honour  and  liberty  be- 
sides ;  but  on  the  7th  of  August,  1782,  on  the  oc- 
casion of  the  uncovering  of  the  famous  monument 
to  Peter  the  Great,  at  St.  Petersburg,  a  manifesto  ap- 
peared, which  restored  him  and  a  number  of  other 
prisoners  to  freedom.  This  favour,  shown  him  in 
honour  of  the  memory  of  Russia's  greatest  hero, 
whose  glorious  actions  had  already  been  the  fa- 
vourite theme  of  the  unfortunate  GolikofF  from  his 
early  childhood,  struck  his  imagination  forcibly. 
After  his  deliverance  from  restraint,  he  immediately 
went  to  the  church  to  return  thanks  to  the  Most 
High,  and  then  hastened  to  the  Peter's  place,  threw 
himself  on  his  knees  before  the  newly  uncovered 
statue  of  Peter,  and  offered  up  a  vow  in  public  that 
he  would  write  his  history.  From  this  time  he  gave 
up  all  other  business,  and  occupied  himself  exclu- 
sively with  his  Memoirs.  After  he  had  collected  and 
read  all  the  accounts  of  this  prince  which  had  ever 
been  printed  or  written  in  Russian,  he  obtained 
a  translation  of  everything  which  had  appeared 
on  the  subject  in  all  foreign  languages,  travelled 
himself  to  all  the  places  where  Peter  had  been,  and 
gathered  from  the  inhabitants  of  each  spot  per- 
sonal recollections  and  anecdotes  about  him.  After 
an  interval  of  six  years,  he  began  in  1788  to  write 


RUSSIAN  AUTHORS.  203 

his  work  at  Moscow,  by  the  title.  The  Actions  of 
Peter  the  Great,  the  wise  Founder  of  Russia. 
Catherine  the  Second  gave  her  attention  to  the 
progress  of  this  work,  and  gave  orders  to  have  all 
the  archives  of  the  empire  put  at  the  service  of  the 
author.  In  1790  he  completed  his  history,  with 
the  production  of  the  twelfth  volume.  But  as 
during  this  time  he  had  collected  a  quantity  of 
other  matter  on  the  subject,  he  afterwards  began 
to  print  A  Supplement  to  the  Actions  of  Peter,  etc. 
In  the  year  1798  eighteen  volumes  had  already  ap- 
peared. Besides  this,  Golikoff  pubhshed  in  1798 
at  Moscow,  Anecdotes  of  Peter  the  Great ;  and  in 
the  year  1800,  Lefort's  and  Gordon's  Biographies. 
The  Emperor  Paul  the  First  rewarded  him  in  1800 
with  the  rank  of  imperial  councillor.  Golikoff  died 
the  12th  of  March,  1801.  His  History  of  Peter 
the  Great,  will  never  lose  its  value  as  a  complete 
collection  of  all  possible  information  connected 
with  that  emperor.  The  critics  blame  Golikoff 
chiefly  for  having  written  his  history  in  too  rheto- 
rical and  florid  a  style ;  and  for  introducing  a  quan- 
tity of  irrelevant  and  unimportant  matter.  In  Go- 
likoff's  justification  it  may  be  replied,  that  he  was 
not,  and  himself  does  not  profess  to  be,  a  histo- 
rian, but  a  compiler ;  and  that  out  of  his  thirty 
volumes,  ten  good  volumes  of  the  proper  biography 
of  his  hero  may  well  be  extracted,  which  Russia, 
without  his  indefatigable  industry,  would  not  so 
easily  have  obtained. 

GoLowiN  (Michael  Eusewjewitsch),  a  pupil  of  the 
celebrated  L.  Euler,  was,  from  1775  to  1786,  oc- 
cupied  as   adjunct   to   the   physical  class  of  the 


204  A  LEXICON  OF 

Academy  of  Sciences  at  St.  Petersburg,  and  after- 
wards made  professor  at  the  Seminary  of  School- 
masters. He  wrote,  in  1789,  A  Plane  and  Spheri- 
cal Trigonometry ;  several  essays  for  the  Com- 
mentaries published  by  the  Academy,  and  translated 
into  Russian  some  mathematical  books ;  and  Te- 
rence's comedy  of  the  Eunuch,  1774.  He  died  in 
the  year  1790. 

GoLOWNiN  (Wassilj  Michailowitsch),  assistant  to 
the  director  of  the  Marine  Cadet  Corps,  a  captain- 
commander  of  the  navy,  and  knight,  was  born 
on  the  8th  of  April,  1776,  in  the  government  of 
Rasan.  In  the  ninth  year  of  his  age  he  lost  his 
parents,  and  in  1788  was  placed  in  the  Marine 
Cadet  Corps,  from  which  he  was  sent  out  as  mid- 
shipman in  1803.  In  the  last  years  of  his  stay  in 
the  corps,  he  occupied  himself  industriously  with 
the  study  of  the  Russian,  French,  and  Enghsh  li- 
terature ;  with  the  reading  of  books  of  voyages  and 
travels,  geography,  and  physics.  This  course  of 
reading  inspired  him  with  an  irresistible  desire  to 
travel :  he  determined,  as  soon  as  he  had  left  the 
Cadet  Corps,  to  leave  his  young  brother,  and  the 
considerable  property  which  he  had  inherited,  under 
the  supervision  and  care  of  strangers,  in  order  to 
be  able  to  remain  in  the  service,  and  to  have  op- 
portunities of  seeing  foreign  countries.  The  greater 
part  of  his  service  was  passed  out  of  Russia.  In 
1793  and  1794  he  was  at  Stockholm,  on  board  of 
a  transport  of  war,  which  had  conducted  thither 
the  ambassador,  count  RumanzofF.  In  1795  and 
1796  he  was  in  England  with  the  allied  fleet, 
under  the  command  of  vice-admiral  Chanikoff ;  and 


RUSSIAN  AUTHORS.  205 

1798-1800  at  the  same  station,  as  aidecamp  and 
translator  to  the  commander-in-chief,  vice-admiral 
MakarofF.     At  the  request  of  this  commander  he 
was  promoted,  in  1799,  to  the  rank  of  lieutenant ; 
and  in  1802  sent  at  the  expense  of  the  Emperor  to 
perform  service  on  board  of  the  Enghsh  fleet,  in 
order  to  extend  his  knowledge  and  famiharity  with 
nautical  affairs.     Herr  Golowin  served  on  board 
several  English  ships,  and  in  different  seas:  among 
other  stations,  in  the  West  Indies.     In  1806  he 
returned  to  Russia,  and  in  consequence  of  his  high 
recommendations  from  the  English  admirals  with 
whom  he  had  sailed,  was  immediately  commissioned 
as  commander  of  the  Diana  sloop,  which  was  or- 
dered to  sail  round  the  world  with  various  objects 
in  view.     At  the  beginning  of  the  year  1817  he 
composed  and  published,  at  the  desire  of  the  minis- 
ter of  the  Admiralty,  Tschitschagoff,  The  Day  and 
Night  Sea-Signals,  which  are  still  in  use  in  the  Rus- 
sian fleet.     By  this  work  he  obtained  the  highest 
favour  and  regard.^  On  the  22nd  of  July,  1807,  he 
was  sent  out  on  an  expedition,  which  was  distin- 
guished by  its  laboriousness,  its  useful  discoveries, 
and  the  misfortunes  which  he  underwent ;  for  he 
was  taken  prisoner  by  the  Japanese,  and  detained, 
together  with  two  other  officers  and  four  seamen, 
for  two  years.     Set  at  liberty  by  the  spirited  exer- 
tions of  his  comrade  and  friend,  lieutenant  Peter 
Iwanowitsch  Ricord,  at  present  a  captain  of  the 
first  rank,  and  governor  of  Kamtschatka,  he  re- 
turned by  way  of  Kamtschatka  and  Siberia  to  St. 
Petersburg,  in  1814.     In  return  for  his  exertions 
and  sufferings,  he  was  promoted  to  the  grade  of 


206  A  LEXICON  OF 

captain  of  the  second  rank,  (he  had  already  been 
advanced  to  be  captain-lieutenant,  by  order  of  se- 
niority), and  was  rewarded  with  an  annual  pension 
of  1500  roubles.  In  the  year  1817  he  was  again 
sent  out  on  a  voyage  round  the  world,  in  the  sloop 
Kamtschatka,  by  way  of  the  North  sea,  and  in- 
structed to  make  reports  of  the  Russian  possessions 
in  those  parts.  Golownin  sailed  from  Cronstadt 
on  the  26th  of  August,  and  returned  on  the  3rd  of 
September,  1819,  having  fulfilled  all  the  commis- 
sions with  which  he  had  been  charged ;  on  which 
account  he  saw  himself  elevated  on  the  13th  of  Oc- 
tober in  the  same  year,  to  the  grade  of  a  captain  of 
the  first  rank.  On  the  13th  of  September,  1821, 
at  the  recommendation  of  the  minister  of  the  Ad- 
miralty, he  was  promoted  to  be  captain-commander, 
and  attached  to  the  Marine  Cadet  Corps.  His 
voyages  in  the  Diana,  from  1807  to  1814,  are 
printed  in  three  separate  works :  one  under  the 
title  of  The  Voyage  of  the  sloop  Diana  from  Cron- 
stadt to  Kamtschatka,  in  the  years  1807,  1808,  and 
1809  ;  another,  A  Brief  Account  of  the  Kurile  Is- 
lands, collected  in  the  year  1811  ;  and  the  third. 
The  Description,  by  Captain  Golownin,  of  his  per- 
sonal Adventures  and  Sufferings  during  his  Cap- 
tivity in  Japan,  in  the  years  1811,  1812,  and  1813, 
in  three  parts.  The  two  first  books  were  published 
in  1819,  by  and  for  the  Admiralty  department ;  the 
third  was  published  in  1816,  by  Golownin  himself, 
and  printed  at  the  expense  of  his  Imperial  Ma- 
jesty. Herr  Ricord  published  also  in  1816,  as  a 
supplement  to  the  last,  A  Narrative,  by  Captain 
Ricord,  of  his  Voyage  to  the  coasts  of  Japan,  in  the 


RUSSIAN  AUTHORS.  207 

years  1812  and  1813,  and  an  account  of  his  in- 
tercourse with  the  Japanese.  Both  these  works 
have  been  translated  into  German  and  French. 
The  very  interesting  voyage  which  Golownin  made 
from  Kamtschatka  to  America  and  back,  in  1811, 
with  a  detailed  account  of  the  settlements  of  the 
Russian-America  Company,  was  never  printed,  for 
particular  reasons,  and  will  probably  never  see  the 
light.  Fragments  of  his  expedition  in  the  sloop 
Kamtschatka  are  to  be  found  in  the  Son  of  his 
Country,  for  the  year  1820  ;  and  a  full  account  of 
it  is  about  to  be  published  by  the  departments  of 
the  Imperial  Admiralty.  Herr  Golownin  is  at  pre- 
sent occupied  in  arranging  the  notes  which  he  had 
collected  on  his  early  voyages,  and  intends  to  give 
them  to  the  world  by  the  title  of  Recollections  of 
my  Travels. 

GoRTSCHAKOFF  (Princo  Dmitrj  Petrowitsch),  ma- 
jor out  of  service,  member  of  the  Society  of  the 
Lovers  of  the  Russian  Language,  was  born  at  Mos- 
cow, 1762,  and  received  his  education  under  the 
paternal  roof.    He  wrote  some  theatrical  pieces,  as : 

1.  The  Cahph  for  one  Hour,  an  opera,  Moscow,  1786. 

2.  The  Lucky  Draught  of  Fishes,  an  opera,  Mos- 
cow, 1786.  3.  The  Woman  Jaga,  an  opera,  Mos- 
cow, 1 788.  4.  The  Careless  Man,  a  comedy,  in  five 
acts,  in  verse,  played  at  St.  Petersburg  in  1801,  but 
never  printed.  Besides  this,  he  wrote  the  novel 
Plamir  and  Raida,  1796;  and  sundry  lyrical  and 
satirical  poems,  distinguished  by  richness  of  thought 
and  a  florid  style. 

GoswiNSKJ  (Feodor  Kassianowitsch),  was  transla- 
tor in  the  Greek  and  Polish  languages  at  the  am- 


208  A  LEXICON  OF 

bassador's  college  ;  translated  in  1608  iEsop's  Fa- 
bles, from  the  Greek  :  and  from  the  Polish,  a  work 
of  the  Pope  Innocentius,  called  Tropnik,  or  A 
Short  Road  to  Salvation.  A  manuscript  copy  of  the 
first  of  these  translations  is  preserved  in  the  library 
of  the  Academy  of  Alexander  Newskj,  and  of  the 
latter  in  the  Synodal  Library. 

Grammatin  (Nikolaj),  school-director  at  Kostro- 
ma, was  author  of  the  notes  and  annotations  to 
the  Legend  of  Igor  and  his  Army,  which  appeared 
at  Moscow  in  1809,  by  which  he  cleared  up  satis- 
torily  many  points  which  had  hitherto  been  left 
doubtful  by  other  critics. 

Grekoff  (Jurj).     See  Korobeinikoff. 

Gretsch  (Nicolaj  Iwanowitsch),  councillor  of 
state  and  knight,  earned  himself-  a  high  reputation 
by  his  studies  in  the  Russian  language  and  litera- 
ture. Among  other  things,  he  pubhshed,  1.  The 
Manual  of  Russian  Literature,  or  passages  selected 
from  original  Russian  works  and  translations,  in 
prose  and  verse,  with  some  Short  Rules  of  Rhetoric 
and  Poetry,  and  a  History  of  Russian  Literature, 
St.  Petersburg,  1819-1822,  price  4  thalers.  This 
work  has  been  translated  into  Polish,  with  addi- 
tions by  Linde.  It  is  in  four  volumes,  and  may  be 
said  to  contain  a  complete  little  Russian  hbrary  in 
itself,  which  we  earnestly  recommend  to  every  fo- 
reigner who  undertakes  the  study  of  Russian.  2. 
Lessons  in  the  Russian  Language,  which  appeared 
first  under  the  name  of  Proof  Sheets.  3.  A  Rus- 
sian translation  of  the  councillor  of  state  Adelung's 
Rapports  entre  la  Langue  Russe  et  la  Langue  San- 
scrit, St.  Petersburg,  1811.    Besides  this,  Herr  Von 


RUSSIAN  AUTHORS.  209 

Gretsch  is  the  editor  of  the  journals  called  The 
Northern  Bee,  and  The  Son  of  his  Country;  (see 
article  Knashevvitsch),  in  which  last  publication,  in- 
dependently of  the  very  copious  and  learned  critical 
labours  which  he  had  contributed,  are  to  be  found 
also  the  sensible  and  witty  Letters  to  the  Caucasus. 
"  At  the  flame  of  his  critical  lamp,"  says  A.  Bestus- 
chefF  of  this  meritorious  scholar,  "  more  than  one 
drone  has  singed  his  wings.  The  Russian  language 
is  indebted  to  him  for  having  developed  anew  the 
rules  of  its  grammar,  which  till  his  time  had  been 
involved  in  a  multitudinous  chaos  by  the  old  gram- 
marians. He  paved  also  the  way  for  a  full  and 
historical  account  of  the  customs  and  natural  phe- 
nomena of  Russia,  by  his  publication  of  an  attempt 
of  the  kind.  In  the  belles  lettres,  properly  so 
called,  Gretsch  has  not  indeed  accomplished 
much ;  but  his  Letters  on  a  Journey  through 
Germany  and  France,  display  an  attentive  observa- 
tion, and  a  keen  critical  acumen,  with  however 
almost  too  much  conciseness  and  abruptness  in  his 
descriptions."  A  German  translation  of  this  last 
work,  by  E.  Eurot,  has  been  published  by  Brock- 
haus,  by  the  title,  Ausflucht  eines  Russen  nach 
Deutschland.  Roman  in  Brief  en.  Leipzig  y  1831, 
8vo. 

Gribojedoff  (Fodor  Iwanowitsch),  served  under 
the  Czars  Alexej  Michailowitsch  and  Feodor  Alex- 
ejewitsch,  and  took  part  in  the  composition  of 
the  Statute-book.  He  wrote  An  Abstract  of  the 
History  of  Russia,  in  thirty-six  chapters ;  which 
contains  a  short  description  of  the  condition  of 
Russia  from  the  Grand  Prince  Wladimir  the  First 


k 


SIO  A  LEXICON  OF 

to  the  accession  of  the  Czar  Feodor  Alexejewitsch, 
to  whom  also  this  work  was  dedicated,  in  the  year 
1676.  This  abstract,  however,  did  not  appear  in 
print,  but  a  manuscript  of  it  may  be  consulted  in 
the  library  of  Alexander  Newskj. 

Gribojedoff  (a  poet) ;  among  other  things  he 
translated  from  the  French  the  play  called,  Le  Se- 
cret du  Manage  ;  and  wrote  an  original  work  in 
four  parts,  entitled.  Trouble  brought  on  by  Clever- 
ness, a  general  picture  of  morals  and  manners, 
which  L.  Schneider  translated  into  German  by  the 
name  Kummer  durch  Ver stand,  in  1835  ^. 

Grigorj  (a  deacon),  composed  in  1056  an  Evan- 
gelium,  for  Ostromir  the  possadnik,  or  governor  of 
Novogorod ;  which  is  the  oldest  manuscript  extant 
of  the  Sclavonic  sacred  books.     It  is  preserved  in 
the  Imperial  Public  Library. 

Grigorj  Samblack,  or  Semiwlack,  metropolitan 
of  Kieff,  a  Bulgarian  by  birth,  was  appointed  and 
consecrated  to  this  dignity  through  the  recom- 
mendation of  the  Lithuanian  Grand  Prince  Witowt, 
in  the  year  1416,  and  died  in  1419.  He  lived  in 
melancholy  times  for  the  interests  of  the  Russian 
church,  since  the  Lithuanians  in  his  day  were  de- 
sirous of  uniting  it  with  the  western  church,  and 
were  doing  all  in  their  power  to  cause  a  division  be- 
tween the  hierarchy  of  KiefF  and  that  of  Moscow. 
Grigorj  was  a  very  pious,  learned,  and  active  man. 
Seven  and  twenty  exhortations  and  panegyrics 
have  descended  to  our  time,  which  he  delivered  on 


R  Gribojedoff  also  wrote  one  act  of  a  comedy,  in  verse,  in  three  acts, 
called  The  Family  Circle.     Vide  Schachofskoj. 


RUSSIAN  AUTHORS.  211 

various  occasions,  and  which  are  preserved  in  the 
Synodal  Library  at  Moscow. 

Grigorowitsch  (Wassilj),  was  born  at  Kieff  in 
1702,  studied  at  the  academy  of  that  place,  after- 
wards at  Lemburg,  and  in  1 724  was  sent  with  a  com- 
pany of  pilgrims  through  Hungary  and  Austria  to 
Rome.  From  thence  Grigorowitsch  travelled  alone 
through  Florence,  Venice,  Corfu,  and  Chios  to  the 
East,  visited  Mount  Athos,  sailed  from  Salonica 
in  the  year  1726  to  Palestine,  saw  most  of  the  cele- 
brated spots  of  the  Holy  Land,  the  island  of  Cyprus, 
Egypt  and  Arabia ;  travelled  through  the  whole  of 
Syria,  and  visited  all  the  islands  of  the  Archipelago, 
In  1734  he  was  consecrated  a  monk  at  Damascus, 
staid  six  years  in  the  isle  of  Patmos  to  occupy  him- 
self undisturbed  in  scientific  .study,  lived  then  one 
year  at  Constantinople,  and  having  again  paid  a 
visit  to  some  parts  of  Greece,  returned  through  Rou- 
melia,  Bulgaria,  Moldavia,  and  Poland,  to  his  na- 
tive country ;  and  after  an  absence  of  twenty-four 
years,  found  himself  once  more,  on  the  2nd  of  Sep- 
tember, 1747,  at  Kieff.  He  however  remained  only 
thirty-five  days  in  his  parental  house,  for  he  died 
on  the  7th  of  October  in  the  same  year,  of  a  tu- 
mour which  he  had  brought  on  by  the  long  jour- 
neys which  he  had  made  on  foot.  Of  all  his 
travels  he  kept  a  full  and  particular  journal, 
in    many  places   took   sketches  of  the  most   re- 

Lmarkable  features  of  the  vicinity,  and  of  the  fa^^ades 
of  the  most  celebrated  buildings;  all  of  which  it 
had  been  his  intention  to  arrange  and  publish  after 
his  return  home,  but  his  premature  death  prevented 
his  accomplishment  of  the  task.  Copies  however 
p2 
I 


9A2  A  LEXICON  OF 

of  his  journals  were  gradually  spread  over  the  whole 
of  Little  Russia,  fragments  of  them  were  inserted 
in  the  journals,  and  at  last  Herr  Ruben  published 
the  whole  together  at  St.  Petersburg,  at  the  ex- 
pense of  Prince  Potemkin,  under  the  following  title, 
in  1778  :  The  Travels  of  the  Pilgrim  Wassilj  Gri- 
gorowitsch  Barskj,  Plaka,  AlbofF,  a  monk  of  An- 
tioch,  born  at  Kieff;  containing  his  visits  to  the 
holy  places  in  Europe,  Asia,  and  Africa,  begun  in 
year  1723  and  reaching  to  the  year  1747,  written 
by  himself;  a  second  edition  appeared  in  1785. 
The  style  of  Grigorowitsch  is  such  as  it  was  the 
custom  to  write  in  Little  Russia  down  to  the  mid- 
dle of  the  eighteenth  century.  It  consists  of  a 
mixture  of  the  Sclavonic,  Polish,  and  Little-Rus- 
sian languages. 

GussEFF  (Wladimir),  took  part  in  the  year  1 497 
in  the  compilation  of  the  Sudebnik,  or.  Statute- 
book  of  the  Czar  John  Wassiljewitsch,  and  was  im- 
prisoned in  the  same  year  on  suspicion  of  treason. 

GussEFF ;  author  of  a  treatise  which  is  to  be 
found  in  the  European  Courier  of  Katschenofskj, 
On  the  Metaphysical  Systems  of  Germany. 

H. 

Hermann  (Carl.),  academician,  professor  at  the 
University  of  St.  Petersburg,  inspector  of  classes  at 
the  place  of  education  for  noble  ladies,  and  at  the 
Institute  of  the  Order  of  St.  Katherine,  councillor 
of  state,  and  knight,  was  born  at  Dantzic,  in  1 767. 
He  published  the  following  works  in  the  Russian 
language :  1 .  A  Statistical  Journal  of  the  Russian 
Empire,  in  four  parts,  St.  Petersburg,  1807.     2.  A 


RUSSIAN  AUTHORS.  213 

Statistical  account  of  the  Governmental  Department 
of  Jarosslaw,  St.  Petersburg,  1808.  3.  A  Geo- 
graphical and  Statistical  Description  of  the  Cau- 
casus, extracted  from  the  Travels  of  Giildenstadt, 
St.  Petersburg,  1809.  4.  A  Statistical  Enquiry  into 
the  State  of  Education  in  the  Russian  Dominions, 
one  part,  St.  Petersburg,  1819.  Many  of  his  es- 
says are  printed  in  the  Transactions  of  the  Academy 
of  Sciences,  and  in  different  periodicals. 

Heym  (Johann),  professor  at  the  University  of 
Moscow,  councillor  of  state,  and  knight,  was  born 
at  Brunswick  in  1753,  and  died  at  Moscow  in  1821. 
He  compiled  Dictionaries  for  the  Russian,  German, 
and  French  languages ;  and  altered  a  Russian  Gram- 
mar for  the  use  of  foreigners,  of  which  the  first 
edition  appeared  in  1798,  the  second  in  1804,  and 
the  third  in  1816,  at  Leipsic  and  Riga,  under  the 
supervision  of  the  imperial  Russian  titular  coun- 
cillor, Sam.  Weltzien.  3.  The  Russian  Reading- 
book  ;  which  contains  select  pieces  in  prose  and 
verse,  and  a  small  dictionary  attached.  It  came 
out  at  Riga  in  1805.  Besides  this  he  published : 
1.  An  Introduction  to  the  Science  of  Commerce, 
Moscow,  1804.  2.  Abstract  of  a  General  Geo- 
graphy, two  parts,  Moscow,  1817.  3.  An  Abstract 
of  the  Statistics  of  the  most  celebrated  Kingdoms, 
one  part,  Moscow,  1 82 1 . 

HiOB.     See  Joff. 

HoLTERHOF  (F.),  author  of  the  Russian  Cella- 
rius,  or  Etymological  Dictionary,  in  8vo.  1771. 


214  A  LEXICON  OF 

I. 

Ignatj  ;  a  deacon  of  the  Russian  metropolitan 
Pimen,  lived  in  the  fourteenth  century.  He  ac- 
companied this  metropolitan  on  his  second  voyage 
on  the  Don  to  Constantinople,  in  the  year  1389, 
and  described  their  journey  with  great  fidelity.  His 
account  is  to  be  found  in  the  Chronicle  of  Nikon, 
and  the  other  Latopisses. 

Ignatj  Jowlewitsch  ;  archimandrite  of  the  Mo- 
nastery of  the  Manifestation  of  Christ  at  Polotsk, 
lived  in  the  middle  of  the  seventeenth  century,  and 
in  his  time  v^^as  looked  up  to  with  the  highest  re- 
spect. Of  his  writings,  only  some  gratulatory  ad- 
dresses to  the  Czar  Alexej  Michailowitsch  and 
some  other  persons,  are  extant,  and  the  Votum 
which  he  laid  before  the  council  at  Moscow  in  de- 
fence of  the  Patriarch  Nikon.  These  writings  are 
printed  in  the  third  volume  of  the  Ancient  Russian 
Library. 

Ijewleff  (Alexej  Iwanowitsch),  secretary;  was 
sent  out  with  the  bojar  Nikiphor  Matwejewitsch 
TolotschaninofF,  at  the  command  of  the  Czar 
Alexej  Michailowitsch,  in  the  year  1650,  to  Alex- 
ander, Prince  of  Imerethi.  They  composed  a  jour- 
nal of  their  expedition,  which  is  preserved  in  the 
Synodal  Library  at  Moscow. 

Il'in  (Nikolaj  Iwanowitsch),  councillor  of  state 
and  knight,  member  of  several  learned  societies, 
was  born  in  1773.  He  wrote  the  following  dramas: 
1.  Lisa,  or  the  Feast  of  Gratitude,  in  three  acts, 
represented  at  St.  Petersburg  in  1802,  and  printed 
in  1803.     2.  Magnanimity,  or  Raising  Recruits,  in 


RUSSIAN  AUTHORS.  215 

three  acts,  represented  in  St.  Petersburg  in  1804, 
printed  at  Moscow  in  1805  ;  second  edition  at  St. 
Petersburg,  1807.  Of  his  translations,  the  follow- 
ing have  been  printed:  1.  The  Misanthrope  in  Love, 
in  three  acts,  in  imitation  of  Demoustier,  Moscow, 
1805.  2.  Castles  in  the  Air,  a  comedy,  in  five  acts, 
after  Colin  d'Harleville,  Moscow,  1808.  3.  The 
Gossip,  a  comedy,  in  one  act,  from  Boissy,  Moscow, 
1809.  4.  Mistrust  and  Stratagem,  a  comedy,  in  one 
act,  from  Dela  Foi,  St.  Petersburg,  1811.  5^  The 
Supposititious  Treasure,  a  comedy,  in  one  act,  from 
Hoffmann.  6.  The  Physiognomist  and  the  Chi- 
romancer, a  comedy,  in  one  act,  Moscow,  1816. 
In  the  year  1809  Il'in  became  editor  of  a  journal 
at  Moscow,  entitled.  The  Children's  Friend,  of 
which  twenty-four  numbers  appeared,  and  in  which 
excellent  translations  of  Berquin's  works  are  met 
with.'  Il'in's  dramas  are  distinguished  by  their 
faithful  delineation  of  country  manners,  and  their 
simple,  natural,  and  conversational  style. 

Innokentj  Gisel,  archimandrite  of  the  Subterra- 
nean Monastery  of  KiefF,  was  born  of  protestant  pa- 
rents, in  what  was  formerly  Polish  Prussia,  but  came 
in  his  youth  to  Kieff,  where  he  became  a  proselyte  to 
the  Greek-Russian  church,  and  a  monk  in  the  mo- 
nastery at  that  place.  He  was  sent  to  qualify  himself 
for  the  office  of  teacher  to  the  Academy  of  Lemburg, 
and  after  he  had  gone  through  a  regular  course  of 
instruction  there,  he  returned  to  Kieff,  and  ob- 
tained a  teacher's  place.  In  1648,  he  was  conse- 
crated igumen  at  the  Brother-Monastery  at  Kieff, 
immediately  received  the  office  of  a  rector  of  the 
Kieff  school,   found   himself  nominated  an  archi- 


216  A  LEXICON  OF 

mandrite  in  1672,  and  died  in  1684,  having  ac- 
quired the  title  of  benefactor  and  protector  of  this 
school.  St.  Dimitrj  of  Rostow,  who  was  at  that 
time  only  a  hieromonach,  composed  and  delivered 
a  panegyrical  discourse  on  the  anniversary  of  his 
death,  in  1685.  Of  Gisel's  writings  the  best  known 
is,  A  Synopsis,  or  short  Description,  of  the  origin 
of  the  Sclavonic  People,  and  of  the  first  Princes  of 
Kieff  to  the  time  of  the  Czar  Feodor  Alexejewitsch. 
This  book  was  first  printed  in  the  Subterranean 
Cloister  of  Kieff,  and  between  1718  and  1810, 
no  less  than  ten  editions  of  it  were  published. 
This  work  is  entirely  drawn  from  the  writings 
of  Polish  authors,  and  is  full  of  mis-statements 
and  manifest  errors;  nevertheless  it  was  used 
generally  in  all  schools,  in  the  want  of  a  better 
Russian  History,  until  the  time  of  LomonossofF. 

Inochodzeff  (Peter  Borissowitsch),  professor  of 
astronomy,  councillor  of  state,  and  knight,  made  two 
journeys  to  ascertain  and  determine  the  latitude  and 
longitude  of  the  towns  of  several  governments  of 
Russia.  His  labours  in  reference  to  these  expedi- 
tions are  printed  in  the  Transactions  and  Calendars 
of  the  Academy.     He  died  in  1806. 

IsAiAs  (Jesaias),  hieromonach  of  the  Monastery 
of  the  Forty  Martyrs,  at  Mount  Athos,  a  Servian 
by  birth,  came  in  1417  to  Russia,  which  however 
he  again  quitted  in  1419,  and  brought  with  him 
some  Sclavonic  books,  amongst  which  is  to  be 
found  his  translation  of  the  writings  of  Dionysius 
Areopagites.  Copies  of  this  exist  in  the  Synodal 
Library  at  Moscow,  and  in  the  Hbrary  of  the  Aca- 
demy of  Sciences  at  St.  Petersburg. 


RUSSIAN  AUTHORS.  217 

IsMAiLOFF  (Alexander  Jefimowitsch),    collegiate 
councillor  and  knight,  member  of  numerous  learned 
societies,  was  born   at   Moscow,   the   l4th  April, 
1779.     He  received  his  education  from  the  year 
1792,  in  the  Mining  Corps;  in  1799,  was  appointed 
to  a  place  in  the  Revenue  Department,  (now  called 
the  Imperial  Chamber,)  and  in   that  office  still  re- 
tains an  official  situation,  as  chief  of  one  of  the 
Bureaus.     He  began  while  very  young  to  compose 
verses;  in   1798,  he  published  a  romance,  which 
was  not  too  favourably  received  however  by  the 
public.     He  wrote  among  other  Tales  that  of  Poor 
little  Mary,  St.  Petersburg,  1801  ;  and  Treatises, 
as  for  instance,    a  pamphlet  on    the    subject    of 
Pauperism,  St.  Petersburg,  1804;    on  the  granting 
of  Favours  and  Pensions,  1803,  and  so  forth.     In 
the  years  1809  and  18 JO,   he  was  conjoined  with 
Benitzkj   and    Nikolskj    in   the  editorship  of  the 
journal  called  the  Flower-Bed.     In  1812,  he  was 
the   chief    editor   of  the    St.  Petersburg   Messen- 
ger, which  was  published  for  the  societies  of  the 
Lovers  of  Russian  Literature,  and  of  the  Sciences 
and  Arts.     Since  1818,  he  has  been  engaged  upon 
the  journal  called  The  Right  Thinker.     Herr  Is- 
mailoff,  in  the  mean  time,  has  not  been  idle  in  the 
composition  of  Fables  and  Russian  Mdhrchen.  The 

I  first  edition  of  these  was  printed  at  St.  Petersburg, 
1804  ;  the  second  in  1816;  the  third,  with  a  sup- 
plement. On  the  Best  way  of  Telling  a  Story,  in 
1817,  and  the  fourth  in  1821.  The  Fables  and 
Mdhrchen  of  Ismailoff  are  for  the  most  part  trans- 
lations, adaptations,  and  imitations,  and  are  written 
in  a  light  and  easy  style.      They  are  distinguished 


218  A  LEXICON  OF 

especially  by  the  faithful  representation  of  the 
character,  the  customs,  and  the  vices  of  the  lower 
orders ;  and  in  these  respects  they  are  without  a 
rival  in  the  Russian  language. 

IsMAiLOFF  (Wladimir  Wassiljewitsch),  Pr.  Major 
out  of  service,  censor  of  the  Moscow  Univer- 
sity, and  member  of  several  learned  societies, 
was  born  at  Moscow  in  1773,  and  received  an 
education  in  the  study  of  foreign  languages  and 
the  sciences  under  the  parental  roof.  He  is 
author  of  the  Journey  in  the  South  of  Russia, 
which  he  undertook  in  the  year  1799,  for  his  own 
amusement,  and  published  in  four  parts,  at  Mos- 
cow, in  1802,  and  of  which  an  enlarged  and  im- 
proved edition  appeared  in  1805.  Besides  this,  he 
wrote  the  tales  The  Young  Philosopher,  and  The 
Evening,  or.  The  Family  Walk,  of  which  the  first  is 
printed  in  the  European  Messenger  for  the  year 
1803.  Of  his  translations  the  following  are  known : 
1.  The  Romance  of  Atala,  or.  The  Lives  of  Two 
Savages  in  the  Forest,  by  Chateaubriand,  Moscow, 
1802.  2.  Sketches  of  Europe,  from  Segur,  Moscow, 
1802,  three  parts ;  second  edition,  1805  ;  and  third 
edition,  1806.  3.  A  Discourse  on  the  Indepen- 
dence of  Men  of  Letters,  from  Millvois,  translated 
into  metre,  Moscow,  1806.  4.  Letters  on  Botany, 
by  Rousseau,  Moscow,  I8l0.  In  1804  he  edited  a 
journal  for  the  instruction  of  youth,  called  The 
Patriot;  in  1814,  The  European  Messenger;  and 
in  1815,  The  European  Museum.  His  transla- 
tions of  various  little  pieces,  which  were  inserted  at 
different  times  in  these  and  in  other  periodicals, 
he  pubhshed   collectively   in   1819  and   1820,  by 


RUSSIAN  AUTHORS.  219 

the  title  of  The  Prose  Translations  of  Wladimir 
IsmailofF,  Moscow.  He  died  at  Moscow  in  the  April 
of  1830.  The  following  short  and  picturesque 
description  of  the  Brother-Colony  of  Sarepta,  which 
we  have  translated  for  the  reader,  we  have  ventured 
to  insert  in  this  place,  as  being  better  calculated  to 
convey  an  idea  of  IsmailofF's  natural  and  simple 
style,  than  any  critical  remarks  which  it  might  be 
in  our  power  to  make. 

The  Brother-Colony  at  Sarepta,  from  the  Russian 
of  W.  W.  Ismailoff. 
"  The  triumph  of  human  society  is  the  evan- 
gelical congregation  on  the   banks  of  the  Ssarpa. 
A  friendly  little    town    with    low-roofed   houses, 
sufficient  inhabitants,    who  live  neither  in  super- 
fluity, nor  indigence,  who  are  happy  through  their 
simplicity,  and  engaged  not  in  the  speculations  of 
science,  but  in  necessary  handicrafts ;  a  place  where 
the  virtues  dwell,  the  arts  flourish,  and  the  society 
of  men  is  a  society  of  brothers, — this  is  Sarepta. 
Here  we  meet  at  every  step  hospitality,  industry, 
the  love  of  order  and  peace,  tranquillity  in  the 
dwellings,  cleanliness  in  the  streets,  simplicity  and 
neatness  in  attire,  and  the  expression  of  the  heart 
on  every  face.     Here,  as  each  settler  passes  with 
his  grey  coat,  his  gracious  countenance,  and  sturdy 
gait,  the   sentiment   of   Rousseau    occurs  to   the 
mind.  That  he  must  be  the  happiest  of  mortals, 
who  distils  into  the  depths  of  his  heart  the  true 
repose  of  life.     Here,  as  each  sister  glanced  by  me, 
with  her  light  corset,  her  simple  cap  fastened  under 
the  chin,  and   the    angel    look    of  innocence,  I 


220  A  LEXICON  OF 

thought  to  myself,  *  there  is  the  woman  with  whom 
I  could  share  my  heart,  my  existence,  and  my 
identity.'  In  a  few  minutes  the  good-citizenship  of 
these  quiet  people  evinces  itself.  You  see  through 
a  window  a  fire  on  a  hearth.  From  curiosity, 
you  enter.  A  woman  of  Sarepta,  in  an  apron 
white  as  snow,  and  with  hands  equally  white,  is 
preparing  a  meal  in  the  kitchen.  But  who  is  this — 
a  cook,  or  a  maid  ?  No  !  the  mistress  of  the  house 
herself, — the  mother  of  a  numerous  family,  and  by 
no  means  the  least  among  the  community.  You 
linger  gazing  before  a  little  house,  which  attracts 
you  by  its  aspect  of  sobriety,  and  a  neat  apartment 
is  opened,  which  contains  no  speck  of  dust — all 
clean  and  elegant ;  the  table  of  beautifully  grained 
wood;  the  chests  against  the  wall;  and,  under  glass, 
what,  think  you  ?  Bread.  On  the  other  side  of 
the  street,  one  of  the  great  men  of  the  colony  is 
meeting  one  of  the  lowest  craftsmen,  with  bro- 
therly friendship,  and  their  mutual  politeness  and 
respect  prevent  all  thought  of  their  difference  of 
rank."  *  *  *  *  * 

IwANOFF(Feodor  Feodorowitsch),  collegiate  coun- 
cillor, was  born  in  June  1777,  received  an  education 
at  the  Moscow  University,  and  served  afterwards  in 
the  guards.  In  1792  he  changed  into  the  line, 
with  the  rank  of  captain,  and  was  engaged  in  the 
campaign  of  Finland.  In  1 797  he  took  his  leave, 
and  died  the  31st  of  August,  1816,  at  Moscow. 
Iwanoff  wrote  the  following  pieces :  1 .  Virtue  Re- 
warded, or  a  Woman  such  as  there  are  few  in 
the   World ;    a   drama,   in  three    acts,    Moscow, 


RUSSIAN  AUTHORS.  221 

1805.  2.  The  Old-fashioned  Family,  a  drama,  in 
one  act,  Moscow,  1806.  3.  The  Bridegrooms, 
or.  Live  and  Learn,  a  comedy,  in  one  act,  Mos- 
cow, 1808.  4.  All  is  not  Gold  that  glitters,  a 
comedy,  in  three  acts,  Moscow,  1808.  5.  Marwa 
Possadniza,  or.  The  Subjugation  of  Novogorod,  a 
tragedy,  in  five  acts,  Moscow,  1 809.  6.  The  Rob- 
bers, a  tragedy,  in  five  acts,  from  the  French,  Mos- 
cow, 1809.  Of  these  pieces,  the  two  first  espe- 
cially, were  received  with  immense  applause  at 
the  Moscow  theatre.  Iwanoff  translated  into 
verse  Voltaire's  tragedy  of  Merope,  but  the  manu- 
script was  unfortunately  burnt  at  the  time  of  the 
French  invasion.  Afterwards  he  again  undertook 
the  same  task,  and  completed  three  acts,  but  death 
prevented  him  from  finishing  the  undertaking. 
Another  translation  of  Merope,  on  which  the  tra- 
gedy as  now  represented  is  founded,  exists  by  Ser^ 
Nikiphorowitsch  Marin,  who  died  in  the  year 
1813. 

J. 

Jakubowitsch  published  some  ancient  Russian 
Poems  at  Moscow  in  1804.  The  second  edition  of 
them  was  brought  out  under  the  care  of  Kalaido- 
witsch,  in  1818,  in  4to. 

JASTREBzoFF(Iwan  Iwanowitsch),  collegiate  coun- 
cillor and  knight,  chancery-director  in  the  com- 
mission for  the  superintendence  of  the  clerical 
schools,  member  of  the  Russian  Academy,  studied 
from  1787  to  1799  at  the  Clerical  Academy  at 
Moscow ;  and  was  for  seven  years  teacher  of  the 
senior  French  class  at  the  same  place.     He  did  a 


222  A  LEXICON  OF 

great  service  to  Russian  literature  by  his  excellent 
translation  of  Select  Sermons  of  Massillon,  bishop 
of  Clermont,  which  appeared  in  print,  in  three  parts, 
at  St.  Petersburg,  in  1809,  by  desire  of  the  Em- 
peror. 

jAsiJKOFF  (Dmitrj  Iwanowitsch),  collegiate  coun- 
cillor and  knight,  chief  of  one  Bureau  in  the  Edu- 
cational Department,  was  born  in  1773,  and  studied 
at  the  University  of  Moscow.  In  1797  he  entered 
the  military  profession,  and  from  the  year  1802  has 
belonged  to  the  above-mentioned  department.  He 
earned  the  especial  regard  of  his  countrymen  by 
his  numerous  translations  into  Russian,  of  foreign 
books  connected  with  the  subject  of  Russian  his- 
tory. The  most  important  of  these  is  Schlozer's 
Nestor.  Besides  this  he  also  translated :  1.  Bec- 
caria's  work  upon  Crimes  and  Punishments,  St. 
Petersburg,  1803.  2.  Montesquieu's  Esprit  des 
Lois,  Moscow,  1810.  He  took  likewise  a  part  in 
the  editorship  of  The  Northern  Messenger,  1804 
and  1805,  and  of  The  Dramatic  Messenger,  1808. 
See  article  Rumanzoff. 

Jazenkoff  (M.),  translated  recently  the  third 
part  of  Antenor's  Travels  in  Greece  and  Asia,  from 
the  French  of  Lautier.  The  two  first  parts  had 
been. already  translated  into  Russian  by  Makaroff. 

Jefimjeff  (Dmitrj  Wladimirowitsch),  was  colo- 
nel of  artillery,  and  educated  in  the  Land  Cadet 
Corps.  He  is  author  of  the  following  comedies : 
1.  The  Criminal  in  Jest,  or.  The  Sister  Sold  by 
her  Brother.  2.  A  Continuation  of  the  Sister  Sold 
by  her  Brother.  3.  The  Traveller,  or.  Education 
without  Fruits.     These  pieces  have  been  played  at 


RUSSIAN  AUTHORS.  223 

the  St.  Petersburg  theatre  with  great  applause. 
The  first  of  them  was  printed  in  1788,  and  is  dis- 
tinguished by  a  light  and  Hvely  style.  This  author 
died  in  1804. 

Jelagin  (Iwan  Perfiljewitsch),  acting  privy  coun- 
cillor, senator,  and  knight,  upper  palace-master, 
and    superior   director   of  the    court-chapel   and 
theatre,  member  of   numerous  hterary  societies, 
was  born  in  1728,  and  received  his  education  in 
the  Land  Cadet  Corps.    He  made  himself  especially 
famous  through  his  translations,  which  in  his  own 
time  were  considered  perfect  models  in  point  of 
style.     Of  these  the  best  known  are  :  1.  The  Free- 
thinker, a  tragedy,  from  Der  Freigeist,  of  the  Ger- 
man Brawe,  St.  Petersburg,  1771.     2.  Anecdotes 
of  the  Marquis  G.,  or.  The  Biography  of  a  Noble- 
man who  had  forsworn  the  World,  four  parts,  first 
edition,  St.  Petersburg,  1756.     3.  The  Man  Hater, 
Moscow,  1788.     But  the  most  generally  known  of 
his  works  is,  4.  An  Attempt  at  a  History  of  Russia, 
printed  at  Moscow  in  1803,  which  he  began  to  write 
in  1790,  but  only  brought  down  to  the  year  1389, 
i.  e.  to  the  death  of  the  Grand  Prince  Diraitrj  Jo- 
hannowitsch  Donskoj.     This  production  consisted 
in  the  manuscript  of  five  parts,  or  fifteen  books. 
The  first  part  of  it  embraces  the  Russian  history 
to  the  death  of  Wladimir  Swatoslawitsch,  printed 
at  Moscow  in  1803.     This  work  was  much  es- 
teemed, so  long  as  it  was  not  printed  ;  but  after  its 
regular  publication,  the  favourable  opinion  of  the 
pubUc  was   much  lowered.      The  author  adheres 
throughout    to    TatischtschefF,   to  the    suppositi- 
tious Chronicle  of  Joachim,  and  several  other  works 


224  A  LEXICON  OF 

of  doubtful  authenticity.  Moreover,  he  himself  stated 
the  most  improbable  facts,  asserted  that  the  Sclaves 
had  occupied  the  site  of  the  town  of  Troy  before 
that  place  was  built,  and  while  he  was  constantly 
accusing  other  writers  of  partiality  and  falsehood, 
committed  these  faults  with  most  unwarrantable 
license  himself.  The  style  of  this  work,  taken  as  a 
whole,  is  too  tumid,  and  for  history  too  oratorical, 
besides  being  not  uniformly  correct.  It  must  how- 
ever be  remembered,  that  this  book  had  the  dis- 
advantage of  being  printed  from  a  faulty  manuscript 
copy^  His  translations  have  the  peculiarity  of  ex- 
hibiting a  language  in  which  many  Sclavonic  words 
are  mixed  with  a  style  generally  pure  ;  the  con- 
struction is  often  complicated,  and  many  expres- 
sions are  used  in  a  forced  or  false  meaning.  The 
public  nevertheless  read  them  with  pleasure,  al- 
though forced  to  confess  that  they  were  no  models 
of  perfect  prose  writing.  At  present  their  sole 
merit  is  to  show  the  state  to  which  Russian  prose 
composition  had  advanced  seventy  years  ago.  Je- 
lagin  died  the  22nd  of  September,  1796. 

Jesaias.     See  Isaias. 

JoFF  (Hiob),  first  Russian  patriarch,  was  conse- 
crated in  1581  bishop  of  Kolomna,  in  1586  as  arch- 
bishop of  Rostow,  in  1587  moved  to  Moscow  as 
metropolitan,  and  in  1589  elevated  to  the  rank  of 
patriarch  of  all  Russia.  In  the  year  1605,  the 
Pseudo-Dimitrj  displaced  him,  because  he  refused 
to  recognise  him  as  Czar,  and  confined  him  in  the 


••  Copious  details  on  the  subject  of  this  history  may  be  found  in  Rich- 
ter's  Russian  Miscellany,  No.  vi.  page  184,  et  seq. 


RUSSIAN  AUTHORS.  225 

monastery  of  St.  Mary,  at  Starez,  where  he  died, 
the  8th  of  March,  1607.  This  patriarch  wrote  the 
Life  of  the  Czar  Feodor  Johannowitsch,  which  is 
to  be  found  in  the  Chronicle  of  Nikon.  His  Ori- 
ginal Testament,  in  which  he  described  his  own 
life,  is  printed  in  the  sixth  volume  of  the  Ancient 
Russian  Library. 

JoHANN,  a  priest  of  Novogorod,  was,  according  to 
Tatischtscheffs  conjecture,  one  of  the  continua- 
tors  (or  rather  transcribers)  of  the  Chronicle  of 
Nestor. 

JoHANN  (Wassiljewitsch  Lewanda),  archpriest  of 
the  cathedral  of  St.  Sophia,  at  Kieff,  and  knight 
of  the  order  of  St.  Anne,  first  class,  was  born  at 
Kieff,  in  1736,  and  studied  at  the  academy  there, 
at  which  he  was  afterwards  appointed  as  a  teacher. 
In  1763  he  received  consecration  as  priest  at  the 
cathedral  of  the  Ascension  of  the  Virgin,  in  Podo- 
lia.  In  1783  he  was  made  archpriest,  and  in  1786 
translated  to  the  cathedral  of  St.  Sophia,  at  KiefF. 
In  1787,  on  the  occasion  of  Catherine  the  Second's 
journey  through  Kieff,  he  received  the  cross  of  the 
red  ribband,  in  1798  the  mitre,  and  in  1810  the 
order  of  St.  Anne.  He  died  the  25th  of  June,  1814. 
Lewanda  was  the  author  of  a  number  of  sermons, 
and  gratulatory  addresses,  which  were  published  at 
St.  Petersburg,  in  three  parts,  in  1 82 1 .  His  writings 
are  rich  in  powerful  and  deep  feehng,  and  entirely 
new  and  original  thoughts.  His  style  is  not  so 
pure  as  that  of  some  other  modern  preachers  ;  but 
this  defect  is  more  than  compensated  by  his  true 
eloquence,  which  rivets  the  understanding,  and 
reaches  the  heart. 


226  A  LEXICON  OF 

JoHANNiKJ  Galatofskj  died  about  the  year  1671, 
archimandrite  of  Novogorod-Sawersk,  was  a  re- 
nowned theologian  in  his  time,  and  wrote  many 
dogmatical  and  polemical  books,  in  the  Polish  lan- 
guage and  the  White-Russian  dialect.  In  1671  he 
was  summoned  to  Moscow,  where  he  delivered  a 
sermon  before  the  court,  which  he  dedicated,  toge- 
ther with  a  gratulatory  discourse,  to  the  Czar  Alexej 
Michailowitsch. 

Joseph  (Sanin),  first  igumen  of  the  monastery  of 
Wolokolam,  which  he  built  himself,  was  born  in 
1440,  and  died  in  1516,  on  the  9th  of  September. 
This  holy  man  distinguished  himself  by  the  pious 
zeal  which  he  displayed  in  the  persecution  of  the 
judaizing-sect  in  the  fifteenth  century.  He  com- 
posed a  copious  history  of  the  rise,  progress,  and 
consequences  of  their  heresies ;  and  besides  this, 
fifteen  discourses  in  refutation  of  their  doctrines, 
under  the  title  of  The  Enlightener.  These  writings 
are  to  be  found  in  manuscript  in  the  Synodal  Library 
of  Novogorod,  and  in  the  Alexander  Library  at  St. 
Petersburg.  An  extract  from  them,  and  a  table  of 
contents  of  all  the  fifteen  discourses  of  St.  Joseph, 
are  printed  in  the  fourteenth  and  sixteenth  parts  of 
the  Ancient  Russian  Library. 

JowLEWiTSCH.     See  Ignatj. 

K. 

Kaisoroff  (M.),  the  translator  of  Sterne. 

Kalaidowitsch,  an  antiquarian,  is  author  of  the 
following  work  :  Archaeological  Enquiries  into  the 
curiosities  of  the  Government  of  Rasan.  See  Jaku- 
bowitsch,  Malinofskj,  and  Strojeff. 


RUSSIAN  AUTHORS.  227 

Kalatilin.     See  L'woff. 

Kaloschnikoff  (G.),  author  of  the  historical  ro- 
mance. The  Daughter  of  the  Merchant  Scholoboff ; 
translated  into  German,  Leipsic,  1833,  two  vols,  in 
four  parts.  The  scene  of  this  romance  is  interest- 
ing from  the  circumstance  of  its  lying  in  Siberia. 

Kantemir  (Prince  Antiochus  Dmitrijewitsch), 
the  first  poet  of  his  time,  deserves  to  live  in  the 
recollection  of  all  posterity.  His  father,  (who  was 
born  in  1673,  and  died  in  1723,  a  hospodar  of 
Moldavia'),  together  with  the  rest  of  the  family, 
became  a  subject  of  Russia,  and  was  a  very 
learned  man,  understanding  many  European  and 
Asiatic  languages,  and  having  written  some  books 
on  historical  and  philosophical  subjects.  Prince 
Antiochus  Dmitrijewitsch  was  born  on  the  10th 
of  September,  1708,  at  Constantinople ;  received 
his  scientific  education  first  of  all  at  Charkow, 
under  the  Greek  priest  Anastassj  Kondoida,  who 
emigrated  with  his  father,  and  afterwards  at  the 
Academy  of  Moscow,  where,  when  he  was  scarcely 
ten  years  old,  he  composed  a  panegyric,  in  the 
Greek  language,  upon  the  martyr  Dimitrj,  which 
attracted  the  attention  and  praise  of  all  the  teachers. 
The  author  of  ten  years  old  was  allowed  to  re- 
cite it  before  the  public  in  the  church  of  the 
Academy.  In  the  year  1 722  he  went  with  his  fa- 
ther to  the  Persian  war,  and  after  his  return  from 
thence,  devoted  himself  exclusively  to  the  sciences. 
In  1725  he  went  as  a  student  to  the  Academy  of 


•  The  family  is  originally  Turkish.      The  name  Kantemir  is  com- 
pounded of  two  words  signifying  blood  and  iro?i. 

q2 


228  A  LEXICON  OF 

Sciences  at  St.  Petersburg,  where  he  attended  the 
public  lectures,  but  in  private  occupied  himself  in 
studying  the  literature  of  his  country,  under  the 
direction  of  the  academical  translator,  I  wan  Il'inskj. 
In  the  mean  time  his  name  had  been  enrolled  in 
the  guards,  and  in  1728  he  entered  the  regiment 
of  the  Preobraschenskj-guard  as  lieutenant.  His 
distinguished  talents,  as  well  as  his  zeal  in  the  ser- 
vice, attracted  the  attention  of  the  Empress  Anna 
Iwanowna.  In  1731  he  found  himself  appointed 
resident  minister  at  the  court  of  London  ;  in  1732 
he  was  made  envoy-extraordinary  and  minister- 
plenipotentiary  at  the  same  court ;  and  in  1738 
was  changed  to  the  French  court  in  the  same 
capacity.  The  Empress  Anna  Iwanowna  appointed 
him  a  chamberlain ;  and  Anna,  the  Regent,  made 
him  a  privy  councillor.  The  Empress  Elizabeth 
Petrowna  confirmed  him  in  these  dignities,  and 
made  him  minister.  He  died  the  1st  of  March, 
1744,  at  Paris,  of  dropsy  on  the  chest,  which 
he  in  vain  endeavoured  to  cure  by  drinking  the 
waters  of  Aix-la-Chapelle.  His  body  was  brought 
to  Moscow,  and  buried  in  the  Greek  monastery 
there.  Amidst  his  numerous  and  important  official 
duties,  Kantemir  still  devoted  himself  unremittingly 
to  literature,  and  especially  to  that  of  Russia,  of 
which  he  found  but  few  true  worshippers  among 
his  contemporaries,  and  no  models  worthy  of  his 
imitation.  His  writings  (with  the  exception  of 
some  diplomatic  papers  which  have  been  preserved 
in  manuscript  by  some  of  the  friends  of  Russian 
history)  are  the  following:  1.  Eight  Satires,  written 
in  rhyme  and  in  syllabic  metre,  consisting  of  thir- 


RUSSIAN  AUTHORS.  229 

teen  stanzas  each.  They  appeared  in  1762  at  St.  Pe- 
tersburg, in  print,  under  the  title.  Satires  and  other 
little  Poems  of  Knas  Antioch  Kantemir,  with  his- 
torical notes,  and  a  short  biographical  notice  of 
the  author.  These  satires  were  translated  into 
French,  at  Paris,  during  the  life-time  of  the  author. 
2.  The  Epistles  of  Horace,  together  with  an  Epis- 
tle on  the  Art  of  Poetry  in  Russia,  printed  under 
the  assumed  name  of  Chariton  Makentin,  St.  Pe- 
tersburg, 1744  and  1788.  3.  Conversations  on  the 
Plurality  of  Worlds,  a  treatise  by  Fontenelle,  with 
original  notes  by  the  translator,  printed  at  Moscow, 
1730,  and  St.  Petersburg,  1761.  Besides  these,  he 
left  many  translations  in  manuscript;  as  for  in- 
stance. The  Lives  of  Cornelius  Nepos :  Justin's 
Ancient  History:  Anacreon's  Odes:  Epictetus'  Mo- 
ral Philosophy :  Montesquieu's  Persian  Letters:  Al- 
garotti's  Discourses  on  the  Universe;  and  many 
others.  Kantemir  may  claim  the  undisputed  right 
of  being  called  the  founder  of  profane  writing  in 
Russian.  His  fame  has  not  only  not  been  dimmed 
by  the  lapse  of  time,  but  shines  on  the  contrary 
with  double  brilliance  now,  because  he  remains 
original  and  inimitable,  and  even  to  the  present 
day  has  no  competitor  to  rival  him  in  the  heights 
of  the  Russian  Parnassus.  The  most  distinguished 
writers  of  more  recent  times  have  given  him,  with 
one  consent,  the  honour  which  is  his  due.  Schisch- 
kofF  has  given  us  the  most  beautiful  passages  in 
a  series  of  extracts  from  his  works ;  Shukofskj 
threw  light  upon  his  writings,  from  the  bright  torch 
of  criticism  ;  and  BatjuschkofF  sketched  with  his 
graceful  pen  the  excellencies  of  this  poet,  when 


230  A  LEXICON  OF 

he  was  in  communication  with  the  bels  esprits  of 
France,  whom  he  astonished  by  his  talents  and  his 
devoted  love  of  Russia,  and  when  he  prophesied  to 
them  the  future  greatness  of  this  mistress  of  the 
north.  The  most  remarkable  productions  of  Kan- 
temir  are  his  Satires.  Shukofskj  says  of  them, 
"Kantemir's  Satires  may  be  divided  into  two  classes 
• — the  philosophical  and  descriptive.  In  the  first 
class,  in  the  sixth  and  seventh  satires,  for  instance, 
the  writer  shows  himself  to  us  as  a  philosopher ; 
and  in  the  other  (particularly  in  the  first,  second, 
third,  and  fourth)  as  a  correct  painter  of  the 
vices  of  mankind.  He  gives  forcible  and  brief  ex- 
pression to  his  thoughts,  drawn  from  common  life, 
and  almost  always  gives  them  life  and  anima- 
tion by  his  pictures  and  comparisons.  All  his 
characters  are  drawn  with  a  strongly-marked  out- 
line. Sometimes  perhaps  in  his  sketches  and  pic- 
tures a  too  copious  and  overflowing  style  may  be 
objected  to  him.  His  mode  of  writing  is  very  di- 
versified ;  at  one  moment  he  speaks  in  his  own 
person,  in  the  next  he  introduces  persons  trans- 
acting business;  at  one  time  he  delights  us  with 
a  gush  of  poetry,  at  another  he  amuses  us  by 
writing  an  epistle.  In  respect  of  his  language 
and  the  structure  of  his  verse,  Kantemir  must  be 
reckoned  among  the  ancient  class  of  poets ;  but  in 
regard  to  the  art  he  displays,  he  belongs  to  the 
most  modern  and  most  accomplished.  In  reading 
his  satires,  we  see  before  us  the  scholar  of  Horace 
and  Juvenal,  who  is  perfectly  acquainted  with  all 
the  rules  of  the  poetical  art,  as  well  as  with  all  the 
best  models  both  in  ancient  and  modern  poetry." 


RUSSIAN  AUTHORS.  231 

Of  Kantemir's  productions  in  prose,  the  translation 
of  Fontenelle's  work  On  the  Plurahty  of  Worlds  is 
decidedly  the  best  known.  This  translation  is  dif- 
ficult in  its  style,  but  deserves  attention  because  it 
shows  the  condition  of  the  Russian  language  at  the 
time  when  it  was  written  ;  and  in  comparing  it 
with  the  language  used  in  later  times,  makes  us 
doubly  sensible  of  the  force  of  genius  and  the  true 
greatness  of  Lomonossoff.  Kantemir's  own  pre- 
face to  this  work  is  written  in  a  much  more  flowing 
and  easy  style.  What  would  he  not  have  accom- 
plished, if  Providence  had  lengthened  his  days,  or 
if  he  had  been  born  twenty  years  later ! 

Kapnist  (Wassilj  Wassiljewitsch),  councillor  of 
state,  member  of  the  Russian  Academy,  and  of 
many  other  learned  societies,  a  friend  and  relation 
of  Dershawin,  may  be  reckoned  among  the  num- 
ber of  the  most  distinguished  lyric  poets  of  Rus- 
sia. His  poems,  which  certainly  do  not  possess 
all  the  fascination  and  boldness  of  Dershawin, 
are  yet  very  attractive  by  a  certain  enthusiastic 
sentiment  which  pervades  them,  and  deserve  espe- 
cial regard  from  the  copiousness  and  purity  of 
the  style.  The  odes  and  other  compositions  of 
Kapnist  were  printed  at  St.  Petersburg,  in  1 806, 
by  the  title.  The  Lyric  Poems  of  Wassilj  Kapnist. 
Besides  this  he  wrote,  in  1 799,  the  comedy  so  well 
known,  on  account  of  its  biting  satire,  called  The 
Pervert ers  of  Right,  Schikanen,  and  in  1815,  the 
tragedy  of  Antigone.  This  much-esteemed  poet 
lived  for  many  years  at  his  country  residence 
Obuchowka  in  Little  Russia,  where,  adorning  his 


^S2  A  LEXICON  OF 

old  age  with  the  intercourse  of  the  Muses,  he  died 
on  the  28th  of  October,  1823. 

Karamsin  (Nikolaj  Michailowitsch),  Imperial 
Russian  historiographer,  councillor  of  state,  and 
knight,  member  of  many  learned  societies,  was  born 
on  the  1st  December,  1765,  in  the  governmental 
department  of  Simbirsk.  He  received  his  educa- 
tion at  Moscow  as  an  indoors  pupil  of  Professor 
Schaden,  and  afterwards  completed  his  course  of 
instruction  at  the  university  of  the  same  place. 
After  having  served  for  some  years  in  the  guards, 
as  officer,  he  made  a  tour,  from  1789  to  1791 
through  Germany,  Switzerland,  England,  France, 
and  Italy,  and  afterwards  settled  at  Moscow,  and 
occupied  himself  with  literary  pursuits.  In  the  year 
1803  he  was  made  historiographer  of  the  empire, 
in  the  following  year  he  received  the  title  of  aulic 
councillor,  in  1810  he  was  decorated  with  the  order 
of  St.  Wladimir,  third  class;  in  1812  he  became 
collegiate  councillor,  and  in  1816,  when  he  pre- 
sented the  eight  first  volumes  of  his  History  of 
Russia  to  the  Emperor  Alexander,  he  was  ap- 
pointed councillor  of  state,  and  received  the  order 
of  St.  Anne,  first  class.  After  this  he  continued 
to  live  at  St.  Petersburg,  at  which  place  he  died 
the  3rd  of  June,  1826,  in  the  Taurian  Palace. 
The  Emperor  Alexander,  a  short  time  before,  had 
granted  him,  by  means  of  a  ukase  of  the  25th  of 
May,  on  the  occasion  of  his  intended  visit  to  some 
foreign  baths,  a  yearly  pension  of  50,000  roubles, 
with  the  condition  that  this  sum  should  be  con- 
tinued to  be  paid  to  him,  to  his  wife,  and  after  their 


RUSSIAN  AUTHORS.  233 

t 

death,  to  their  children,  without  diminution  ;  to  the 
sons  till  such  time  as  they  should  enter  the  pubhc 
service,  and  to  the  daughters,  until  the  marriage  of 
the  youngest  of  them.  Karamsin  began  while  ex- 
ceedingly young,  to  busy  himself  in  the  literature  of 
his  country ;  and  the  time  which  others  devote  to 
the  pursuit  of  honours  and  riches,  he  consecrated 
to  the  sciences.  Besides  his  grand  work.  The  His- 
tory of  the  Empire  of  Russia,  (as  a  companion  to 
which,  the  first  part  of  a  Historical,  Chronolo- 
gical, and  Geographical  Atlas,  has  just  appeared  by 
AchmatofF,  at  St.  Petersburg^),  a  complete  collec- 
tion of  his  works  was  published  in  1804,  of  which 
the  second  edition  came  out  in  1815,  and  a  third 
in  1820,  in  nine  volumes.  This  collection  contains : 
1.  Poems,  chiefly  lyrical.  2.  Letters  of  a  Russian 
Traveller,  in  four  parts,  1797,  translated  into  Ger- 
man, by  John  Richter,  Leipsic,  1800.  3.  Tales: 
as  Poor  Elizabeth  ;  The  Beautiful  Princess  ;  The 
Fortunate  Dwarf;  Juhe;  The  Impenetrable  Forest ; 
Natahe,  the  Bojar's  Daughter ;  Sierra  Morena ; 
The  Island  Bornholm  and  Marwa  Posadniza,  or 
the  Subjugation  of  Novogorod  ;  which  last  is  con- 
sidered the  best.  4.  Historical  Panegyrics  upon 
Catherine  the  Second.  5.  A  Discourse  on  Fortune. 
6.  Upon  Bogdanowitsch  and  his  Writings.  7.  His- 
torical Fragments  on  the  Insurrection  of  Moscow, 
under  the  reign  of  Alexej  Michailowitsch ;  The 
Pantheon  of  Russian  Authors ;  Antiquities  of  Rus- 
sia ;  Historical  Recollections,  and  Remarks  on  a 
Journey  to  the  Monastery  of  Troizka.     8.  A  Dis- 

''Vide  article  Achmatoff. 


234  A  LEXICON  OF 

course  delivered  at  a  Meeting  of  the  Russian  Aca- 
demy, &;c.  &c.  Besides  these,  there  are  printed  in 
this  collection  smaller  prose  compositions  on  differ- 
ent subjects,  which  are  to  be  found  in  the  journals 
which  Karamsin  edited.  In  Moscow,  he  was  the 
editor  of:  1.  The  Moscow  Journal,  eight  volumes, 
from  1792  to  1793.  His  own  articles  in  this  jour- 
nal were  published  separately,  in  1794,  under  the 
title  of  Trifles.  2.  Aglaia,  or  various  composi- 
tions in  prose  and  verse,  two  volumes,  1794 ; 
translated  into  German  by  Ferdinand  von  Bieden- 
feld,  Leipsic,  1829,  8vo.  3.  Aonides,  or  a  Col- 
lection of  various  Poems,  in  three  parts,  1797, 
1799.  4.  The  Pantheon  of  Foreign  Belles  Let- 
tres,  three  small  volumes,  1798.  5.  The  European 
Messenger,  a  political  and  hterary  journal,  in 
twelve  volumes,  1802  and  1803.  Of  his  transla- 
tions which  are  printed  in  these  journals,  many  are 
also  to  be  found  in  the  journal  called  Reading  for 
Children.  The  following  have  also  been  printed 
separately;    Marmontel's    Tales,  Moscow,    1794, 

1815.  2.  Tales  of  Madame  de  Genhs,  Moscow, 

1816.  3.  Tales  by  Different  Authors,  Moscow, 
1816.  But  his  most  important  work,  to  which  he 
devoted  the  whole  of  his  time  from  the  year  1803, 
is  his  History  of  the  Empire  of  Russia,  in  eight 
volumes,  St.  Petersburg,  1816,1818;  second  edi- 
tion, 1819  and  1820.  The  ninth  volume  appeared 
in  1821,  and  the  tenth  and  eleventh  in  1823.  After 
the  death  of  the  author,  Diwoff  undertook  the 
continuation  of  the  work.  The  history  was  imme- 
diately on  its  appearance  translated  into  German 
by  Hauenschild,  into  Polish  by  Buczynski,   and 


RUSSIAN  AUTHORS.  235 

into  French  by  JaufFret  and  St.  Thomas.     Lelewel 
has  given  a  critique  of  this  work  in   Nos.  19,  20, 
and   21   of    the   Northern  Archives    of    the   year 
1823.   See  article  Bulgarin.    With  Karamsin  begins 
an  entirely  new^  epoch  in  the  history  of  Russian 
literature,    since  he  created  the  modern  Russian 
prose,    and   in   his   history   of   the   Russian    em- 
pire, gave  an  example  of  a  style  at  once  light, 
clear,  pure,  elevated,  and  agreeable.     At  first  his 
writings,  which  found  numerous,  but  few  successful 
imitators,  aroused  the    opposition    of   those  who 
were  accustomed  to  the   prose   of  LomonossofF^ 
and  his  contemporaries  :    but  in  the  sequel,  the 
general  voice  of  the  enlightened  public  discovered 
and  proclaimed  that  Karamsin's  style  was  far  from 
being  a  mere  imitation  of  foreign  originals,  but 
was  grounded  on  a  deep  acquaintance  with  the  pe- 
culiarities and  necessities  of  the  Russian  language, 
set  forth  with  the  finest  taste,  and  resting  on  the 
rules  of  universal  grammar.     In  his  earliest  works, 
especially  in  the  Letters  of  a  Russian  Traveller, 
many  foreign  expressions  are  to  be  found  :  only  the 
style  of  his  later  compositions  and  translations,  but 
especially  his  Russian    History,  may  be  cited  as 
perfect  models.     We  would  not  venture  to  assert 
that  Karamsin  has  even  yet  attained  to  the>  highest 
degree  of  perfection.     The  Russian  language  may 
continue  to  be  enriched  with  new  expressions  and 
new  forms,  and  be  advanced  far  beyond  the  point  to 
which  it  has  at  present  attained ;  but  the  name  and 
the  efforts  of  Karamsin  will  shine  by  their  own 
light  throughout  all  futurity,  by  the  side  of  those  of 

'  Lomonossoffdiedl765,  the  same  year  in  which  Karamsin  was  born. 


236  A  LEXICON  OF 

a  Kantemir  and  a  Lomonossoff.  The  works  of  Ka- 
ramsin  had  a  most  extraordinary  influence  upon  his 
his  contemporaries.  The  fair  sex  also  of  Russia 
were  attracted  and  stimulated  by  them  to  occupy 
themselves  with  the  elegant  literature  of  their 
country,  and  laid  the  foundation  for  the  cultivated 
and  improved  taste  of  the  present  age.  We  trust 
we  shall  be  excused  for  introducing  here  a  short 
specimen  of  the  manner  of  Karamsin,  extracted 
from  the  Travels  of  a  Russian.  The  reader  must 
bear  in  mind  that  his  style  was,  at  the  time 
when  this  was  written,  not  yet  in  its  highest 
state  of  perfection  ;  but  there  is  a  simple  strain 
of  eloquence  in  the  description,  which  can  hardly 
fail  to  interest  and  please. 

The  last  of  the  race  of  Buhenburg,  from  the  Rus- 
sian of  Karamsin. 

"  On  the  southern  bank  of  the  Lake  of  Thun, 
the  old  castle  of  Spitz  towers  into  the  air,  which 
once  belonged  to  the  family  of  Bubenburg,  one  of 
the  oldest  and  most  distinguished  of  the  republic 
of  Bern.  Many  of  the  Bubenburgs  had  done 
good  service  for  their  country,  and  shed  their 
blood  for  her  glory.  The  latest  scions  of  this 
house  were  Leonhard,  and  his  sister  Amalia,  both 
young,  and  both  beautiful.  All  the  noble  famihes 
of  Bern  were  eager  to  court  their  alliance.  At 
last  Leonhard,  in  the  true  devotion  of  his  heart, 
espoused  a  daughter  of  the  house  of  Erlach,  and 
his  sister  accepted  the  hand  of  that  lady's  brother. 
Their  marriages  were  fixed  for  one  and  the  same 
day ;  a  general  festivity  did  honour  to  the  occa- 


RUSSIAN  AUTHORS.  237 

sion,  on  which  the  two  first  famihes  of  the  land 
were  to  be  united  ;  all  proclaimed  the  happiness  of 
the  equally  young  and  equally  beautiful  pairs.  The 
rejoicings  on  that  day  were  ceaseless.  After  the 
splendour  of  the  marriage  ceremony,  the  newly- 
wedded  pairs  with  all  their  guests  embarked  on  a 
party  of  pleasure  on  the  lake  of  Tliun.  The 
heaven  was  bright  and  clear.  A  cooling  wind  invi- 
gorated the  rowers,  and  played  with  the  ringlets  of 
the  young  and  happy  pairs.  Gently-swelling  waves 
foamed  under  the  bows  of  the  boat.  Presently  the 
day  declined,  and  still  the  gay  party  found  them- 
selves wider  and  wider  from  the  shore.  The  sun 
went  down ; — and  on  a  sudden,  as  if  from  the 
depths  of  hell,  a  storm  arose,  and  roared  aloud  with 
the  thunder.  The  lake  uprose  in  tumult,  and  a 
chill  panic  seized  the  steersman  of  the  boat.  He 
endeavoured  to  gain  the  shore,  but  utter  darkness 
concealed  it  from  his  sight.  The  oars  dropped 
from  the  hands  of  the  exhausted  watermen,  and 
billow  after  billow  threatened  the  boat  with  destruc- 
tion. What  a  condition  for  those  loving  pairs ! 
At  first  they  encouraged  the  rowers  and  the  helms- 
man, and  lent  them  their  assistance ;  but  when  they 
saw  that  all  their  endeavours  were  in  vain,  they 
put  their  fates  into  the  hands  of  God,  dried  up  the 
last  tears  which  life  could  claim  from  them,  and 
locked  in  each  others'  arms,  awaited  death.  Soon 
a  gigantic  wave  swept  over  the  boat — and  all  sunk; 
— all  except  one  solitary  boatman,  who  was  fortu- 
nate enough  to  reach  the  shore,  and  lived  to  tell 
the  melancholy  tale.  Thus  ended  the  race  of  Bu- 
benburg.     Their  castle  passed  into  the  possession 


2S8  A  LEXICON  OF 

of  the  family  of  Erlach,  which  is  still  one  of  the 
most  powerful  and  illustrious  in  the  canton  of 
Bern.  With  sad  and  pensive  thoughts  I  paced 
around  this  castle.  The  wind  was  whistling  through 
its  deserted  walls." 

Katenin  (Pawel,  Paul,  Alexandrowitsch),  colo- 
nel and  knight,  was  born  at  St.  Petersburg,  the 
1 1th  of  December,  1792,  and  educated  in  his  pa- 
rents' house.  In  1816  he  entered  the  public  ser- 
vice, and  1819  was  already  titular  councillor ; 
in  the  following  year,  however,  he  entered  into 
the  military  profession,  served  in  the  regiment  of 
the  Preobrashenskj-guard,  and  in  1820  was  pro- 
moted to  the  rank  of  colonel,  on  attaining  which, 
he  took  his  leave  of  the  army.  His  first  poems 
are  printed  in  the  Zwdtnik  or  Nosegay  of  1810  ;  on 
the  3rd  of  February,  1811,  his  first  dramatic  pro- 
duction Ariadne,  a  tragedy  in  verse,  in  five  acts, 
imitated  from  Corneille,  was  represented.  After 
this,  he  wrote  at  several  different  times  several 
other  pieces  for  the  dramatic  boards.  1.  Esther, 
a  tragedy,  in  verse,  imitated  from  Racine.  2. 
Calumnies,  a  comedy,  in  three  acts,  in  verse,  in 
imitation  of  Le  Mechant,  by  Gresset.  He  also 
took  part  in  the  translation  of  the  tragedies.  The 
Horatii,  and  Medea:  of  all  these,  only  two  have  as 
yet  been  printed  ;  viz.,  Esther,  St.  Petersburg, 
1816;  and  Calumnies,  1821.  His  poems  uncon- 
nected with  the  stage,  have  appeared  from  year  to 
year,  for  the  most  part,  in  the  Son  of  the  Country, 
and  in  the  European  Messenger. 

Katschenofskj   (Michael  Trofimowitsch),  Pro- 
fessor of  Antiquities  at  the  University  of  Moscow, 


RUSSIAN  AUTHORS.  239 

member  of  the  Russian  Academy,  and  many  other 
learned  societies,  and  knight,  was  born  at  Charkow, 
1775,  and  educated  at  the  college  of  that  place. 
From  1793  to  1795,  he  served  in  the  governmental 
administration   of  Charkow,  till  1801  he  followed 
the  military  profession,  which  he  left  again,  as  re- 
gimental quarter-master.      In   1805   he   took   the 
degree  of  Master,   and  afterwards   of   Doctor   of 
Philosophy  and  Pohte  Literature  in  the  University 
of  Moscow.      In  1 808,  he  became  adjunct  at  that 
University;  in  1810,  extraordinary  Professor;  and 
in  1811,  ordinary  Professor  of  the  Fine  Arts,  Archae- 
ology,   and    afterwards   of   Russian   History  also. 
Since  1805,   Herr  Katschenofskj  became  the  edi- 
tor of  the  European  Messenger.     In  1808,  1809, 
and  1810,  he  only  took  part  in  the  labour  with 
Herr  Shukofskj,  and  in  1814  he  handed  over  the 
entire  editorship  to   IsmailofF.      He  was  also  the 
transLtor  of    several  works  from  the  French,  as 
The  Athenian  Letters,  Moscow,  1817,  and  pub- 
lished many  single  collections  of  Tales,  Anecdotes, 
&c.  which  he  inserted  in  his  Journal,  as  well  as  a 
Greek  Chrestomathy,  which  went  through  several 
editions.     He  earned  the  regard  and  gratitude  of 
the  Russian  public,  especially  by  his  conducting  of 
the  European    Messenger,  which  holds  the   first 
place  in  the  number  of  Russian  journals,  and  con- 
g*     tains    many    interesting    articles.      The    original 
H    essays  of  Katschenofskj  which  are  to  be  found  in 
H    the  Messenger,  and    in  the   Transactions  of  the 
H    Moscow  Society  for    the   Lovers    of   Literature, 
H    namely,  A  Treatise  on  the  Ancient  Russian  Litera- 
B    ture,  and  another.  Upon  the  Panegyrical  Orations 

k 


240  A  LEXICON  OF 

of  LomonossofF  and  many  others,  assure  to  him 
an  honourable  place  amongst  the  writers  of  Rus- 
sian history,  and  the  connoisseurs  of  literature. 

Klimofskj  (Semen),  a  Cossack  of  Little  Russia, 
lived  about  the  year  1724,  and  was  a  pupil  of 
nature  in  the  poetical  art.  He  composed  some 
songs ;  as  for  instance,  "  I  wish  for  nothing,  but  only 
thee," and  a  poem  "On  the  honesty  and  high-minded- 
ness  of  the  beneficent,"  written  in  syllabic  verse,  of 
which  the  manuscript  is  preserved  in  the  Impe- 
rial Library.  Klimofskj  distinguished  himself  among 
his  countrymen  by  his  understanding  and  virtues, 
and  his  favourite  maxim  was,  "  Good  for  ourselves, 
ill  to  nobody,  is  the  right  way  to  live." 

Kluschin  (Alexander),  imperial  councillor,  died 
in  1804.  He  wrote  two  comedies,  in  verse,  viz. : 
1.  Disgrace  and  Misfortune,  St.  Petersburg,  1759, 
and  2.  The  Obliging  Man,  St.  Petersburg,  1801. 
He  also  took  part  in  the  editorship  of  the  St.  Peters- 
burg Mercury,  and  the  Spectator,  St.  Petersburg, 
1792,  and  composed  some  lyric  poems. 

Knashewitsch  (Dmitrj),  author  of  Russian 
Synonymes,  and  editor  of  the  supplementary  sheets 
of  the  Son  of  the  Country,  the  journal  edited  by 
the  councillor  of  state,  Von  Gretsch.  These  sup- 
plementary sheets  contain  a  well-chosen  selection 
of  tales,  and  are  distinguished  by  a  pure  and 
fluent  style  of  writing. 

Knashnin  (JakofF  Borissowitsch),  imperial  coun- 
cillor, and  member  of  the  Russian  Academy,  was 
born  at  Pskow,  the  3rd  of  October,  1742,  received 
his  first  instructions  in  the  house  of  his  father, 
the  privy  councillor  of  state  Boriss  Iwanowitsch 


RUSSIAN  AUTHORS.  241 

Knashnin,  and  afterwards  at  St.  Petersburg,  under 
Professor  Moderach.  After  being  well  grounded 
in  the  modern  languages,  he  applied  himself  sedu- 
lously to  French,  German,  and  Italian  literature, 
and  began  writing  verses  while  he  was  yet  a  school- 
boy. After  he  had  completed  his  studies,  he  served 
first  in  the  College  of  Foreign  Affairs,  and  at  the 
Comptoir  of  Architectural  Improvements.  Then  he 
entered  into  the  military  profession,  and  became 
captain  and  adjutant-general.  At  this  period  he 
wrote  his  tragedy  of  Dido,  which  attracted  the  at- 
tention of  Catherine  II.  In  the  course  of  a 
journey  which  he  made  to  Moscow,  on  some  private 
business,  he  made  the  acquaintance  of  SumarokofF, 
whose  personal  friendship  he  obtained,  and  whose 
lessons  and  advice  he  turned  to  advantage,  and 
afterwards  married  his  daughter.  Soon  after  this 
he  quitted  the  public  service,  and  occupied  himself 
exclusively  with  literature  ;  but  this  tranquillity  did 
not  last  long.  Bezkoj  took  him  as  his  private  secre- 
tary, and  associated  him  in  the  undertakings  which 
he  was  prosecuting  with  so  much  advantage  to 
mankind.  In  the  mean  time,  he  did  not  desist  to 
occupy  himself  with  poetry.  The  tragedy  Ross- 
lafF  was  written .  by  him  in  the  midst  of  official 
occupations,  and  the  distractions  of  the  public  ser- 
vice. Dmitrefskj  by  his  genius  in  the  performance 
of  the  part  of  RosslafF,  completed  the  triumph 
of  Knashnin.  In  the  year  1783,  the  Russian 
Academy  chose  him  to  be  one  of  its  members,  and 
he  took  a  part  in  the  compilation  of  the  great  dic- 
tionary on  which  they  were  employed  ;  still  the 
dramatic  art  remained  his  chief  and  favourite  oc- 


242  A  LEXICON  OF 

cupation.  At  the  request  of  the  Empress,  he 
translated  in  three  weeks,  Metastasio's  tragedy.  La 
Clemenza  di  Tito.  Soon  after  this  he  undertook, 
at  the  urgent  desire  of  the  Director  of  the  Land 
Cadet  Corps,  count  Anhalt,  an  entirely  new  office, 
which  compelled  him  to  lecture  on  Russian  lite- 
rature before  the  upper  classes  of  that  corps.  About 
this  time  he  wrote  some  tragedies,  as  Sophonisba 
and  Wladissan,  and  his  two  comedies.  The  Boaster, 
and  The  Eccentric  Men.  At  the  end  of  the  year 
1790,  he  fell  dangerously  ill,  of  which  illness  he 
died,  on  the  14th  of  January,  1791.  Knashnin  has 
left  behind  him  the  following  works :  Tragedies. 
1.  Dido,  in  five  acts.  2.  The  Clemency  of  Titus, 
in  three  acts.  3.  Rosslaff,  in  five  acts.  4.  Wladis- 
san, in  five  acts,  with  choruses.  5.  Wladimir 
and  Jaropolk,  in  five  acts.  6.  Sophonisba,  in 
five  acts.  Comedies ;  in  verse.  1.  The  Boaster, 
in  five  acts.  2.  The  Eccentric  Men,  in  five  acts. 
In  prose  :  The  Unfortunate  Peace-maker,  in  three 
acts.  4.  Mourning,  or  the  Consoled  Widow, 
in  two  acts.  Operas  :  1.  The  Coach-accident,  in 
two  acts.  2.  The  Sbit-carrier,  in  three  acts.  3. 
The  Miser,  in  one  act.  4.  The  Pretended  Mad- 
man, in  two  acts.  The  Melodrame  of  Orpheus. 
Besides  these,  he  wrote  a  number  of  odes,  fables, 
songs,  and  other  minor  poems.  A  complete  col- 
lection of  Knashnin's  works  appeared  in  1822,  at 
St.  Petersburg,  in  five  volumes.  Merslakoff  judges 
very  correctly  on  the  writings  of  Knashnin,  when 
he  says,  "  Sumarokoff 's  place  was  succeeded  to 
by  his  relative  and  pupil  Knashnin.  In  the  trage- 
dies of  the  latter  there  is  a  purer,  nobler,  and  more 


RUSSIAN  AUTHORS.  243 

dignified  style  than  in  those  of  SumarokofF.  But 
he  is  often  cold,  high-flown,  forced,  and  is  al- 
ways too  much  bent  on  sublimity.  In  one  particu- 
lar scene  of  his  RosslafF,  he  seems  to  have  collected 
together  all  the  fine-sounding  words  which  are 
scattered  over  the  different  tragedies  of  a  Cor- 
neille,  a  Racine,  and  a  Voltaire.  He  imitates  all 
the  French  tragedians,  or  rather,  he  makes  down- 
right extracts  from  their  works.  Not  so  Suma- 
rokoff!"  Among  Knashnin's  comedies,  however, 
there  are  some  which  are  decidedly  good.  The  Ec- 
centric Men,  and  The  Boaster,  are  not  to  be  esteemed 
much  inferior  to  Von  Wisin's  immortal  comedies, . 
The  Mother's  Spoiled  Son,  and  the  Brigadier. 

Knashnin  (I.  Alexander),  lieutenant-general  and 
knight  of  several  orders,  died  on  the  8th  of  April, 
1829,  at  St.  Petersburg,  in  the  twenty-ninth  year 
of  his  age,  in  consequence  of  the  wounds  which 
he  had  received  at  the  battle  of  Borodino,  in  1812. 
In  his  leisure  hours,  literature  was  his  chief  amuse- 
ment. There  are  several  plays  of  his  composition, 
most  of  which  are  still  favourites  with  the  public 
on  the  stage,  and  many  of  which  have  been  printed. 
Besides  these,  he  has  left  several  fables  and  treatises 
in  verse  and  prose. 

KoKoscHKiN  (Feodor  Feodorowitsch),  collegiate 
councillor,  a  lord  of  the  bedchamber,  and  knight, 
honorary  member  of  the  University  of  Moscow, 
and  of  many  other  learned  bodies,  was  born  at 
Moscow,  the  20th  of  April,  1773,  and  educated  in 
his  father's  house,  and  at  the  above  named  univer- 
sity. He  served  first  of  all  in  the  guards,  and 
then  in  the   ministry  of  the  department  of  justice. 

r2 


244  A  LEXICON  OF 

In  1807,  be  took  an  active  part  in  the  establish- 
ing, and  in  1812,  in  the  arming  of  the  Moscow 
mihtia.  Since  1819,  he  has  been  connected  with 
the  management  of  the  theatre,  and  also  one 
of  the  council  of  the  Building  Commission  at  Mos- 
cow. In  literature,  Kokoschkin  is  known,  inde- 
pendently of  other  successful  contributions  to  the 
drama,  by  his  masterly  translation  of  the  Misan- 
thrope of  Moh^re.  Besides  this,  he  has  trans- 
lated several  pieces  in  prose,  and  is  the  author  of 
many  little  poems. 

KoNiFSKJ,  see  Georgj. 

KoNSTANTiN  (Konstautinowitsch),  prince  of  Os- 
trog,  woywode  of  KiefF,  and  marshal  of  Volhy- 
nia,  occupies  a  distinguished  station  in  the  his- 
tory of  Russian  literature ;  not,  it  is  true,  among 
the  number  of  writers,  but  as  a  zealous  defender 
of  the  true  faith,  and  of  general  enlightenment  in 
the  western  provinces  of  the  Sclavonic  countries. 
This  Knas,  descended  from  the  successors  of  Wlad- 
imir,  preserved,  almost  the  only  one,  among  all 
the  Lithuanian  and  Volhynian  princes  in  the  six- 
teenth century,  the  pure  doctrines  of  the  Eastern 
Church,  notwithstanding  the  efforts  and  persecu- 
tions of  the  Papists  and  Unionists :  and  he  first 
ventured  to  have  the  Sclavonic  church-books 
openly  printed  amongst  them  for  the  use  of  the 
Russians.  Finally,  in  1580,  he  sent  for  the  printer, 
Johann  Fodoroff  from  Lemberg,  and  engaged  him 
to  print  in  the  same  year  the  Psalms,  the  New 
Testament,  and  the  Kalendar,  and  in  1581,  the 
entire  Bible  in  two  parts,  in  the  Sclavonic  lan- 
guage.    There  were  also  published  from  the  same 


RUSSIAN  AUTHORS.  245 

press  a  number  of  other  books,  and  thus,  the 
first  establishment  of  numerous  printing  presses 
was  caused  in  Southern  Russia,  for  instance,  in 
Lemberg,  in  Mohileff,  in  KiefF,  and  many  other 
places.  In  all  these  printing  presses,  the  form  of 
the  Ostrogian  letters  was  preserved,  in  which  re- 
spect they  differ  from  the  printing  used  at  Moscow. 
Of  the  original  works  of  Konstantin  Konstantino- 
witsch,  the  following  is  known :  A  Circular  Letter 
to  all  the  Volhynian  and  Lithuanian  Churches, 
warning  them  not  to  follow  the  Apostate  Bishops, 
and  exhorting  to  the  continuance  in  the  Faith 
of  the  Eastern  Greek  Church,  which  he  composed 
in  the  year  1595.  This  appeared  in  print  at  Os- 
trog.  Another  circular  letter  of  his  is  printed  in 
the  Russian  Church  History  of  the  most  vener- 
able metropolitan  Platon.  This  prince  died  in 
1608.  One  of  his  sons,  Janussj,  castellan™  of 
Cracow,  became  a  convert  to  the  Roman  Catholic 
faith  ;  the  other,  named  Alexander,  woywode  of 
Volhynia,  continued  to  follow  his  father's  attach- 
ment to  the  orthodox  creed,  but  engaged  in  the 
discharge  of  the  duties  of  the  military  profession, 
which  he  adopted,  and  occupied  constantly  in  wars, 
he  was  not  animated  by  his  father's  zeal  for  religion 
and  piety. 

KopjEwiTSCH,or,KopiJEFSKJ  (Ilja,/Ehas,'  Feodor- 
owitsch),  born  in  White  Russia,  studied  in  Holland, 
and  after  having  declared  himself  a  convert  to  the 
reformed  faith,  was  appointed  a  preacher  in  Amster- 
dam.   Peter,  during  his  stay  in  that  city,  became  ac- 

"  Or  commander.. 


246  A  LEXICON  OF 

quainted  with  Kopjewitsch's  merits,  gave  him  the 
title  of  Translator  to  the  College  for  Foreign  Affairs, 
and  engaged  him  in  the  composition  and  translation 
of  a  number  of  educational  works  for  the  youth 
of  Russia,  which  he  ordered  to  be  printed  at  the 
Sclavonic  press,  by  Tessing.  Kopjewitsch  entered 
with  ready  zeal  into  the  views  of  his  royal  employer. 
In  the  years  1699  and  1700,  the  following  works  and 
translations  of  his  performance  were  printed  by  Tes- 
sing. 1.  An  Introduction  to  a  History  of  the  World. 
2.  On  the  Art  of  War,  a  work  written  by  the 
Greek  Emperor  Leo,  surnamed  the  Peace-maker. 
And  3.  A  Latin  Grammar  for  the  Use  of  Russian 
Youth,  published  under  the  t\t\e  Latin  a  Grammatica 
in  usum  Scholarum  celeberrimce  gentis  Slavonico- 
Rosseance,  Sfc.  Besides  these,  he  prepared  for  the 
press  a  number  of  other  works ;  but  his  death, 
which  ensued  in  1701,  did  not  permit  him  to  su- 
perintend their  publication  himself.  Among  these 
were:  1.  Mathematical  Works ;  as  for  instance. 
The  Introduction  to  Arithmetic.  2.  Theological 
works.  3.  Poetical  works;  as  iEsop's  Fables, 
Horatius  Flaccus,  Upon  the  Virtues,  &c.  4.  His- 
torical works ;  as  Quintus  Curtius'  Life  of  Alex- 
ander the  Great  of  Macedon.  5.  Rhetorical  works. 
6.  Grammatical  works.  7.  Dictionaries,  and  so 
forth.  After  the  death  of  Kopjewitsch,  of  all  his 
translations  only  one  was  printed,  in  1704,  at  the 
press  of  Abraham  Brenan  at  Amsterdam,  viz..  The 
Book  of  Navigation.  In  the  year  1700  he  had 
himself  printed  at  that  place  A  Panegyric  on  Peter 
the  Great,  in  verse,  written  in  the  Latin  and  Rus- 
sian languages,  and  entitled  "  The  Praise  of  the 


RUSSIAN  AUTHORS.  247 

Triumphs,  and  Admiration  of  the  Victories  of  the 
Most  High  and  Mighty,  Most  Powerful  and  Most 
Unconquerable  Great  Monarch,the  Czar  and  Grand 
Prince,  Peter  Alexijewitsch,  and  so  forth. 

KoppEN  (P.  von),  author  of  a  publication  at 
St.  Petersburg,  in  1825,  entitled.  Bibliographical 
Sheets. 

KopussTENSKJ.     See  Zacharias. 

KoRNiLowiTSCH,  wrote  Upon  the  Diplomatic 
Missions  to  Russia  in  Past  Times.  This  essay  is  to 
be  found  in  a  journal  published  at  St.  Petersburg, 
by  the  Society  of  the  Friends  of  Enlightenment 
and  Philanthropy. 

KoROBEiNiKOFF  (THphon),  and  Jurj  Grekoff, 
merchants  of  Moscow,  were  sent,  in  the  time  of 
the  Czar  John  Wassiljewitsch  to  the  holy  places  of 
the  East,  to  give  alms  and  offerings  in  memory 
of  the  deceased  Imperial  Prince  John.  They 
visited  Constantinople,  Antioch,  Jerusalem,  Alex- 
andria, and  other  places,  and  wrote  a  journal  of 
their  Travels,  which  has  appeared  in  print  in  the 
twelfth  number  of  the  Ancient  Russian  Library, 
under  the  title,  the  Journey  of  Triphon  Korobeini- 
koff,  a  merchant  of  Moscow,  and  his  fellow-traveller 
to  Jei'usalem,  Egypt  and  Mount  Sinai,  in  the  year 
1583.  It  was  also  separately  printed  in  St.  Peters- 
burg in  1783. 

KosLOFF  (Iwan),  the  blind  poet,  has  very  re- 
cently published  a  most  excellent  translation  of 
The  Bride  of  Abydos.  The  Conversations-Lexicon 
gives  ample  details  concerning  him.  The  Trans- 
lator trusts  that  he  may  be  excused  for  having 
added  the   following  interesting  extract  from  the 


248  A  LEXICON  OF 

Conversations-Lexicon.  "  KoslofF  is  a  Russian 
noble,  and  equally  remarkable  as  a  man  and  as  a 
poet.  He  was  born  in  1780,  and  spent  the  greater 
part  of  his  youth  in  the  gaieties  of  the  great  world. 
A  welcome  guest  in  all  the  most  refined  and 
fashionable  circles  of  Moscow,  he  spent  rather  a 
life  of  excitement  than  of  activity.  His  genius 
slumbered  undeveloped ;  but  still  he  evinced  a 
love  of  literature,  so  far  as  an  attention  to  the 
French  and  Italian,  as  well  as  the  Classics,  could 
give  evidence  of,  or  promote  this  taste.  In  these 
he  found,  in  the  want  of  any  serious  occupation, 
an  agreeable  amusement,  and  a  fountain  from  which 
to  refresh  himself  when  exhausted  by  dissipation. 
His  whole  energies  were  devoted  alternately  to  the 
pleasures  of  the  world,  and  the  provision  for  his 
family.  About  his  fortieth  year  he  caught  a  severe 
distemper,  which  entirely  deprived  him  of  the  use 
of  his  feet.  Thus  thrown  into  utter  retirement, 
after  being  accustomed  to  incessant  society,  he 
found  himself  obliged  to  seek,  in  his  own  resources, 
a  compensation  for  the  gaieties  which  he  had  lost. 
This  stroke  of  fortune  did  not  bow  him  down. 
His  spirit  took  a  more  lofty  direction  than  before. 
He  became  a  poet.  The  ideal  world  which  he 
now  created  for  himself  soon  fully  atoned  for  the 
loss  of  the  real  world  which  was  taken  from  him. 
In  the  intervals  of  his  pain  he  acquired  a  know- 
ledge of  himself,  and  discovered  that  he  possessed 
talents  of  which  he  had  not  yet  been  aware.  In  a 
short  time  he  made  himself  well  acquainted  with 
the  English  language  and  literature.  Yet  a  severer 
trial  awaited  him  :  he  lost  his  sight.     But  not  even 


RUSSIAN  AUTHORS.  249 

this  melancholy  affliction  could  subdue  or  depress 
his  mind.  It  became  for  him  another  step  in  the 
moral  and  mental  scale  of  ascension.  In  his  bhnd- 
ness,  he  amused  himself  the  whole  day  long  with 
poetry.  He  began  next  to  study  the  German  lan- 
guage, and  was  soon  able  to  understand  the  clas- 
sical poets  of  Germany.  Ever  since  he  has  lived 
in  the  world  of  memory  and  imagination.  Gifted 
with  an  extraordinary  grasp  of  thought,  he  retains 
everything  which  he  has  once  acquired.  He  trans- 
lated Byron  from  memory,  recorded  the  emotions 
of  his  own  past  life  in  the  gilded  dream-imagery  of 
song,  and  composed  epistles  in  verse  to  his  friends, 
who  assembled  often  to  see  him,  and  enjoy  his 
conversation.  He  translated  very  happily  some 
things  from  the  English  and  Italian ;  of  which  we 
only  recollect  at  this  moment  The  Bride  of  Aby- 
dos,  St.  Petersburg,  1826,  and  of  his  original 
poems  we  remember  principally  Tschernetz,  (  i.  e. 
The  Monk,  which  was  translated  into  German,  by 
Schreiber,  St.  Petersburg,  1825.)  His  Poems,  ap- 
peared at  St.  Petersburg,  1828." 

KosTROFF  (Jermit  Iwanowitsch),  provincial  se- 
cretary, was  born  in  the  government  of  Watka. 
He  received  his  education  first  in  the  seminary  of 
that  place,  then  at  the  clerical  academy  of  Mos- 
cow, and  at  last,  from  the  year  1771,  at  the  univer- 
sity of  the  same  place,  where  he  also  took  a  ba- 
chelor's degree  in  the  year  1778,  and  was  appointed 
provincial  secretary  in  1782.  He  died  the  9th  of 
December,  1796.  A  collection  of  his  poetical 
works,  which  had  previously  appeared  separately, 
was   published   in    1802,   in    two  parts.     He  had 


250  A  LEXICON  OF 

translated :  1 .  Homer's  Iliad,  six  books,  from  the 
original  Greek,  St.  Petersburg,  1787.  He  trans- 
lated also  six  books  more,  of  which  the  seventh, 
eighth,  and  half  of  the  ninth,  are  printed  in  the 
European  Messenger.  It  is  related  that  he  offered 
these  six  books  to  a  bookseller,  but  that  the  barba- 
rian refused  to  give  him  more  than  150  roubles  for 
them,  upon  which  the  indignant  poet  threw  them 
into  the  fire.  His  translation  of  the  Iliad  will  be 
sufficient  to  hand  down  Kostroff 's  name  to  posterity, 
although  later  translators  have  surpassed  him  in 
the  performance.  The  chief  fault  and  principal 
difficulty  of  this  translation  is  that  it  is  not  written 
in  the  same  metre  with  the  original".  Compare  ar- 
ticle Gnaditsch.  2.  Apulejeff,  or  the  Golden  Ass 
of  Apuleius,  Moscow,  1781.  3.  Ossian's  Poems, 
in  two  parts,  which  he  translated  from  the  French 
version,  Moscow,  1792,  second  edition,  St.  Peters- 
burg, 1818.  KostrofF's  translation,  however,  is  in- 
comparably better  than  the  French.  4.  Elvira  and 
Cenotemissa,  a  poem  of  Arnaud,  Moscow,  1779. 
And  5.  Voltaire's  Tactics,  in  verse,  Moscow, 
1779. 

KoTLAREFSKj,  has  earned  himself  a  name  by  his 
translation  of  the  iEneid  into  the  provincial  dialect 
of  Little  Russia. 

Kraft  (Wolfgang  Ludwig),  was  born  at  St.  Pe- 
tersburg in  1743,  and  studied  mathematics  and 
physics  at  foreign  universities.    In  1769  he  was  sent 


"  This  observation  will  appear  less  strange,  as  coming  from  a  German, 
when  we  recollect  that  Voss's  Homer,  by  far  the  best  translation  of  him 
that  has  ever  appeared,  is  written  in  German  hexameters. 


RUSSIAN  AUTHORS.  251 

to  Orenburg  to  take  observations  of  the  transit  of 
Venus  over  the  sun  ;  and  in  1771  he  was  adopted 
into  the  Academy.  He  vi^as  a  co-operator  with  the 
great  Euler  in  the  preparation  of  the  lunar  tables, 
and  working  out  the  new  theory  of  the  moon's 
courses.  Kraft  was  teacher  of  physics  and  astro- 
nomy to  the  Emperor  Alexander  Pawlowitsch,  and 
the  Grand  Prince  Constantine  Pawlowitsch.  He 
died  in  1814. 

Krascheninnikoff  (Stephen  Petrowitsch),  pro- 
fessor of  botany  in  the  Academy  of  Sciences  at  St. 
Petersburg,  was  born  in  1713,  at  Moscow,  and  stu- 
died at  the  Academy  of  Saikonospaskj.  In  1733 
he  was  sent  from  St.  Petersburg  as  a  student  to 
accompany  the  second  expedition  to  Kamtschatka. 
The  professors  there  sent  him,  in  1 736,  on  account 
of  their  own  too  pressing  engagements,  from  Ja- 
kutsk  to  Kamtschatka  ;  but  as  they  themselves  did 
not  make  the  journey,  all  the  obligations  and  re- 
sponsibilities rested  on  Krascheninnikoff  alone.  With 
the  assistance  of  the  adjunct  Steller,  who  was  sent 
out  in  1739  to  complete  his  arrangements,  he  pre- 
pared all  the  necessary  materials  for  a  description 
of  these  parts,  and  returned  in  1743  to  St.  Peters- 
burg. In  1745  he  was  appointed  adjunct,  and  in 
1750  professor.  He  died  on  the  12th  of  February, 
1755,  on  the  same  day  that  the  last  sheet  of  his 
description  of  Kamtschatka  was  printed.  Of  his 
writings,  the  best  known  are;  1.  Description  of 
the  Country  of  Kamtschatka,  in  two  parts,  with 
many  copperplates,  St.  Petersburg,  1 755  :  new  edi- 
tion, same  place,  1818.  2.  A  Discourse  on  the 
Utility  of  the  Arts  and  Sciences,  printed  in  1750. 


252  A  LEXICON  OF 

3.  A  Translation  of  the  Life  of  Alexander  the  Great, 
by  Quintus  Curtius.  Kraseheninnikoff  was  no  ge- 
nius, but  a  clever  man ;  his  style  is  correct,  toler- 
ably pure,  and  was  for  a  long  time  considered  a 
model  of  perfection. 

Krasnopulskj,  a  young  Russian  noble,  translated 
into  Russian  one  of  Kotzebue's  plays,  called  The 
Coachman  of  Peter  the  Great,  which,  fortunately 
for  the  author,  contained  an  indirect  compliment 
to  the  Emperor  Paul.  For  when  Kotzebue  was  ar- 
rested on  the  Russian  frontier  and  sent  to  Siberia, 
in  the  year  1800,  some  friend  of  the  poet  put  into 
the  Emperor's  hand  this  translation  of  Krasnopulskj, 
which  so  much  pleased  him,  that  he  had  the  piece 
represented  at  the  St.  Petersburg  theatre,  recalled 
the  writer  from  exile,  took  him  into  favour,  and 
presented  him  with  a  landed  estate,  called  Wokro- 
kiill,  in  Livonia.  See  Kotzebue's  work,  called  Das 
merkwurdigste  Jahr  meines  Lebens,  2  vols.  Berlin, 
1801. 

Krassofskj  (Johann  Iwanowitsch),  born  in  1746, 
was  one  of  the  compilers  of  the  Etymological  Rus^- 
sian  Dictionary,  in  six  volumes. 

Krekschin  (Peter),  died  in  1763,  aged  80  years, 
collected  with  industry  all  possible  materials  bear- 
ing on  the  subject  of  Russian  history,  and  wrote 
himself  the  history  of  several  Czars,  but  never  had 
his  labours  printed.  His  papers  were  purchased 
after  his  death,  by  Catherine  the  Second,  and  pre- 
sented by  her  to  the  Imperial  Library. 

Krukofskoj  (Matwaj  Wassiljewitsch),  born  at 
St.  Petersburg  the  16th  of  November,  1781,  re- 
ceived his  education  in  the  Land  Cadet  Corps,  en- 


RUSSIAN  AUTHORS.  253 

tered  the  army  as  lieutenant,  served  afterwards  as 
an  officer  in  the  same  corps,  and  still  later,  as  trans- 
lator to  the  Commission  for  Improving  the  Laws. 
In  1808  he  went,  with  the  assistance  of  govern- 
ment, to  complete  his  education  in  the  arts  and 
sciences  in  foreign  countries ;  and  in  1810  re- 
turned to  St.  Petersburg,  where  he  died  in  the  en- 
suing year.  Of  his  works  the  best  known  are  :  1. 
'  Posharskoj,  a  tragedy,  in  three  acts,  in  verse,  re- 
presented for  the  first  time  at  St.  Petersburg,  the 
22nd  of  May,  1807,  and  printed  there  in  1807  and 
1811.  This  piece  has  been  adapted  to  the  German 
stage  by  F.  R.  Gebhardt,  under  the  title  of  Prince 
Posharskoj,  the  Hero  of  Russia,  or.  The  Storming 
of  Moscow,  a  historical  drama,-  in  three  acts.  2. 
Elizabeth,  the  Daughter  of  Jarofslaw,  a  tragedy, 
in  five  acts,  which  never  appeared  on  the  stage,  but 
was  printed  at  St.  Petersburg  in  1820.  Besides 
these  he  published  a  translation  On  Political  Eco- 
nomy, from  Herrenschwand,  St.  Petersburg,  1807. 

Krijloff  (Alexander),  an  elegiac  poet,  died  on 
the  26th  of  July,  1829,  aged  thirty-one  years,  at 
his  estate  in  the  district  of  Tichwinsch,  after 
protracted  bodily  sufferings,  to  which,  in  his  last 
years,  total  blindness  was  superadded.  "  A.  Kru- 
lofF,"  says  A.  Bestuscheff,  in  speaking  of  him, ''  pos- 
sesses the  unusual  gift  of  converting  foreign  beau- 
ties into  the  Russian  tongue,  without  disfiguring 
the  sense  of  the  original.  His  muse  is  not  self- 
dependent,  but  his  verses  enchant  by  the  melody 
of  their  flow." 

Kruloff  (Iwan  Andrejewitsch),  librarian  to  the 
Imperial  Public  Library,  councillor  of  state,  and 


i__ 


254  A  LEXICON  OF 

knight,  member  of  the  Russian  Academy,  and  many 
other  learned  societies,  was  born  at  Moscow,  the 
2nd  of  February,  1768.  His  parents  removed 
shortly  after  his  birth  to  Twer,  where  he  was  edu- 
cated under  their  eye.  He  served  at  first  at 
Twer,  afterwards  (from  the  year  1785)  at  St.  Pe- 
tersburg in  different  courts  of  justice.  In  1802 
he  was  appointed  secretary  to  the  administration 
department  of  war  at  Riga.  In  1811  he  came  to 
the  Imperial  Public  Library,  in  which  we  believe 
that  he  still  continues  to  be  engaged.  He  is  the 
author  of  the  following  dramatic  works  :  1.  The 
Coffee-house  Girl,  an  opera,  which  he  wrote  when 
only  sixteen  years  old,  but  which  is  not  yet 
printed.  2.  Mischievous  People,  a  comedy,  in  five 
acts,  in  prose,  St.  Petersburg,  1793.  3.  The  Au^ 
thor  in  the  Antechamber,  a  comedy,  in  three 
acts,  in  prose,  St.  Petersburg,  1794.  4.  The  Mil- 
liner's Shop,  a  comedy,  in  three  acts,  in  prose, 
St.  Petersburg,  1807  :  second  edition,  1816.  5. 
The  Girls'  School,  a  comedy,  in  one  act,  in  prose, 
St.  Petersburg,  1807  :  second  edition,  1816.  6. 
The  Riotous  Family,  an  opera,  in  three  acts,  1793, 
etc.  Fables :  of  which  the  last  edition  at  St.  Pe- 
tersburg appeared  in  1819,  and  a  splendid  edi- 
tion in  the  Russian,  French,  and  Italian  languages, 
under  the  superintendence  of  Orloff,  was  pubhshed 
by  Bossange  in  Paris,  1825,  in  several  parts.  He 
also  took  a  part  in  the  editorship  of  the  following 
journals:  1.  The  Witty  Post,  1789.  2.  The  Spec- 
tator, 1792.  3.  The  St.  Petersburg  Mercury,  1793; 
and  4.  The  Dramatic  Messenger,  1808.  Herr  von 
Kriiloff  occupies  the  first  place  in  the  list  of  Rus- 


RUSSIAN  AUTHORS.  255 

sian  fable-writers.  Originality  of  invention,  sim- 
plicity and  nature  in  arrangement,  a  true  Russian, 
pure,  correct,  and  unconstrained  style,  interwoven 
with  expressions  which  the  author  himself  picked 
up  from  the  wit  of  the  Russian  common  people ; 
these  things  constitute  the  merit  of  his  fables.  The 
other  Russian  fable-writers  are  happy  in  their  imi- 
tations of  foreign  models,  and  have  often  attained 
to  an  equality  with  their  masters  ;  but  KriilofF  be- 
came himself  a  model  for  the  copy  of  foreigners, 
who  translate  his  fables  with  eagerness,  in  order  to 
acquaint  their  countrymen  with  the  "  play  of  the 
Russian  intellect."  Of  KriilofTs  comedies.  The  Mil- 
liner's Shop  and  The  Girls'  School  are  distinguished 
by  an  accurate  representation  of  nature  in  the  cha- 
racters and  style.  Pity  that  they  should  have  been 
written  in  prose ! 

KuBAssoFF  (Sergj),  son  of  a  bojar  of  Tobolsk, 
who  had  emigrated  from  Jarosslawl,  lived  at  the 
beginning  of  the  seventeenth  century.  He  was 
author  of  a  book  of  chronography,  i.  e.  A  His- 
tory from  the  Creation  of  the  World.  This  chro- 
nology begins,  like  others,  with  the  creation,  is 
continued  down  through  the  Greek  empire,  and 
ends  with  the  taking  of  Constantinople.  In  the 
245th  chapter  of  it,  begins  "the  history  of  the  Scla- 
vonic language,"  and  of  "  the  Russian  people,"  etc. 
and  the  same  concludes  with  the  election  of  the 
Czar  Michael  Feodorowitsch.  To  the  end  of  the 
work  is  attached  in  an  appendix,  besides  some  syl- 
labic verses,  A  Short  Description  of  the  Czars  of 
Moscow,  from  John  Wassiljewitsch  to  Michael  Feo- 
dorowitsch.    This  chronology  is  preserved  in  the 


r 


256  A  LEXICON  OF 

library  of  the  Moscow  University,  and  the  last- 
mentioned  article  appeared  in  print  in  the  first  part 
of  the  Russian  Memorabilia. 

KiJCHELBECKER,  author  of  the  European  Letters, 
and,  as  Bestuscheff  remarks,  "distinguished  by  the 
lofty  flights  of  his  fancy." 

KuKOLNiK,  a  young  and  original  author,  is  the 
writer  of  the  historical  drama.  The  Arm  of  the  Al- 
mighty hath  saved  the  Country.  The  subject  is 
taken  from  Russian  history,  and  alludes  to  the  de- 
liverance of  Moscow  in  1613,  and  the  consequent 
elevation  of  the  house  of  RomanzofF  to  the  throne. 
M.  Karatiquen  is  the  actor  who  has  generally  taken 
the  part  of  Prince  Posharskoj. 

KuRBSKJ  (Prince  Andrej  Michaelowitsch),  a  de- 
scendant of  the  Prince  of  Jarosslaw,  and  near  rela- 
tive of  the  Czar  John  Wassiljewitsch,  by  the  side 
of  his  first  wife,  Anastasia  Romanowna,  was  bojar 
and  woywode  under  this  Czar,  and  was  born  in  the 
year  1529.  He  served  with  rapid  promotion  in 
the  different  campaigns  of  the  Czar;  and  in  the 
second  campaign  against  Casan,  1553,  he  com- 
manded, at  the  age  of  twenty-four,  in  company  with 
the  Prince  Peter  Iwanowitsch  SchtschenatjefF,  the 
right  wing,  which  was  12,000  men  strong.  At  the 
assault  of  Casan  it  fell  to  his  lot  to  be  intrusted 
with  the  seizure  of  the  lower  gates,  and  after  the 
town  was  taken,  he  followed  the  Tatar  army  in  its 
retreat,  in  the  course  of  which  pursuit  he  was 
severely  wounded.  Six  years  after,  he  engaged 
in  the  third  and  last  campaign  against  Casan, 
which  he  brought  to  a  happy  conclusion.  After 
this,  he   marched   against  the  Livonian   knights. 


RUSSIAN  AUTHORS.  257 

and  distinguished  himself  again  by  numberless  brave 
actions.  In  the  year  1564  he  incurred  the  dis- 
pleasure of  the  Czar,  and  fled  with  some  other  per- 
sons to  Lithuania,  under  the  protection  of  the  then 
king  of  Poland  and  Lithuania,  Sigismund  Augustus, 
who  assured  to  him  an  unmolested  residence  in 
the  Lithuanian  town  of  Wolmar,  and  afterwards  at 
Kowno.  From  Wolmar  he  wrote  to  the  Czar  John 
Wassiljewitsch  a  letter  of  reproach,  which  the  Czar 
answered  by  sending  him  two  long  letters,  full  of 
charges  and  accusations.  Prince  Kurbskj  refuted 
them  both,  and  then  set  to  work  and  wrote  a  thick 
book  against  the  Czar,  which  bears  for  title,  A  His- 
tory of  the  Actions  of  the  Grand  Prince  of  Mos- 
cow, which  we  have  partly  heard  from  the  testi- 
mony of  credible  witnesses,  and  partly  seen  with 
our  own  eyes.  In  this  book  he  gives  a  short  ac- 
count of  the  birth  and  education  of  this  monarch  ; 
the  campaigns  against  Casan,  the  Krimea,  the 
Tscheremisses,  and  the  Livonians.  But  he  has 
filled  up  the  greatest  part  of  it  with  pictures  of 
the  Czar's  hardness  of  heart,  and  of  the  punish- 
ments which  were  imposed  upon  the  bojars  and 
other  subjects  of  the  Czar.  There  are  to  be  found 
in  this  work  many  historical  relations,  which  are 
sought  for  in  vain  in  the  other  Latopisses.  The 
composition  however  is  not  printed.  Many  of  the 
friends  of  antiquity  are  in  possession  of  copies  of 
it  in  MS.  At  the  end  of  it  are  added  his  letters  to 
the  Czar  John  Wassiljewitsch.  The  answers  of 
the  Czar  are  to  be  found  in  some  of  the  copies  of 
the  Stufenbuch,  or  Step-book,  in  MS.,  which  are 
more  complete    than   the  Stufenbuch  which  was 


258  A  LEXICON  OF 

published  by  Miiller.  Of  the  number  of  eighty-four 
discourses  of  St.  Chrysostom  on  the  Gospel  of  St. 
John,  which  were  translated  by  Maxim,  the  Greek, 
and  printed  in  Moscow  in  1665,  the  44th,  the 
45th,  46th,  and  47th,  as  appears  from  the  signatures, 
were  translated  by  von  Andrej  Kurbskj,  but  whe- 
ther by  this  writer,  or  another  prince  of  the  same 
name,  is  subject  of  dispute.  It  is  moreover  men- 
tioned in  the  history  itself,  that  he  had  composed 
a  preface  to  the  Book  of  Homilies  of  Chrysostom, 
surnamed  the  New  Margarites,  so  that  it  may  be 
supposed  by  inference  that  he  was  also  the  trans- 
lator of  these  discourses.  It  is  evident  from  his 
history,  that  he  was  acquainted  with  the  Greek  and 
Latin  languages,  and  was  familiar  with  the  reading 
of  the  Holy  Scriptures  and  the  works  of  St.  John. 
The  time  and  place  of  his  death  are  not  known. 
In  his  letters  to  the  Czar  he  gives  his  word  that  he 
will  never  return  to  his  native  country,  and  in  one 
of  the  answers  he  calls  himself  a  grey-headed  man. 


Lasar-Baranowitsch,  archbishop  of  Tschernigow 
and  Novogorod,  was,  from  1650  to  1655,  rector  of 
the  Academy  of  KiefF,  and  died  in  1693.  This  ec- 
clesiastic distinguished  himself  in  his  own  times  by 
his  learning,  and  zealous  support  of  the  orthodox 
church  against  the  Jesuits.  In  1669  he  persuaded 
the  army  of  Saporog,  by  his  eloquent  addresses,  to 
declare  for  the  Czar  Alexej  Michailowitsch.  Lasar 
wrote  sermons  in  the  Little  Russian  of  his  time,  as 
well  as  some  polemical  works  in  Polish.  Some  of 
his  poems  were  printed,  together  with  some  eccle- 


RUSSIAN  AUTHORS.  259 

siastical  discourses,  in  an  appendix  to  the  book 
called  The  Wet  Fleece.  And  a  separate  and  com- 
plete poem  appeared  in  quarto  at  KiefF  in  1676, 
under  the  title,  A  Lament  for  the  Death  of  the  Grand 
Prince  Alexej  Michailowitsch,  and  a  congratula- 
tory address  to  the  Czar  Feodor  Alexejewitsch. 

Lawrentj-Zisanj,  a  protopope,  or  superior  priest, 
of  the  orthodox  faith,  at  Korez  in  Lithuania,  pub- 
lished the  first  Sclavonic  grammar,  under  the  title  of 
A  Sclavonic  Grammar,  containing  the  complete 
science  of  the  eight  parts  of  speech,  and  other 
necessary  instructions,  published  at  Wilna,  in  1596. 
An  exact  description  of  this  book,  which  is  ex- 
tremely difficult  to  be  met  with,  is  given  in  Strahl's 
Learned  Russia,  p.  157.  Besides  this,  he  composed, 
1.  A  Sclavonic  Horn-book,  with  some  prayers,  and 
a  little  Sclavonic-Russian  Dictionary,  which  was 
printed  at  Wilna  in  the  year  1596;  and,  2.  A  Great 
Cathechism,  in  the  Lithuanian  language,  which, 
after  being  subjected  to  the  review  of  the  clergy  of 
Moscow,  was  abridged  and  printed  at  that  place 
in  1662,  under  the  title,  A  Catechismus,  called  in  the 
Lithuanian  language  Religious  Instructions,  and 
in  Russian,  Lectures,  extracted  from  the  sacred 
books  of  the  Gospel,  of  the  Apostles,  and  of  the 
Holy  Fathers  of  the  Church  ;  in  questions  and  an- 
swers. 

Laxemann,  author  of  the  Siberian  Letters,  which 
were  translated  into  Russian  by  Schlozer. 

Lefschin.     See  Platon. 

Lelewel.     See  Bulgarin. 

Lepechin  (Iwan  Iwanowitsch),  councillor  of  state 
and  knight,  was  born  in  the  year  1739,  received 

s2 


260  A  LEXICON  OF 

his  education  in  the  Gymnasium  of  the  Academy 
of  Sciences,  and  was  sent  in  1762  to  Strasburg,  to 
the  university  there,  where  he  proceeded  to  the  de- 
gree of  doctor  of  medicine.     After  his  return  to  his 
country  he  was  appointed,  in  1768,  adjunct  to  the 
Academy  of  Sciences,  and  sent  out  as  chief  con- 
ductor on  an  expedition  of  physical  science.     He 
visited  the  governments  of  Wladimir,  Nischegorod, 
Casan,  Orenburg,  Simbirsk,  and  especially  the  coun- 
tries lying  round  the  Volga,  and  the  Uralian  moun- 
tains ;    and  later  still  he  travelled  over  and  de- 
scribed the  Polar  countries  of  the  Russian  empire. 
In  1773  he  went,  by  order  of  the  Empress,  to  White 
Russia,  to  describe  the  natural  curiosities  of  those 
parts.     In  1771  he  was  appointed  an  academician  ; 
and  at  the  institution  of  the  Russian  Academy  in 
1783,  he  was  chosen  a  member  and  perpetual  se- 
cretary of  that  society.     For  fifteen  years  succes- 
sively he  was  superintendent  of  the  Gymnasium  of 
the  Academy.     He  died  on  the  6th  of  April,  1802. 
His  works  are :  1.  A  Journal  of  my  Travels  in  va- 
rious Provinces  of  the  Russian  Empire,  in  three  parts, 
St.  Petersburg,  1771-1780.     2.  On  the  Advantage 
of  Investigating  the   Medical  Virtues   of  Native 
Vegetable  Productions,  St.  Petersburg,  1785.     3. 
The  Method  of  Preventing  Contagious  Disorders 
in  Horned  Cattle,  and  the  Method  of  Curing  the 
same,  St.  Petersburg,  1790.      4.  Thoughts  upon 
the  Cultivation  or  Production  of  Silk,  St.  Peters- 
burg, 1798.     Besides  this,  he  translated  half  the 
first  part,  and  from  the  fifth  to  the  tenth  part  of 
Count  Buffon's  Natural  History,  General  and  Par- 
ticular. 


RUSSIAN  AUTHORS.  261 

Levesque  (Peter  Karl),  deserves  the  first  place 
among  foreign  writers  who  have  occupied  them- 
selves with  Russian  history.  He  was  a  member  of 
the  French  National  Institute,  Professor  of  History 
in  the  French  College,  knight  of  the  Legion  of  Ho- 
nour, and  was  born  at  Paris,  the  28th  of  March, 
1736.  He  studied  at  the  College  of  Four  Na- 
tions, and  soon  distinguished  himself  by  his  bril- 
liant advancement  in  his  scientific  education.  In 
the  meantime  he  had  the  patience  to  acquire  the 
art  of  engraving  upon  copper.  When  twenty-four 
years  old  he  published  some  treatises,  of  which 
two,  viz.  The  Moral  Man,  and  The  Thinking  Man, 
gained  him  the  friendship  and  protection  of  Dide- 
rot, at  whose  recommendation  he  was  called  to 
Russia  in  1773,  and  appointed  a  Professor  in  the 
Land  Cadet  Corps.  Immediately  on  his  arrival  at 
St.  Petersburg,  he  determined  to  occupy  himself 
with  the  history  of  the  Empire.  With  this  view  he 
studied  perseveringly  the  Russian  and  Sclavonic 
languages,  and  availed  himself  of  the  Chronicles, 
public  documents,  and  other  memorials  of  Russian 
antiquity  which  had  been  hitherto  concealed  from 
the  learned  men  of  Europe ;  and  in  this  work  he 
found  sufficient  employment  for  seven  years.  In 
1780  he  returned  to  France,  and  in  1782  had  his 
work  printed,  under  the  title,  A  History  of  Russia,  and 
of  the  Principal  Nations  which  constitute  the  Rus- 
sian Empire,  {Histoire  de  Russie  et  des  Principales 
Nations  de  FEmpire  Russe).  This  history  merits 
the  greatest  respect  as  being  the  first  attempt  of  the 
kind  among  foreign  nations.  Levesque  died  on  the 
12th  of  March,  1812,  while  engaged  in  the  pre- 


mz  A  LEXICON  OF 

paration  of  the  fourth  edition  of  his  History,  which 
consists  of  eight  parts.  This  highly-esteemed  writer 
must  not  be  confounded  with  his  countryman, 
the  physician  Le  Clerc,  who  had  pubhshed  at 
Paris,  in  the  year  1787,  a  collection  of  all  the 
smatterings  of  information  which  he  could  amass 
on  the  subject  of  Russia,  with  the  pompous  title 
of  A  Natural,  Moral,  Municipal,  and  Political  His- 
tory of  Ancient  and  Modern  Russia,  in  five  parts, 
Boltin,  Schlozer,  and  other  learned  critics,  have 
treated  this  pitiable  patchwork  in  the  manner  it  de- 
serves. 

Lewanda.     See  Johann. 

LiCHUD  the  monks,  (Johannikj,  born  1633,  and 
Sophronj,  born  1652,  two  brothers,  and  natives  of 
Greece),  were  appointed  in  1685  as  teachers  at  the 
Sclavonic-Greek-and-Roman  Academy  at  Moscow, 
where  they  acquired  extraordinary  reputation  by 
their  instructions  and  writings;  and  so  contributed  in 
a  great  degree  to  advance  the  credit  of  this  academy. 
Johannikj  died  in  1717,  and  Sophronj  in  1730. 

LiNDE  (Samuel  Gottlieb),  rector  of  the  Lyceum 
at  Warsaw,  was  born  in  1771,  and  raised  for  himself 
an  imperishable  memorial  in  Sclavonic  literature  by 
his  publication  of  The  Dictionary  of  the  PoHsh  Lan- 
guage, which  was  printed  at  Warsaw,  in  six  parts, 
1806-1810,  and  costs  twelve  ducats.  This  work 
contains  the  entire  range  of  words  of  all  the  va- 
rious Sclavonic  languages  and  dialects,  and  gives 
their  derivation,  varieties,  and  mutual  relations.  It 
serves  as  a  sure  guide  in  tracing  the  etymologies  of 
these  languages,  so  rich  in  themselves,  and  though 
harmonising,  so  different,  and  gives  important  assist- 


RUSSIAN  AUTHORS.  263 

ance  in  the  study  of  the  history  of  the  Sclavonic 
tribes.     See  article  Vostokoff. 

LoBANOFF  (Michael  Eustaphjewitsch),  assistant 
in  the  Imperial  Public  Library,  and  knight,  was 
born  at  St.  Petersburg  in  1787,  and  received  his 
literary  and  scientific  education  from  private  schools 
and  tuition.  His  most  remarkable  work  is  the 
beautiful  metrical  translation  of  the  Iphigenia  of 
Racine,  published  and  represented  on  the  stage  at 
St.  Petersburg  in  1815.  Afterwards  he  employed 
himself  in  translating  the  Phaedra,  of  which  he  has 
read  many  specimens  at  the  open  sittings  of  the 
Society  of  the  Lovers  of  Russian  Literature.  Be- 
sides this,  he  has  published  :  1.  An  Ode  on  the 
War  of  1812.  2.  An  Eleg>'  on  the  Death  of  Count 
A.  P.  Stroganoff.  3.  A  Song  to  the  Russian  Czar. 
4.  An  Ode  on  the  Arrival  of  the  Emperor  from 
Paris,  etc.  etc. ;  which  last  was  sold  for  the  benefit 
of  the  Russian  Military  Hospital,  and  brought  in  a 
sum  of  a  thousand  roubles. 

LoMONossoFF  (Michacl  Wassiljewitsch),  Professor 
at  the  Academy  of  Sciences  at  St.  Petersburg,  mem- 
ber of  the  Academies  of  Stockholm  and  Bologna, 
was  born  in  1711,  at  the  village  of  Denissowska,  not 
far  from  Cholmogory,  in  the  government  of  Arch- 
angel, His  father,  a  serf  of  the  crown,  was  by  occu- 
pation a  fisherman.  The  young  LomonossoiF  often 
accompanied  him  on  his  fishing  excursions  in  the 
•  White  and  North  seas.  Spending  the  winters  at 
home,  he  learnt  reading  and  writing  from  the  minister 
of  the  church,  acquired  a  knowledge  of  the  Sclavonic 
grammar  and  arithmetic,  and  read  the  translation 
of  the  Psalms  in  verse,  which  had  been  done  by  Si- 


264  A  LEXICON  OF 

meon  Polozkj,  with  which  book  he  occupied  him- 
self so  long,  that  at  last  he  knew  it  entirely  by 
heart.  This  awakened  in  him  the  love  of  the  sci- 
ences and  of  literature,  which  he  had  not  the  means 
of  satisfying  in  his  native  village.  He  resolved 
therefore  to  make  a  journey  to  Moscow,  with  a 
wagon  which  was  going  to  carry  a  load  of  frozen 
fish  to  that  capital.  Here  he  entered  the  school 
of  Saikonospaskj,  at  which  he  soon  distinguished 
himself  above  all  the  other  scholars  by  his  industry 
and  progress.  After  this  he  was  sent  to  KiefF,  and 
in  1 734  to  the  Academy  of  Sciences  at  St.  Peters- 
burg, to  complete  his  studies.  At  Moscow  and 
KiefF  he  busied  himself  with  the  study  of  the  an- 
cient languages,  and  the  reading  of  Sclavonic  books, 
but  at  St.  Petersburg  with  mathematics,  physics, 
chemistry,  and  mineralogy.  After  two  years  he 
was  sent  to  Marburg,  to  the  celebrated  mathema- 
tician and  philosopher.  Christian  Wolff;  remained 
there  three  years,  and  thence  went  to  Freiberg,  to 
study  practical  metallurgy  and  the  art  of  mining. 
Although  he  engaged  with  ardour  in  these,  the 
chief  ends  and  objects  of  his  studies,  yet  he  still  de- 
voted all  his  leisure  hours  to  literature,  obtained  a 
thorough  acquaintance  with  the  German  language, 
read  the  German  poets  of  the  day,  and  already  de- 
termined to  imitate  and  rival  them.  In  1739  he 
wrote,  in  iambic  verses  of  four  feet,  an  ode  On 
the  Conquest  of  Chotschin,  and  sent  it  to  St.  Pe- 
tersburg. It  was  presented  to  the  Empress  Anne, 
favourably  received,  and  excited  universal  admi- 
ration. In  the  meantime  Lomonossoff  had  mar- 
ried at  Marburg,  but  soon  came  to  a  separation. 


RUSSIAN  AUTHORS.  265 

and  being  hard  pressed  by  creditors,  resolved  to 
return   by  way  of  Holland   to  Russia.      On   the 
journey  he  fell  into  the  hands  of  a  party  of  Prus- 
sian recruiting  officers,  and  had  great  difficulty  in 
getting  free  from  them  again.     When  he  arrived 
at  St.  Petersburg,  in  1741,  he  was  appointed  ad- 
junct at  the  Academy  of  Sciences;  in  1746  pro- 
fessor of  Chemistry  ;  and  in  1751  collegiate  coun- 
cillor.    In  the  same  year  he  was  made  a  member 
of  the  Academical  Chancery ;    in  1760  the  com- 
plete management  of  all  the  gymnasiums  and  uni- 
versities was  given  over  to  him ;  and  in  December 
1764  he  was  appointed  councillor  of  state.     He 
died  the  4th  of  April,  1765,  and  was  buried  in  the 
monastery  of  St.  Alexander  Newskj.     The  chan- 
cellor Count  Michael  Larionowitsch  Woronzoff  had 
a  splendid  marble  monument,  with  a  Russian  and 
Latin  inscription,  erected  over  his  grave.    The  sen- 
timent expressed  at  the  conclusion  of  a  biographi- 
cal sketch  in  PiketofTs  Pantheon  of  Russian  Writers, 
"  That  Russia,  if  the  gifts  of  genius  afford  a  title  to 
the  gratitude  of  the  people,  owes  a  monument  to 
LomonossofF,"  seems  at  last  likely  to  be  practically 
exemplified  now,  a  half  century  after  his  death, 
since,  on  the  9th  of  October,  1827,  it  was  signified 
at  St.  Petersburg  that  the  Company  of  Russian 
Merchants  had  sent  one  thousand  roubles  to  Arch- 
angel as  a  contribution  towards  erecting  a  monu- 
ment to  the  first  Russian  poet,  Lomonossoff.     His 
writings  are  as  follows;   in  prose  :  1.  A  Short  Rus- 
sian   Chronicle,   with    a   Genealogical    Table.     2. 
The  Ancient  Russian  History,  from  the  beginning 
of  the  Russian  People  to  the  death  of  the  Grand 


266  A  LEXICON  OF 

Prince  JarosslafF  the  First,  i.  e.  till  1054.  3.  A 
Russian  Grammar,  translated  into  German  by  Sta- 
wenhagen,  St.  Petersburg,  1764.  4.  A  Short  In- 
troduction to  Eloquence  of  Style,  the  first  book, 
comprising  Rhetoric.  5.  Letters  on  the  Rules  of 
Poetry.  6.  On  the  Use  of  the  Church  Books.  7. 
A  Panegyrical  Discourse  on  the  Empress  Elizabeth 
the  First,  (translated  by  himself  into  Latin).  8.  A 
Panegyrical  Discourse  upon  Peter  the  Great.  9. 
On  the  Use  of  Chemistry.  10.  A  Discourse  on 
Ele  trical  and  Atmospherical  Phenomena.  11.  A 
Treatise  on  the  Nature  of  Light,  setting  forth  an 
entirely  new  theory  of  the  origin  of  colours.  12. 
A  Programme,  composed  for  the  opening  of  the 
Lectures  upon  Physics.  13.  A  Description  of  the 
Comet  which  appeared  in  the  year  1744.  14.  The 
First  Principles  of  Metallurgy,  five  parts,  with  two 
appendices.  15.  Sixteen  Letters  to  J.  J.  Schuwa- 
lofF,  etc.  In  verse  :  1.  The  two  first  cantos  of  an 
epic  poem,  Peter  the  Great.  2.  Tamira  and  Selim, 
a  tragedy.  3.  Demophont,  a  tragedy.  4.  An  Epis- 
tle on  the  Use  of  Glass,  to  J.  J.  Schuwaloff.  5. 
Thirty  Odes  on  Sacred  and  other  subjects.  6. 
Forty-nine  Inscriptions.  7.  Verses  on  the  Fire- 
works of  the  1st  of  January,  1755.  8.  Polydorus, 
an  idyl.  And  a  number  of  small  poems,  imitations 
of  Anacreon,  epistles,  and  so  forth.  His  transla- 
tions are  the  following;  in  prose:  1.  A  Dialogue 
in  the  Shades  Below,  between  Alexander  the  Great, 
Hannibal,  and  Scipio,  from  the  Greek  of  Lucian. 
2.  A  Dialogue,  called  The  Morning,  from  the  Latin 
of  Erasmus  of  Rotterdam.  In  verse:  1.  An  Ode 
to  Fortune,  from  the  French  of  J.  B.  Rousseau. 


RUSSIAN  AUTHORS.  267 

2.  The  Crowning  of  the  Hopes  of  the  Russian  Em- 
pire, from  the  German  of  Professor  Junker.     The 
collected  works  of  LomonossofFhave  been  published 
by  the  Academy  of  Sciences,  in  six  vols.  4to. :  of 
which  the  third  edition  was  called  for  in  1803. 
The  chief  subjects  of  Lomonossoff's  studies  and 
labours,  were  chemistry,  physics,  and  metallurgy. 
He  pursued  with  eager   interest  all  these  depart- 
ments of  knowledge,  and  wrote   some    excellent 
works  connected  with  each  of  them ;  but  neverthe- 
less he  has  earned  his  immortality  by  his  achieve- 
ments in  literature  properly  so  called.    Batjuschkoff 
has  written  a  beautiful  character  and  criticism  of 
Lomonossoff,  which  however  contains  little  more 
than  conjecture  on  many  important  points.     His 
contemporaries  have  left  us  but  scanty  memorials 
of  that  great  man;  they  regarded  him  as  a  pro- 
fessor of  chemistry,  and  saw  nothing  in  him  but  the 
councillor  of  state.     A  few  apposite  remarks  how- 
ever, which  we  have  extracted,  cannot  be  consi- 
dered here  as  out  of  place.     *'  Lomonossoff,"  says 
Batjuschkoff,   **  formed    our   language    by    laying 
down  rules  of  all  sorts.    He  did  for  literature  what 
Peter  the  Great  did  for  our  civic  institutions.    Peter 
awoke  a  people  fettered  in  ignorance  and  barbar- 
ism, and  gave  them  laws,  self-confidence,  and  glory; 

I  Lomonossoff  shaped  the  language  of  that  people, 
just  lifting  up  their  heads  from  sleep,  and  gave  it 

I  even  in  his  own  time  the  highest  possible  degree  of 
perfection.     I  say  the  highest  possible  degree,  be- 

1  cause  language  always  progresses  in  proportion  to. 


2G8  A  LEXICON  OF 

of  a  nation's  glory  abroad,  the  degree  of  enlighten- 
ment, the  necessities  of  society,  the  municipal  laws, 
and  the  habits  of  life."  "  The  general  voice,"  says 
MerslakofF,  elsewhere,  "  proclaims  LomonossofF  to 
be  the  father  of  Russian  poetry.  But  if  we  consider 
his  diversified  labours  in  the  provinces  of  history, 
metallurgy,  astronomy,  and  the  sciences,  on  the 
subject  of  navigation,  and  above  all,  of  physics,  we 
must  acknowledge  him  to  be  the  father  also  of  all 
those  branches  of  useful  knowledge,  which  were 
introduced  into  Russia  first  of  all  by  the  compre- 
hensive spirit  of  the  incomparable  Peter,  and  ma- 
tured and  encouraged  by  his  good  daughter.  The 
grateful  admirers  of  the  genius  of  LomonossofF  may 
rightly  say  that  poetry,  which  is  to  others  a  labo- 
rious occupation,  was  to  this  hero  of  learning  only 
a  recreation — a  recreation  agreeable  in  itself,  and 
worthy  of  so  great  a  man.  This  assertion  at  least 
may  be  made  with  truth  of  most  of  his  poetical 
compositions,  since  every  one  of  his  odes,  for  ex- 
ample, are  written  to  celebrate  some  well  known 
passing  event  or  festive  occasion.  The  Master- 
singer,  who  eulogised  his  imperial  mistress,  was 
the  speaking  organ  of  the  gratitude  and  feelings  of 
all.  This  is  in  truth  a  noble  and  a  sublime  mission, 
which  ever  requires  the  most  brilliant  exertions  of 
genius,  but  especially  when  its  field  of  display  is  in 
the  midst  of  the  new  and  incipient  enlightenment 
of  a  nation, — in  a  new  language  which  the  author 
has  to  define  and  settle  for  himself,  and  in  the  very 
cradle  of  the  Muses,  whose  prophetic  dawn  beamed 
so  brightly  in  the  song  of  the  poet  before  the  ad- 


RUSSIAN  AUTHORS.  269 

vent  of  a  mild  and  benevolent  princess,  whose 
reign  the  Most  High  blessed  also  with  a  continual 
and  unbroken  peace.  Thus  the  tender  shoots  in 
the  garden  of  science  had  time  and  opportunity  to 
deepen  their  roots.  In  proportion  as  the  hearts  of  the 
people  were  more  readily  reached,  and  quickly  per- 
vaded, the  favour  of  the  patrons  and  the  emulation 
of  the  sons  of  genius,  were  also  more  sensibly  ex- 
cited. And  how  happily  and  gloriously  has  Lo- 
monossoif  fulfilled  this  mission,  imposed  on  him  by 
Heaven !  On  one  side  he  gave  us,  like  a  legislator, 
a  grammar  and  rhetoric;  and  first  of  all  arranged, 
measured,  and  systematised,  the  comprehensive 
compass,  the  richness,  the  power,  and  the  majesty 
of  our  mother-tongue ;  and  pointed  out  moreover 
the  best  way  to  its  perfect  development,  by  direct- 
ing our  attention  to  the  Sclavonic  or  church-lan- 
guage : — on  the  other  side,  he  confirmed  and  illus- 
trated the  rules  which  he  laid  down,  by  his  own 
inimitable  models  of  composition,  as  well  in  poetry 
as  in  prose.  He  was  the  architect,  his  was  the 
genius,  which  in  the  midst  of  the  northern  snows 
erected  a  new  temple  of  literature,  of  taste,  and  of 
science,  but  set  no  limits  to  the  path  which  leads 
to  it.  No !  Still  more,  to  attract  and  win  the 
friends  of  intelligence,  he  himself  continued  until 
his  death  to  serve  in  that  temple,  as  its  high-priest, 
where  by  his  enchanting  eloquence  he  softened  and 
moulded  the  as  yet  half-educated  hearts  of  his 
hearers.  He  was  at  once  the  creator  and  the 
zealous  protector  and  patron  of  the  Russian  lan- 
guage. He  is  the  Pygmalion  of  letters,  who  breathes 
into  his  statue,  which  serves  as  a  model  to  the  rest. 


270  A  LEXICON  OF 

soul,  life,  and  motion,  by  the  force  of  his  patriotic 
love  and  enthusiasm.  But  to  invest  Lomonossoff 
in  all  his  peculiar  and  well-merited  glory,  take  into 
your  consideration  those  who,  now  niched  in  the 
fane  of  immortahty,  guided  their  earthly  career  by 
following  his  steps.  Set  before  your  eyes  our  mas- 
ter-bard, as  in  the  midst  of  all  the  other  sons  of 
song,  he  held  up  the  torch  to  his  dependents,  fol- 
lowers, and  imitators,  to  light  them  in  the  path  to 
fame.  See  him  surrounded  by  a  CheraskofF,  Pet- 
rofF,  Popofskj,  Bogdanowitsch,  Dershawin,  and  other 
illustrious  men,  who  are  the  honour,  the  ornament, 
and  the  triumph  of  Russian  literature.  They  all 
consider  that  it  contributes  no  little  to  their  glory  to 
be  called  the  pupils  of  Lomonossoff;  they  all  have 
imitated  his  style  and  language,  and  drawn,  so  to 
say,  their  very  works  out  of  the  materials  prepared 
and  hewn  by  him;  more  or  less  they  all  have  copied 
him,  even  in  the  designs  and  projections  of  their 
works — in  one  word,  they  are  all  his  debtors." 
"  The  contributions  of  Lomonossoff  to  our  lan- 
guage and  literature,"  continues  Merslakoff,  "  are 
immortal.  In  his  works  the  Russians  first  disco- 
vered with  glad  astonishment  the  richness,  fulness, 
and  luxuriance  of  their  language,  skilfully  min- 
gled with  the  Sclavonic.  His  biographer.  Professor 
Popofskj,  speaks  of  the  impression  which  his  first 
ode  produced  at  the  court  of  Anne.  Every  one 
found  a  new  language,  new  words,  and  new-sound- 
ing syllables.  They  felt  that  they  had  a  deep  in- 
terest in,  and  a  close  relationship  with,  these  new 
introductions;  and  they  were  pleased  with  them, 
because  they  had  not  yet  been  acquainted  with 


RUSSIAN  AUTHORS.  271 

them.  Their  astonishment  is  justijfiable;  since  even 
to  this  day,  I  dare  to  assert  it  openly,  no  one  has 
equalled  LomonossofF,  either  in  sublimity  of  style, 
in  the  subtile  conjunction  of  Sclavonic  words  with 
Russian  ones,  or  in  the  power  and  brevity  of  his 
idioms  and  expressions.  His  works  must  ever  be 
the  favourite  and  first-loved  book  of  every  young 
scion  of  the  Muses.  He  wrote  nineteen  odes.  In 
the  first  there  is  much  more  liveliness  of  fancy,  and 
more  fire  than  in  the  last.  On  the  other  hand, 
these  last  are  much  more  regular,  and  even  in  their 
composition,  although  far  colder ;  even  in  these, 
however,  if  each  stanza  and  strophe  be  separately 
examined,  what  a  degree  of  sublimity,  strength, 
and  passion  is  to  be  found  there !  In  every  ode 
we  meet  with  passages  truly  imperishable  in  their 
beauty,  and  like  which  nothing  can  be  cited  from 
the  compositions  of  more  recent  times.  From  love 
for  the  fame  of  Lomonossoff,  we  cannot  easily  for- 
give that  he  should  have  written  so  many  odes 
upon  festivals,  celebrations,  and  so  forth,  because 
such  subjects  must  be  uninteresting  to,  and  unHkely 
to  be  translated  by  foreigners.  On  the  other  hand, 
his  moral  writings  have  been  already  translated  into 
the  languages  of  all  lands,  and  they  contain  beau- 
ties for  the  capacity  of  all  nations,  by  reason  of 
the  comprehensive  and  universal  truths  which  they 
contain.  The  magic  of  his  language  is  for  us 
alone ;  the  thoughts  are  for  all  mankind.  Some  of 
the  odes  of  Horace  alone  have  the  same  felicity  of 
expression,  and  universality  of  idea.  One  great 
lesson  for  the  poet  remains.     Man  is  of  all  things 


272  A  LEXICON  OF 

the  most  important  study  for  man.  Celebrate  then 
in  song  his  virtues  and  his  passions,  his  weakness, 
his  good  fortune,  and  his  misery.  Here  hes  the 
true  secret  of  escaping  oblivion." 

LuDOLF  (Heinrich  Wilhelm),  v^^rote  a  Russian 
Grammar,  and  derived  it  principally  from  the  work 
of  Smotrizkj ;  he  shows  thereby  his  slight  acquaint- 
ance with  the  language.  It  appeared  by  the  title, 
H.  W.  Ludolji  Grammatica  Russica,  quce  continet 
et  mamiductionem  quamdam  ad  Grammaticam  Scla- 
vonicam,  Oxonii,  1696,  8vo.  (97  pages). 

LusLOFF.     See  Andrej. 

LuKAS  ScHiDATA,  or,  ScHiRATA,  bishop  of  Novo- 
gorod,  and  a  native  of  that  place,  died  in  1059,  and 
left  us  An  Edifying  Discourse  to  the  Brethren.  This 
discourse  is  to  be  found  in  the  Lawrentian  MS. 
of  Nestor's  Chronicle,  see  article  Nestor ;  and  is 
printed  also  in  the  first  part  of  the  Russian  Me- 
morabilia, which  have  been  collected  and  published 
by  the  Moscow  Society  for  History  and  Russian 
Antiquities. 

L'woFF  (Th.),  the  author  of  a  work  Upon  the 
Popular  and  National  Songs  of  the  Russians,  St. 
Petersburg,  1790,  8vo.  He  divides  the  Russian 
national  songs  into  ^«rmomc«/ (protashnija)  and  me- 
lodical  (placcowija — songs  for  dancing)  ;  the  former 
in  the  minor  key,  the  latter  in  the  major.  A  se- 
lection of  the  best  profane  national  songs  was  pub- 
lished by  Dmitrijeff,  under  the  title  of  The  Pocket 
Song  Book,  Moscow,  1796,  three  vols,  small  8vo. 
The  most  recent  collections  of  Russian  songs  are 
the  following:  1.  The  Newest  and  most  Complete 


RUSSIAN  AUTHORS.  27S 

Universal  Russian  Song-book,  by  Sh.  G.  T.  R.  K., 
Moscow,  1810,  8vo.  2.  The  Last  Universal  Song- 
book,  by  Kalatilin,  Moscow,  1810,  8vo.  3.  The  Uni- 
versal Russian  Song-book,  St.  Petersburg,  printed 
for  Glasunoff,  4  vols.  4.  The  Most  Modern  and 
Selected  Book  of  Songs,  by  P.  and  K.  V.,  St.  Pe- 
tersburg, printed  for  BeikofF,  4  vols.  8vo.  (5.  See 
article  Jacobowitsch.  6.  See  article  DanilofF.  7. 
See  article  PopofF). 

M. 

Magnizkj  (Leontj  Phihppowitsch),  the  first  Rus- 
sian teacher  of  mathematics,  was  born  in  1669. 
From  the  year  1700  he  taught  mathematics  at  Mos- 
cow. His  first  publication  was  in  the  Russian  lan- 
guage, at  Moscow,  1703,  viz.  an  arithmetic  with 
Arabic  tables  and  figures,  which  he  had  printed  in 
folio,  in  the  Sclavonic  character.  Till  his  time  the 
Russians  had  used  the  letters  of  their  alphabet  for 
arithmetical  figures.     He  died  in  1739. 

Maikoff  (Wassilj  Iwanowitsch),  was  born  about 
the  year  1725.  He  commenced  with  the  mihtary, 
and  afterwards  adopted  the  civil  profession.  In 
1772  he  became  brigadier  and  procurator  in  the 
College  of  War.  He  died  at  Moscow  in  1778,  in  the 
office  of  member  of  the  Armoury  Palace.  MaikofF 
had  in  his  youth  little  or  no  opportunity  of  in- 
structing himself.  He  was  accordingly  not  ac- 
quainted with  any  foreign  languages,  and  wrote 
.  verses  only  at  the  suggestion  of  his  own  genius. 
In  his  early  years  he  witnessed  the  first  establish- 
ment of  the  Russian  theatre  at  Jarosslawl,  where 
he  himself  assisted  WolkofF,  and  determined  him 

t 


274  A  LEXICON  OF 

on  first  erecting  this  theatre  within  his  father's 
house ;  a  circumstance  which  probably  awakened 
in  him  the  love  of  poetry,  and  especially  his  fond- 
ness for  the  drama.  MaikofF  was  the  author  of 
two  tragedies,  and  a  number  of  odes,  epistles,  and 
fables.  But  his  most  notable  works  are  his  comic 
poems:  1.  Elysium,  or  Bacchus  in  a  Rage,  in  five 
cantos;  and  2.  The  Game  of  Ombre,  in  three  cantos. 
In  these  works  may  be  detected  extraordinary  po- 
etical talents,  keenness  of  observation,  and  gaiety. 
Pity  that  a  more  refined  taste  did  not  always  guide 
the  pen  of  the  poet !  His  works  were  printed  at 
St.  Petersburg  in  1809,  in  one  volume. 

Makarj,  metropolitan  of  Moscow,  and  of  all 
Russia,  distinguished  by  his  zeal  for  the  church, 
his  extensive  acquaintance  with  literature,  and  by 
his  remarkable  talent  for  preaching.  In  his  youth 
he  occupied  himself  as  a  painter,  but  afterwards 
adopted  the  clerical  profession,  became  a  monk,  and 
archimandrite  of  the  Lushez  monastery  at  Mos- 
haisk.  In  1526  he  was  made  archbishop  of  Novo- 
gorod;  in  1542  metropolitan,  in  which  capacity  he 
placed  the  crown  upon  John  Wassiljewitsch  the 
Fourth  as  Czar,  and  died  the  25th  of  December, 
1564.  This  ecclesiastic  was  zealous  in  spreading 
enlightenment  by  means  of  the  Gospel  among  the 
Tschudish  tribes,  which  border  on  the  district  of 
Novogorod.  He  laboured  sedulously  in  reforming 
the  clergy,  and  superintended  the  translation  of  a 
number  of  books  into  the  Sclavonic  language,  for 
which  purpose  he  entertained  a  number  of  learned 
men  in  his  house.  He  himself  laboured  hard  for 
twelve  years  at  Novogorod  at  the  Tschetj  Minej, 


RUSSIAN  AUTHORS.  275 

or  biographies  of  the  saints  which  are  held  in  ho- 
nour by  the  orthodox  oriental,  and  especially  by 
the  Russian  church.  This  work,  consisting  of  two 
heavy  volumes,  and  called  The  Great  Tschetj  Mi- 
nej,  or  legend-book,  is  to  be  found  in  MS.  in  the 
Library  of  St.  Sophia,  in  the  Synodal  Library  at 
Moscow,  and  at  many  of  the  libraries  of  the  monas- 
teries. Makarj  was  the  author  of  a  number  of  ad- 
dresses and  discourses  (as  for  instance,  of  that  de- 
livered at  the  assembly  of  the  church  called  at  Mos- 
cow in  1557,  to  greet  the  Czar  John  Wassiljewitsch 
the  Severe,  on  his  return  from  the  campaign  of 
Casan)  ;  and  his  compositions  of  this  kind  are  dis- 
tinguished by  a  remarkably  florid  style.  By  his 
appointment,  and  under  his  immediate  superin- 
tendence, the  Stufen-bucher  or  Step-books  (see  Ap- 
pendix, and  the  article  Miiller)  were  in  part  com- 
posed and  in  part  completed.  Some  historians  have 
even  ascribed  the  entire  composition  of  these  books 
to  him  alone. 

Makaroff  (Peter  Iwanowitsch),  a  major  retired 
from  the  service,  was  born  in  1765,  and  died  at  the 
end  of  the  year  1804,  on  a  journey  from  Moscow 
to  Poland.  Although  his  life  is  said  to  have  been 
unusually  eventful,  he  has,  alas !  as  yet  found  no  bio- 
grapher. He  translated  the  following  works  from 
the.  French  :  1.  The  Count  de  St.  Merang,  or  New 
Vagaries  of  the  Heart  and  the  Understanding,  St. 
Petersburg,  1795  ;  second  edition,  Moscow,  1800. 
2.  The  First  Two  Parts  of  Antenor's  Travels  in 
Greece  and  Asia,  from  Lantier,  Moscow,  1802;  the 
third  part  was  translated  by  M.  JazenkofF.  In  1803 
he  edited  the  Moscow  Mercury,  which  was  remark- 

t2 


276  A  LEXICON  OF 

able  for  the  correct,  ingenious,  and  severe  tone  of 
criticism  it  displayed,  and  was  of  great  advantage 
in  forming  the  taste  of  the  young  writers  of  the  day. 
The  works  and  translations  of  MakarofFwere  printed 
at  Moscow  in  1805,  in  two  parts,  and  a  second  edi- 
tion in  1817. 

Malghin  (Timotheus  Semenowitsch),  collegiate 
assessor,  and  member  of  the  Russian  Academy, 
published:  1.  The  Mirror  of  the  Russian  Empire 
from  862  to  1794,  etc.  St.  Petersburg,  first  edition, 
1791  ;  second  edition,  1794.  2.  An  Attempt  at  a 
Historical  Inquiry  into  and  Description  of  the  An- 
cient Laws  and  Jurisprudence  of  the  Russian  Em- 
pire; and  Upon  the  Property  of  Persons  and  Com- 
mercial Transactions  in  the  same,  St.  Petersburg, 
1 803.  3.  An  Attempt  at  a  Historical  Inquiry  into  J 
the  early  Use  and  Nature  of  Money  in  the  Russian 
Empire,  St.  Petersburg,  1810.  Malghin  died  at. 
St.  Petersburg  in  1820,  aged  70. 

Malinofskj  (Alexej  Fodorowitsch),  a  privy  coun- 
cillor, senator,  and  knight,  chief  keeper  of  the  Mos- 
cow archives,  was  born  at  Moscow  in  1763,  and 
studied  at  that  university.  From  the  year  1780 
he  was  employed  in  the  office  of  the  above-men- 
tioned archives.  During  the  time  of  his  service 
there,  he  compiled  several  works  on  the  subject  of  j 
Russian  history  and  diplomacy,  but  they  were  never 
printed.  Under  his  direction  and  superintendence 
A  Collection  of  Russian  Records  and  other  Pubhc 
State  Documents,  was  made  by  Konstantin  Fodo- 
rowitsch Kalaidowitsch  and  Paul  Michailowitsch 
Strojeff,  which  was  printed  at  Moscow  (the  first 
part  in  1813,  and  the  second  part  in  1819,  folio). 


RUSSIAN  AUTHORS.  277 

at  the  expense  of  Count  M.  P.  RumanzofF.  Besides 
this,  translations  of  various  books  which  he  had  un- 
dertaken in  his  younger  days,  have  been  printed ; 
and  in  1817  was  pubHshed  at  Moscow,  his  Bio- 
graphical Notice  of  Prince  D.  M.  Posharskj.  Ka- 
laidowitsch  and  Strojeff  compiled  together  at  Mos- 
cow, in  1819,  an  edition  of  the  Statutes  of  the  Grand 
Prince  John  Wassiljewitsch,  and  of  the  Ssudebnik 
(see  Appendix).  The  former  of  them  also  published 
in  1818,  at  Moscow,  The  Ancient  History  of  Rus- 
sia, which  had  been  collected  by  Kirscha  DanilofF, 
and  the  latter  A  Short  Russian  History  for  begin- 
ners, Moscow,  1819. 

Marin.     See  IwanofF. 

Martunoff  (Iwan  Iwanowitsch),  acting  council- 
lor of  state  and  knight,  member  of  the  Upper-School 
Directory,  of  the  Russian  Academy,  and  of  many 
other  learned  societies,  was  born  in  1771,  in  the  little 
town  of  Perewolotschna,  and  received  his  educa- 
tion at  the  seminary  of  Poltawa.  After  the  year 
1789  he  became  teacher  of  the  Greek  and  Latin 
languages,  of  poetry,  and  rhetoric,  at  the  seminary 
of  St.  Alexander  Newskj  at  St.  Petersburg.  In 
1795  he  was  made  translator  to  the  College  for  the 
Administration  of  Foreign  Affairs;  in  1802  he  was 
registrar  to  the  Imperial  Council;  and  in  1803 
chancery-director  of  the  Ministerial  Bureau  for  the 
Education  of  the  People,  in  the  foundation  of  which 
also  he  had  taken  a  prominent  part.  In  1816  he 
was  appointed  a  member  of  the  Upper  School-Di- 
rectory. The  following  translations  have  appeared 
from  his  pen  :  1.  The  Thoughts  of  J.  J.  Rousseau, 
St.  Petersburg,  1801.     2.  The  Walks  of  J.  J.  Rous- 


278  A  LEXICON  OF 

seau,  St.  Petersburg,  1801.  3.  On  the  Sublime, 
from  the  Greek  of  Dionysius  Longinus,  with  notes, 
St.  Petersburg,  1802.  4.  The  poems  of  Anacreon, 
from  the  Greek,  St.  Petersburg,  1802.  5.  Atala, 
a  tale  of  Chateaubriand,  St.  Petersburg,  1802.  6. 
St.  Julien,  a  romance,  by  A.  Lafontaine,  St.  Peters- 
burg, 1802.  7.  Susette's  Dowry,  a  romance,  by 
Madame  de  Semeterre,  St.  Petersburg,  1802.  8. 
Dupaty's  Journey  to  Italy,  two  parts ;  first  edition, 
St.  Petersburg,  1802 ;  second  edition,  Moscow, 
1809  :  and  many  others  from  Greek,  French,  Ita- 
lian, and  German  authors,  which  have  not  as  yet 
all  been  printed.  Some  of  them  however  are  to  be 
found  in  print  in  Pnin's  St.  Petersburg  Journal, 
and  in  The  Northern  Messenger.  Recently  ap- 
peared from  his  pen  :  1.  The  Technical  Botanical 
Dictionary,  St.  Petersburg,  1820;  and  2.  The  Three 
Botanists,  St.  Petersburg,  1821.  Besides  all  this 
he  has  been  editor  of  the  following  journals  :  1. 
The  Muses,  four  parts,  1796.  2.  The  Northern 
Messenger,  eight  parts,  1804  and  1805.  3.  The 
Lyceum,  four  parts,  1806.  In  the  two  last  named 
are  to  be  found  some  excellent  critical  papers. 

Massolskj,  a  novelist  of  the  present  day.  His 
best  known  work  is  the  historical  romance  called 
The  Strelitzes. 

Matwajeff  (Artemon  Sergejewitsch),  was  governor 
of  several  towns,  keeper  of  the  great  seal,  minister 
for  Foreign  Affairs,  supreme  judge  of  the  Tribunals 
of  the  Strelitzes  and  of  Casan,  director  of  the  Mint, 
etc.,  and  was  born  in  the  year  1625.  This  cele- 
brated minister  and  personal  friend  of  the  Czar 
Alexej  Michailowitsch,  was  the  most  enlightened 


RUSSIAN  AUTHORS.  279 

of  all  his  contemporaries  who  were  not  of  the  cleri- 
cal profession.  He  was  well  acquainted  with  ele- 
gant literature,  history,  philosophy,  and  the  other 
sciences,  and  loved  the  arts.  He  had  his  domestic 
chapel  adorned  by  the  paintings  of  Italian  artists, 
and  invited  the  ablest  workmen  to  Russia.  He 
was  the  first  statesman  of  his  time,  and  was  also 
the  author  of  several  works.  The  second  wife  of 
the  Czar  Alexej  Michailowitsch,  the  mother  of  Pe- 
ter the  Great,  Nataha  Kirilowna  Nariischkina,  was 
his  pupil.  The  love  of  the  people  for  this  worthy 
bojar  was  so  great,  that  the  poor,  when  they  heard 
it  was  his  wish  to  build  a  house,  brought  into  the 
court-yard  the  stones  from  the  graves  of  their  fore- 
fathers to  aid  in  its  construction.  After  the  death 
of  the  Czar  Alexej  Michailowitsch,  he  fell  into  dis- 
grace. Illnature  and  calumny  armed  themselves 
against  him.  Overwhelmed  by  the  most  shameful 
accusations,  he  was  stript  of  his  rank  of  bojar  or 
noble,  and  of  all  his  property,  and  driven  into 
exile,  together  with  his  son.  After  the  death  of 
the  Czar  Alexej  Alexejewitsch,  he  returned  to 
Moscow,  and  was  reinstated  in  all  his  former  dig- 
nities ;  but  fourteen  days  only  after  his  restoration 
he  fell  a  victim  (the  15th  of  May,  1682)  to  a  rebel- 
lion among  the  Strelitzes.  Of  his  works  (without 
including  his  official  labours,  and  his  correspondence 
with  different  persons  from  his  place  of  banish- 
ment) the  following  most  deserve  mentioning :  1. 
The  Characters,  Titles,  and  Seals  of  all  the  Grand 
Princes  of  Moscow,  and  the  Independent  Princes 
of  all  parts  of  the  Russian  Empire.  2.  An  Account 
of  all  the  Grand  Princes  and  Czars  of  Russia,  who 


280  A  LEXICON  OF 

have  made  themselves  known  by  their  Victories 
and  Conquests.  To  him  also  is  ascribed  the  La- 
topiss  on  several  Plots  and  Mutinies,  v^^hich  has 
been  published  by  Prince  Schtscherbatoff. 

Mausoroff,  a  modern  poet.  He  is  the  author 
of  The  Last  of  the  Bards,  a  poem,  which  appeared 
in  Gretsch's  periodical  called  The  Son  of  the  Coun- 
try. 

Maxim  (the  Greek),  a  monk  of  the  Watopedisch 
monastery  upon  mount  Athos,  a  native  of  Albania, 
studied  the  Belles  Lettres  at  Paris,  Florence,  and 
other  towns,  acquired  during  that  time  a  vast 
reputation  for  learning,  and  received  in  1556  a 
summons  to  Moscow  from  the  Grand  Prince 
Wassilj  Johannowitsch,  to  examine  and  write  an 
account  of  all  the  Greek  works  which  had  been 
preserved  at  the  Grand  Prince's  palace.  The  im- 
portance and  rarity  of  these  manuscripts  excited 
the  astonishment  of  Maxim.  He  made  a  copious 
and  detailed  catalogue  of  them  all,  and  presented 
to  the  Grand  Prince  a  list  of  those  works,  which 
did  not  yet  exist  in  the  Russian  language.  Was- 
silj engaged  him  to  translate  one  of  them  into  Rus- 
sian, viz.  The  Psalter  Expounded,  and  gave  him  for 
this  purpose  two  interpreters,  Dimitrj  and  Wlassj, 
and  for  the  writing  out  of  the  translation  when 
completed,  the  monks  Silwan  and  Michael  Medo- 
warzeff  as  assistants.  After  seventeen  months'  em- 
ployment, Maxim  presented  his  translation  to  the 
Grand  Prince,  and  it  was  received  with  the  greatest 
favour  and  applause  by  all  the  metropolitans  and 
assembled  clergy.  These  demonstrations  of  favour 
from  the  prince  were  however  unable  to  dazzle  the 


RUSSIAN  AUTHORS.  281 

strict  monk.     He  requested  permission  to  retire  to 
mount  Athos ;  but  he  was  prevailed  upon  to  re- 
main at  Moscow,  to  correct  the  many  faults  which 
had  crept  into  the  translations  and  copies  of  the 
sacred  books.    In  this  employment  he  was  occupied 
nine  years.     In  the  meantime,  some  envious  per- 
sons, who  were  jealous  of  his  reputation  and  his 
good  fortune,  succeeded  in  accusing  him  before  the 
Czar  of  ingratitude,  and  of  perverting  the  meaning 
of  passages  in  his  exposition  of  the  Scripture.     Ir- 
ritated by  the  resistance  of  Maxim,  Wassilj  gave 
orders  for   his   being  brought  to  trial.     He  was 
found  guilty,  and  in  the  year  1525  banished  to  the 
Otrotschian  monastery  at  Twer.     All   his  pupils 
were  confined  in  other  separate  monasteries,  and 
his,  writings  deposited  in  custody  at  the  Zarenburg, 
or  fortress  of  the  Czars.     The  Czar  Johann  Was- 
siljewitsch  allowed  him  to  remove  into  the  Sergian 
monastery  of  Troizka,  at  which  place  he  died  in 
1536.     Maxim  occupied  himself  both  before  and 
after  his  banishment  in  the  composition  of  dog- 
matical, political,  (polemical  against  the  heretics,) 
philosophical,  and  moral  writings,  and  was  the  au- 
thor of  Answers  to  Several  Questions ;  A  Book  of 
Prayers  ;  and  the  like.     Among  other  things,  he 
also  wrote  An  Inquiry  into  the  Uses  of  Grammar, 
Rhetoric,  and  Philosophy,  which  is  printed  at  the 
end  of  the  Grammar  of  Meletj  Smotrizkj ;  by  rea- 
son of  which  circumstance,  that  Grammar  itself  has 
been  often  wrongly  attributed  to  Maxim. 

Maximoff.     See  Feodor. 

Meletj  Smotrizkj,  a  hieromonach  in  a  monas- 
tery at  Wilna,  and  afterwards  archbishop  of  Po- 


282  A  LEXICON  OF 

lozsk,  died  in  1 663.  His  most  remarkable  work  is 
■  A  Sclavonic  Grammar  (compare  article  Maxim), 
which  was  printed  at  Jewie,  near  Wilna,  in  the 
year  1619,  and  is  much  more  complete  than  the 
first  Sclavonic  grammar  of  Lawrentj  Zisanj. 

Menschenin,  the  translator  of  the  Letters  on 
Chemistry. 

Merslakoff  (Alexej  Feodorowitsch),  collegiate 
councillor,  and  knight,  professor  of  poetry  and  elo- 
quence at  the  Imperial  University  of  Moscow, 
member  of  the  Russian  Academy  and  many  other 
learned  societies,  was  born  in  1778,  in  the  town  of 
Dalmatowa,  in  the  government  of  Perm.  His  father 
was  a  merchant,  but  by  no  means  wealty.  Alexej 
Feodorowitsch,  from  his  eleventh  year  and  upwards, 
attended  the  chief  national  school  at  Perm,  then 
under  the  guidance  of  the  school-director,  J.  J. 
PanajefF.  In  his  fifteenth  year  he  wrote  an  ode  on 
the  peace  with  Sweden.  Catherine  the  Second, 
who  had  received  a  copy  of  this  ode  from  the  su- 
perior director  of  national  schools.  Count  P.  W. 
Sawadofskj,  commanded  that  it  should  be  incor- 
porated in  the  monthly  publications  of  the  Academy 
of  Sciences,  and  ordered  1 50  copies  to  be  printed 
for  the  benefit  of  the  author,  whom  she  sent,  as 
soon  as  he  had  completed  his  course  of  school  stu- 
dies, to  finish  his  further  education  at  the  University 
of  Moscow,  with  directions  that  she  should  herself 
be  informed  of  his  progress  at  the  end  of  every 
half  year.  Merslakoff  was  now  therefore  put  under 
the  care  of  M.  M.  CherasskofF,  and  in  1793  intro- 
duced to  the  Gymnasium  of  the  university.  Here 
he  remained  until  1797,  and  became  a  student,  and 


RUSSIAN  AUTHORS.  283 

already,  in  that  capacity,  with  the  permission  of  the 
university  senate,  gave  pubhc  lectures  upon  Rus- 
sian grammar.     He  was  soon  afterwards,  in  1798, 
advanced  to  a  master's  degree,  and  occupied  the 
chair  of  poetry  and  eloquence.     In  1805  he  went, 
at  the  request  of  the  curator  of  the  university,  M. 
M.  Murawjeff,  to  St.  Petersburg,  where  he  spent 
the  whole  winter  in  the  house  of  that  learned,  sens- 
ible, and  benevolent  dignitary.     After  his  return 
to  Moscow,  he  became  a  doctor  and  adjunct;  in 
1807,  extraordinary  professor  of  poetry  and  elo- 
quence ;   and  in   1810,  ordinary  professor,  which 
appointment  he  has  ever  since  continued  to  adoni. 
Besides  his  official  labours  at  the  university,  he 
found  time  to  occupy  himself  with  his  favourite 
pursuits,  viz.  the  composition   of  original  works, 
and  translations,  especially  from  the  classics.     In 
1810  a  distinguished  friend  of  literature.  Prince 
Boriss  Wladimirowitsch  Goliziin,  attended  his  lec- 
tures at  the  university,  and  engaged  him  to  deliver 
a  similar  course  at  his  private  house,  upon  poetry 
and  eloquence,  in   the  presence  of  a  select  and 
noble  audience.     These  lectures  were  held  twice 
a  week  throughout  the  three  winter  months,  and 
were  attended  by  numbers  of  the  nobility  of  the 
highest  rank  and  of  both  sexes,  and  also  by  the  first 
Russian  literati  of  the  day.    In  the  succeeding  year 
MerslakofF  renewed  these  lectures,  at  the  house  of 
his  excellence  Herr  Von  Kokoschkin  ;  in  the  course 
of  which,  he  first  laid  down  a  regular  theory  of  the 
fine  arts  in  general,  and  then  proceeded  to  a  criti- 
cal analysis  of  the  most  famous  Russian  poets  in 


284  A  LEXICON  OF 

particular.  MerslakofF's  writings  are  as  follows  : 
1.  Translations  from  the  Ancient  Writers  and 
Works  ready  for  publication,  three  parts.  Many 
of  these  have  appeared  in  different  journals,  espe- 
cially in  the  Transactions  of  the  Moscow  Society 
for  the  Friends  of  Russian  Literature.  2.  Lectures 
on  Literature,  containing  a  complete  Theory  of  the 
Sciences  and  Fine  Arts,  as  well  as  criticisms  on  the 
best  Russian  Authors,  in  4  volumes,  "  wherein,"  as 
A.  Bestuscheff  remarks,  "  in  stating  his  opinion  as  a 
judge  of  the  mother-tongue  without  pedantry  or  dry- 
ness, he  has  classified, appreciated, and  individualised 
each  writer  according  to  his  just  merits."  (Com- 
pare for  instance,  the  article  LomonossofF).  3.  The 
Poetics  of  Aristotle,  translated  from  the  Greek,  with 
the  notes  of  Ramler  and  others.  This  work  was 
begun  to  be  printed  just  before  the  invasion  of  the 
French,  but  the  greater  part,  not  only  of  the  already 
printed  sheets,  but  of  the  translation  itself,  was 
destroyed  in  the  general  conflagration  at  Moscow. 
The  author  had  the  perseverance  to  begin  again,  and 
succeeded  in  bringing  the  work  to  a  conclusion.  4. 
Horace's  Epistle  to  the  Pisos  on  the  Art  of  Poetry. 
Many  editions  of  this  epistle  had  been  published. 
The  author,  however,  being  anxious  to  republish  it 
with  copious  notes,  set  about  a  new  edition,  of 
which  ten  sheets  had  actually  been  completed,  when 
this  also  was  destroyed  on  the  same  occasion  ;  but 
the  manuscript  was  preserved.  5.  Virgil's  Eclogues, 
with  notes,  Moscow,  1807.  6.  Idyls,  by  Madame 
deDeshouilli^res, Moscow,  1807.  7.  Chosen  Scenes 
from  the  old  Greek  Tragedians  iEschylus,  Euripi- 


RUSSIAN  AUTHORS.  285 

des,  and  Sophocles,  with  critical  and  historical 
notes.  Some  of  these  scenes  were  got  up  and 
represented  at  the  private  theatres  of  noblemen. 
Many  of  them  are  to  be  found  printed  in  the  Eu- 
ropean Messenger,  in  the  Amphion,  and  elsewhere. 
8.  A  Fragment  of  the  Theory  of  Universal  Litera- 
ture, from  Eschenburg  °.  Of  the  Rhetoric,  the  third 
edition  appeared  at  Moscow  in  1820 ;  and  the 
Poetics  at  the  same  place.  9.  A  Discourse  on  the 
Genius  of  the  Poetry  of  the  Ancients,  and  on  its  in- 
fluence on  the  civilization  and  education  of  the  peo- 
ple (Moscow).  10.  A  Panegyrical  address  to  the 
Emperor  Alexander  the  First,  on  the  conclusion  of 
the  Holy  National  War,  Moscow,  1814.  11.  Am- 
phion, a  Journal,  in  twelve  volumes,  published  in 
the  course  of  1815.  12.  Jerusalem  Delivered,  fi'om 
Tasso,  translated  into  metre,  a  work  which  he  has 
entirely  finished,  but  not  yet  committed  to  the 
press.  Specimens  of  it  are  to  be  found  in  the  Eu- 
ropean Messenger.  Herr  MerslakofF  is  now  en- 
gaged in  the  composition  of  A  Complete  Course  of 
Literature ;  a  work  which  is  to  comprise  the  sub- 
stance of  all  the  lectures  which  he  has  delivered  at 
different  times  at  the  university.  In  the  department 
of  Russian  literature,  Mersliikoff  occupies  without 
dispute  the  first  place  among  theorists  and  critics. 
Michael  Dessnizkj,  metropolitan  of  Novogorod, 


»  Note  by  the  Translator. — John  Joachim  Eschenburg,  who  died  at 
Brunswick  in  1820,  is  best  known  (independently  of  the  work  mentioned 
in  the  text)  as  a  translator  from  the  English.  His  Shakspeare  was  long 
considered  the  best ;  and  he  also  translated  some  of  our  best  metaphy- 
sicians and  critics,  as  Brown,  Webb,  Burney,  Fuseli,  Hurd,  and  a  num- 
ber of  others. 


286  A  LEXICON  OF 

St.  Petersburg,  and  Finland,  knight  of  many  orders, 
president  of  the  Holy  Synod,  of  the  Commission  for 
Places  of  Religious  Instruction,  and  of  many  learned 
societies,  was  born  in  the  Governmental  Department 
of  Moscow,  in  the  year  1752.  In  1792,  when  he 
was  merely  priest  of  the  parish  of  St.  John  at  Mos- 
cow, he  already  attracted  by  his  sermons  the  atten- 
tion of  the  friends  and  admirers  of  pulpit  eloquence. 
In  1799  he  became  a  monk,  was  soon  promoted  to 
the  rank  of  archimandrite,  and  appointed  a  mem- 
ber of  the  Synod,  and  religious  lecturer  in  the  first 
Cadet  Corps.  In  1802  he  received  consecration 
as  vicarious  bishop  of  the  metropoUtan  district  of 
Novogorod  ;  in  1803  he  was  translated  to  the  epar- 
chy of  Tschernigoif ;  in  1 806  appointed  archiman- 
drite, and  on  the  26th  of  March,  1818,  metropoli- 
tan of  St.  Petersburg,  Esthonia,  and  Finland,  united 
on  the  25th  of  June  with  Novogorod.  He  died  at 
St.  Petersburg,  on  the  24th  of  March,  1821.  The 
venerable  Michael,  whose  whole  life  was  devoted  to 
Christianity,  was  most  zealous  in  increasing  the 
number  and  perfecting  the  condition  of  the  clerical 
schools  within  the  eparchy  intrusted  to  his  bene- 
ficent superintendence ;  he  spent  large  sums  from 
his  own  purse  upon  them,  and  educated  numbers 
of  poor  scholars  at  his  personal  cost.  He  was,  as 
we  have  above  mentioned,  one  of  the  most  eloquent 
preachers  which  Russia  has  had  to  boast.  The 
sermons  which  he  delivered  from  time  to  time  in 
his  ministry,  appeared  from  1816  to  1820,  at  St. 
Petersburg,  under  the  title.  Discourses  dehvered 
at  various  places  and  on  various  occasions ;  in  ten 
volumes. 


RUSSIAN  AUTHORS.  287 

MicKiEwicz,  Adam,  (inserted  by  the  translator). 
We  feel  persuaded  that  no  apology  will  be  required 
of  us  for  inserting  here  a  name  so  distinguished  as 
that  of  Adam  Mickiewicz.  The  author  of  this  work, 
while  he  gives  us  a  history  of  Sclavonic  literature 
in  general,  and  has  even  inserted  numerous  Polish 
names  connected  with  the  early  period  of  the 
church,  which  are  far  less  interesting  to  the  ma- 
jority of  readers,  has  omitted  nearly  entirely  to 
give  notices  of  the  more  recent  ornaments  of  the 
literature  of  Poland,  although  that  country  has  at 
the  present  day  the  misfortune  to  form  a  consti- 
tuent part  of  the  Russian  empire.  This  is  proba- 
bly to  be  accounted  for  by  the  general  political 
bias  which  pervades  the  whole  work,  and  which 
however  is  ascribable  rather  to  Gretsch  and  other 
Russian  writers  from  whom  the  materials  have  been 
derived,  than  to  the  author  himself.  Mickiewicz 
has  too  much  identified  himself  with  the  spirit  of 
liberty,  and  of  PoHsh  patriotism,  to  admit  of  his 
name  being  celebrated  by  a  Russian  writer,  who,  in 
speaking  of  him,  could  in  justice  only  have  pro- 
claimed his  praise.  The  following  notice  has  been 
in  a  great  measure  extracted  from  the  Conversa- 
tions-Lexicon :  "  Adam  Mickiewicz  may  be  consi- 
dered without  a  rival  as  the  most  distinguished 
living  poet  of  Poland.  He  was  born  in  Lithuania, 
in  the  year  1798,  of  noble  but  poor  parents,  re- 
ceived his  first  education  at  Novogrodek,  and  after- 
wards at  the  Gymnasium  at  Minsk ;  in  1815  went 
to  the  University  of  Wilna,  and  some  years  later 
became  himself  a  teacher  in  the  school  of  Kowno. 
By  his  brilliant  talents,  and  unremitting  industry. 


288  A  LEXICON  OF 

he  soon  won  the  favour  of  many  valuable  friends  ; 
but  the  germ  of  his  slumbering  genius  for  poetry 
was  first  awakened  in  him  by  his  love  for  the  sister 
of  one  of  his  friends  at  Wilna.  When  this  lady, 
since  unpropitious  circumstances  divided  their  loves, 
gave  her  hand  to  another,  Mickiewicz  portrayed  his 
unfortunate  passion  in  a  poem  called  Dziady,  or 
The  Festival  of  the  Dead.  After  he  had  pubhshed 
at  Wilna,  in  1822,  a  collection  of  his  scattered 
poems,  the  edicts  of  proscription,  which  were  di- 
rected against  the  university  of  Wilna,  reached  him 
in  1823.  He  was  detained  for  a  long  time  in  pri- 
son ;  but  as  no  evidence  could  be  adduced  to  cri- 
minate him  as  a  conspirator,  he  was  remanded 
into  the  interior  of  Russia,  to  be  kept  with  many 
others  under  a  strict  surveillance.  In  his  exile  he 
made  a  journey  to  the  Crimea;  and  composed  on  the 
shores  of  the  Black  sea  those  beautiful  sonnets  by 
which  he  won  the  goodwill  of  the  military  governor 
of  Moscow,  Prince  Gallitzin,  who  invited  him  to 
Moscow  in  the  year  1826,  and  desired  him  to  con- 
tinue as  his  guest,  and  under  whose  patronage  the 
sonnets  were  printed ;  (the  same  which  were  trans- 
lated into  German  by  Schwab,  and  appeared  in 
the  Deutschen  Musenalmanach  for  the  year  1833). 
While  protected  by  Galitzin  he  acquired  an  un- 
common reputation  at  St.  Petersburg  by  his  rare 
gift  of  improvisation.  There  he  published  in  1828 
his  epic  poem  Conrad  Wallenrod,  translated  into 
German  by  Kannegiesser,  Leipsic,  1834,  which  has 
almost  become  a  national  epic  among  the  Poles. 
After  his  romances  and  ballads,  the  next  important 
poem  which  he  published  was  the  Ode  to  Youth, 


RUSSIAN  AUTHORS.  289 

a  poem  so  famous  and  so  popular,  that  the  last 
words  of  it  being  written  upon  the  wall  of  the 
council-house  of  Warsaw  on  the  30th  of  Novem- 
ber, 1830,  were  echoed  by  ten  thousand  voices  of 
the  inspirited  people,  and  hailed  as  a  favourable 
omen  to  their  cause.  The  interesting  fortunes  of 
the  poet  himself  increased  the  enthusiasm  that  was 
kindled  by  his  verse.  At  last  he  obtained,  by  the 
exertions  of  some  of  his  admirers,  permission  to 
make  a  journey  into  foreign  countries.  He  tra- 
velled through  Germany  and  France,  and  was  in 
Italy  when  the  Polish  revolution  of  1830  broke 
out.  In  the  year  1831  he  lived  at  Dresden,  and 
in  the  summer  of  1832  changed  the  place  of  his 
abode  to  Paris,  where  in  the  course  of  the  same 
year  he  published  as  a  fourth  volume  to  the  old  set, 
by  the  title  Poezye,  1828,  a  part  of  his  most  recent 
poems,  which  far  surpass  all  that  he  had  written 
before.  The  preface  gives  a  general  view  of  the 
state  of  poetry  in  modern  Europe  generally,  and 
the  author  shows  himself  to  be  well  acquainted 
with  the  history  of  German  literature  in  particular. 
The  fate  of  his  native  country  gave  to  his  genius 
in  late  years  a  predominantly  political  bias,  which 
he  indulged,  especially  in  a  work  called  Ksiegi  na- 
rodu  Polskiego  i  Pielgryzmstwa  PolsJciego,  Paris, 
1832  ;  a  book  which,  composed  in  a  prose  written 
in  imitation  of  the  old  biblical  style,  shadows  out 
the  past  and  the  future  fates  of  Poland.  It  was 
translated  into  German  under  the  title  of  The  Polish 
People  and  the  Polish  Pilgrimage,  1833:  and  into 
French  by  the  title  of  Le  Pelerin  de  Pologna,  by 
the  intimate  friend  of  the  author,  the  talented  young 

u 


290  A  LEXICON  OF 

Comte  de  Mortelembert.  The  last  work  of  Mie- 
kiewiez  is  Pan  Tadeusy,  i.  e.  Thaddeus,  an  epic 
poem,  Paris,  1834. 

MiLONOFF  (Michael  Wassiljewitsch),  titular  coun- 
cillor, member  of  several  learned  societies,  was  born 
in  1792,  studied  at  the  University  of  Moscow,  and 
distinguished  himself  early  there  by  his  extraor- 
dinary abilities  in  all  literary  attainments.  He 
served  in  different  offices  and  capacities  ;  amongst 
others,  under  the  minister  of  justice,  J.  J.  Dmitri- 
jeff,  and  in  the  commission  appointed  to  sit  at  Mos- 
cow for  the  relief  of  those  who  had  suffered  through 
the  invasion  of  the  enemy.  He  died  at  St.  Peters- 
burg, October  1 7th,  1 821 .  Milonoff  was  the  author 
of  some  beautiful  poems  in  the  lyric  and  didactic 
style.  His  elegies,  epistles,  and  satires,  enjoy  a  most 
extensive  popularity.  Sublimity,  intelligence,  and 
feeling  are  expressed  in  them  throughout  by  a  lan- 
guage which  breathes  a  pure,  chastened,  and  agree- 
able, but  most  moving  melancholy.  His  poems 
were  in  part  printed  at  St.  Petersburg  in  1819,  under 
the  title.  Satires,  Epistles,  and  other  Minor  Poems 
of  Michael  Milonoff.  Shortly  before  his  death,  he 
had  begun  a  poem  on  the  Creation  of  the  World. 

MoGiLA.     See  Peter. 

MoRAwsKJ,  a  Pole.     Vide  article  Wasemskj. 

MuLLER  (Gerhard  Friedrich),  acting  state  coun- 
cillor, director  of  the  Moscow  Archives  in  the 
College  of  Foreign  Affairs,  Russian  historiographer, 
knight  of  the  order  of  St.  Wladimir,  third  class, 
member  of  several  academies  and  learned  bodies, 
was  born  on  the  8th  of  October,  1705,  at  Herford, 
in  Westphalia.     He  received  his  first  literary  edu- 


RUSSIAN  AUTHORS.  291 

cation  at  the  Gymnasium  of  that  place,  and  after- 
wards studied  at  the  universities  of  Rinteln  and 
Leipsic.  In  1725  he  went  to  Russia,  and  was  ap- 
pointed as  adjunct  in  history  and  geography  at  the 
then  newly-opened  Academy  of  Sciences.  In  1730 
he  was  made  professor  and  member  of  the  Academy 
of  Sciences,  and  sent  out  the  next  year  into  foreign 
countries  to  execute  commissions  suggested  by  the 
Academy.  From  1733  to  1743  he  travelled  about 
Siberia,  in  order  to  bring  home  accurate  accounts 
of  the  geography  and  history  of  those  parts.  In 
1 747  the  Academy  named  him  secretary  of  Con- 
ferences, which  office  he  held  for  eleven  years.  In 
the  year  1766  he  was  appointed  a  member  of  the 
Imperial  College  for  Foreign  Affairs,  by  which  he 
also  acquired  the  custody  of  the  Moscow  archives 
of  that  college.  He  died  at  Moscow,  October  4th, 
1783.  Miiller  fills  a  distinguished  place  not  only 
among  the  foreigners  who  have  been  employed  in 
the  service  of  Russia,  but  in  the  number  of  Russian 
writers  themselves.  Without  enumerating  here  all 
his  writings,  translations,  and  editions  (of  which  the 
23rd  number  of  the  Son  of  the  Country  for  the 
year  1821,  gives  a  detailed  account),  we  will  only 
mention  his  most  important  labours  on  the  subject 
of  Russian  history  and  literature.  From  1732  to 
1 764  he  published  a  periodical  work  in  the  German 
language,  entitled  A  Collection  of  Russian  History, 
through  which  he  conveyed  to  both  Russians  and 
foreigners,  a  quantity  of  useful  information  re- 
specting the  ancient  and  modern  history  and  geo- 
graphy of  Russia.  From  1755  he  edited  for  the 
Academy  of  Sciences,  the  first  scientific  and  lite- 

u2 


292  A  LEXICON  OF 

rary  journal  published  in  Russia,  called  Monthly 
Sheets  for  Use  and  Amusement,  which  has  contri- 
buted infinitely  to  extend  in  Russia  the  taste  for 
literary  occupation.  He  then  wrote  a  History  of 
Siberia,  of  which  however  only  the  first  part  was 
printed,  at  St.  Petersburg  in  1750.  The  most  im- 
portant service  however  which  he  conferred  upon 
Russia,  consisted  in  his  editing  and  causing  to  be 
published,  a  number  of  old  Russian  works,  which 
had  been  preserved  in  MS.,  of  which  the  most  re- 
markable are  the  following:  1.  The  Ssudebnik,  or 
Statute-book,  of  the  Czar  John  Wassiljewitsch, 
Moscow,  1768.  2.  A  Russian  History,  composed 
by  W.  N.  TatischtschefF,  Moscow,  1768,  1769: 
1 773  and  1 774.  3.  The  Kernel  of  Russian  History, 
by  Prince  Chilkoff,  Moscow,  1771.  4.  A  Geo- 
graphical Lexicon  of  the  Russian  Empire,  compiled 
by  Feodor  Polunin,  Moscow,  1773.  5.  Letters  of 
Peter  the  Great  to  Count  Boris  Petrowitsch  Sche- 
renietjefF,  Moscow,  1774.  6.  The  Stufenbuch,  or 
Step-book,  in  two  parts,  Moscow,  1771-1774.  See 
Appendix. 

Murawjeff-Apostoll  (Iwan  Matwajewitsch),  pri- 
vy councillor  and  knight,  member  of  numerous 
learned  societies,  was  Russian  Minister  at  Ham- 
burg, and  at  the  court  of  Madrid,  and  now  lives 
at  his  own  estate  in  Little  Russia,  where  he  devotes 
his  time  and  talents  to  enriching  the  literature  of 
his  country  by  translations  of  the  classics.  His 
prose  translation  of  The  Satires  of  Horace,  is 
printed  in  the  Transactions  of  the  Society  of  the 
Lovers  of  the  Russian  Language ;  and  in  1821  was 
published  at  St.  Petersburg  his  translation,  also  in 


RUSSIAN  AUTHORS.  293 

prose,  and  printed  with  the  original  text,  of  the 
Clouds  of  Aristophanes.  His  Letters  from  Mos- 
cow to  Nischnj-Novogorod,  are  known  to  all  friends 
of  literature.  They  formed,  in  1813,  1814,  and 
1815,  one  of  the  chief  ornaments  of  the  journal 
called  the  Son  of  the  Country. 

MuRAWJEFF  (Michael  Nikititsch),  privy  council- 
lor and  senator,  assistant  to  the  minister  for  Public 
Instruction,  curator  of  the  University  of  Moscow, 
and  knight,  member  of  many  learned  societies,  was 
born  at  Smolensk,  the  25th  of  October,  1757.  His 
father  (the  councillor  of  state,  Nikita  Artamono- 
witsch  MurawjefF)  was  sent  to  Orenburg  as  an  as- 
sistant of  the  government,  and  there  first  began  the 
education  of  Michael  Nikititsch.  In  1765  he  com- 
menced the  study  of  the  German  language,  under 
an  inhabitant  of  Orenburg,  named  Kalau  ;  and  his 
father,  who  had  been  an  officer  in  the  engineers, 
taught  him  mathematics.  In  his  eleventh  year  he 
travelled  with  his  father  to  Moscow,  and  attended 
there,  first  the  Gymnasium,  and  afterwards  the 
University.  When  seventeen  years  old,  he  came  to 
St.  Petersburg,  entered  the  IsmailofF  regiment  of 
guards,  and  still  did  not  abandon  his  literary  and 
scientific  pursuits ;  for  he  attended  the  public  read- 
ings of  the  professors  at  the  Academy  of  Sciences, 
and  made  frequent  use  of  the  Hbrary  there.  In 
1776  he  was  selected  to  be  one  of  the  parties  em- 
)loyed  in  arranging  the  Free  Collection  at  the 
^Moscow  University,  but  nevertheless  still  continued 
to  hold  his  commission  in  the  guards.  His  distin- 
guished talents  and  learning  attracted  the  attention 
of  Catherine,  and  in  1785  he  was  made  knight. 


294  A  LEXICON  OF 

and  appointed  to  be  tutor  to  the  young  Grand- 
Princes  Alexander  and  Constantine  Paulowitsch, 
whom  he  instructed  in  morals,  and  in  the  literature 
and  history  of  Russia.     In  the  course  of  this  ser- 
vice he  was  promoted  to  the  rank  of  colonel.   When 
he  had  completed  his  share  of  their  highnesses' 
education,  he  was  transferred  into  the  public  ser- 
vice of  the  state.     In  1800  he  became  a  senator, 
and  in  1801  was  appointed  secretary  of  state  by 
the  late  Emperor  Alexander.     In  1802,  as  assistant 
to  the  minister  for  Pubhc  Instruction,  in  company 
with  N.  N.  NowosilzofF,  Count  P.  A.  Stroganoff, 
F.  J.  Khnger,  Count  S.  O.  Potozki,  and  Prince  A. 
A.  Tschartoriisskj  (Czartoryski),  he  took  an  active 
part  in  the  management  of  this  new  and  important 
branch  of  administration  in  Russia,  and  especially 
occupied  himself  in  regulating  and  perfecting  the 
University  of  Moscow,  which  had  been  confided  to 
his  auspices,  and  which  still  remembers  and  will 
ever  remember  his  name  with  honour  and  affec- 
tion.    He  died  at  St.  Petersburg,  the  29th  of  July, 
1807.     MurawjefF  began  early  to  occupy  himself 
with  literature,  and  this  noble  passion  did  not  even 
abandon  him  till  the  moment  of  his  death.     In 
1776  some  poems  of  his  composition,  and  amongst 
them  a  few  in  hexameter  verses,  were  printed  in 
the  papers  of  the  Free  Moscow  Collection.     As  he 
'  valued  the  discharge  of  his  duties,  as  of  far  higher 
consequence  than  all  the  gratified  vanity  of  author- 
ship, he  devoted  all  his  time  while  tutor  of  the 
Grand  Princes  to  their  instruction,  and  wrote  al- 
most exclusively  for  his  noble  pupils.     Of  these 
works  he  only  printed  ten  copies  of  each ;  but  they 


RUSSIAN  AUTHORS.  295 

are  such  that  he  himself  ever  read  them  with  sa- 
tisfaction, and  in  doing  so  corrected  and  improved 
them.  In  1789  were  printed  :  1.  The  Good  Child. 
2.  Emil's  Letters.  3.  Dialogues  of  the  Dead.  4.  The 
Inhabitant  of  the  Suburbs,  in  1796.  Essays  on  His- 
tory, Literature,  and  Morals,  under  which  title  Herr 
von  Karamsin  published  some  of  his  works  in  1810, 
and  in  1820  a  complete  collection  of  them  was  pub- 
lished at  St.  Petersburg,  in  three  volumes.  A  re- 
lative and  pupil  of  this  distinguished  author,  we 
mean  K.  N.  Batjuschkoff,  wrote  a  very  fine  cri- 
ticism on  his  works,  which  is  to  be  found  in  the 
Sketches  in  Prose  and  Verse,  by  Konstantine  Bat- 
juschkoff, 1  thaler,  pages  81.  Of  the  critical  re- 
marks which  are  there  found,  we  have  selected  the 
following :  "  The  collection  of  MurawjefTs  works 
comprises  principally  several  minor  works  which  he 
had  written  separately  for  the  use  of  his  young  and 
royal  pupils.  He  was  anxious  to  encourage  the 
power  of  thought,  and  move  the  imagination  of 
their  youth  by  displaying  the  historical  characters 
of  illustrious  men,  especially  of  the  Russian  Grand 
Princes  and  Czars  ;  and  for  this  purpose  he  availed 
himself,  hke  Fontenelle,  of  the  plan  of  making  their 
shades  converse  in  the  other  world.  These  Dia- 
logues of  the  Dead,  and  the  Letters  of  an  Inhabi- 
tant of  the  Suburbs,  may  be  placed  in  the  hands 
of  teachers,  as  quite  equal  to  the  best  productions 
of  foreign  writers.  In  them  the  precepts  of  mo- 
rahty  are  set  forth  with  so  much  clearness,  with  so 
much  goodness  of  heart,  and  arrayed  in  so  beauti- 
ful a  style,  that  the  severest  critic  can  only  speak 
of  them  in  terms  of  eulogy.     The  other  essays  be- 


296  A  LEXICON  OF 

long  to  a  higher  walk  in  hterature.  Among  them 
the  tale  of  Oskold  is  rich  in  beauties,  in  which  the 
author  describes  a  campaign  of  the  people  of  the 
North  against  Constantinople.  It  is  greatly  to  be 
lamented  that  this  work  remains  incomplete,  and 
forms  but  the  beginning  of  a  larger  work,  which 
the  author  appears  to  have  contemplated.  To- 
wards the  end  of  his  life,  he  occupied  himself  less 
with  the  Muses,  but  dedicated  his  time  to  the 
reading  of  the  ancients  in  the  original  languages, 
and  especially  of  the  Greek  historians,  for  whom 
he  had  early  contracted  a  deep  and  lasting  par- 
tiality. The  historical  essays  of  Murawjeff  deserve 
especial  notice,  and  we  may  venture  to  assert,  since 
in  so  doing  we  only  repeat  the  opinion  of  the  best 
judges,  that  scarcely  anything  has  been  achieved 
in  the  Russian  language  on  the  subject  of  his- 
tory, eq^al  to  his  Sketch  of  Russian  History,  which 
was  first  printed  in  1810.  The  philosophical  and 
moral  writings  of  our  author  remain  still  to  be  no- 
ticed. Here,  more  than  in  any  other  department, 
there  is  room  to  discover  his  soul,  and  the  fine 
promptings  of  his  heart,  so  that  the  same  observa- 
tion may  be  made  of  him  which  Schiller  made  of 
Matthisson'*.  "  Here  we  find  the  author  himself, 
and  become  as  it  were  personally  and  intimately 
acquainted  with  him.    Human  taste  can  counterfeit 

"  Note  of  the  Translator. — Friederich  de  Matthisson,  a  German 
lyric  poet,  who  died  at  Worlitz  in  1831,  in  his  71st  year,  must  be  the 
person  alluded  to;  but  we  have  not  been  so  fortunate  as  to  find  the  obser- 
vation of  Schiller  referred  to  in  the  text.  Matthisson  was  much  esteemed 
in  his  day,  and  some  of  his  descriptions  of  nature  are  first  rate  ;  but  in  his 
general  writings,  melody  of  versification  is  perhaps  apparent  rather  than 
power  of  imagination  or  depth  of  thought. 


RUSSIAN  AUTHORS.  297 

all  other  things  but  the  real  feelings  of  a  good 
heart ;  and  in  this  consists  the  peculiar  originality 
of  our  author.  He  discovers  perpetually,  and  as 
it  were  in  spite  of  himself,  the  most  tender  soul, 
and  the  most  refined  good-heartedness ;  and  this 
especially  in  the  fragment.  Civilisation  and  Luxury, 
in  which,  while  sketching  the  eccentric  character 
of  Rousseau,  he  allows  the  force  of  his  subject  to 
lead  him  into  a  sweet  vision  with  him  whom  he 
is  describing:  his  disposition  is  equally  displayed 
in  his  Essay  on  Happiness,  in  which,  in  describing 
the  perceptions  of  joy,  he  allows  himself  to  be  car- 
ried away  by  his  imagination,  and  reposes  amidst 
the  tranquillity  of  the  countr}%  and  in  the  lap  of 
that  nature  which  he  so  much  adored.  He  is  an 
author  that  may  be  read  at  all  times  alike,  as 
well  in  the  tumult  of  society  as  amid  the  deep  stil- 
ness  of  solitude.  His  words  are  like  the  words  of  an 
old  friend,  who  while  speaking  of  himself  in  heart- 
felt simplicity,  reminds  us  of  our  own  life,  our  pas- 
sions, our  sorrows,  our  hopes,  and  our  joys.  He 
imparts  to  us  the  repose  and  purity  of  his  own 
soul,  and  ever  leaves  an  enduring  impression  of 
his  lectures  in  our  memory.  In  one  word — the  very 
burthen  itself  of  sorrow  and  care — I  borrow  his  own 
words,  falls  ff'om  us  at  hearing  his  consolatory  ap- 
peal. It  has  long  ago  been  said  that  an  author's  style 
is  a  mirror  of  his  soul ;  and  of  our  author  the  re- 
mark may  be  most  coiTectly  repeated.  His  style 
resembles  that  of  Fenelon  :  the  same  purity  and 
precision  of  expression,  and  harmony  of  thought, 
and  the  same  heartfelt  and  irresistible  eloquence. 


298  A  LEXICON  OF 

Educated  in  the  school  of  antiquity,  his  writings 
bear  the  ineffaceable  stamp  of  classic  beauty — sim- 
plicity, dignity,  and  aptitude  of  expression.  The 
poems  of  MurawjefF  should  unquestionably  be 
classed  in  the  same  rank  with  the  best  of  his  prose 
works.  In  them  the  same  dignified  philosophy  is  to 
be  found,  the  source  of  which  is  a  good  and  sympa- 
thising heart,  with  a  select  imagery,  and  a  purity 
and  correctness  of  style  which  can  only  result  from 
a  careful  reading  of  the  writings  of  the  classics." 

MussiN  PuscHKiN  (Couut  Alcxcj  Iwanowitsch), 
acting  privy  councillor,  and  knight,  was  born  in 
1774,  was  engaged  in  the  military  profession  till 
I794p  in  which  year  he  was  appointed  privy  coun- 
cillor of  state,  and  in  the  following  year  upper-pro- 
curator of  the  Synod,  senator,  chief  of  the  Mine 
Cadet  Corps,  and  chief  of  the  Academy  of  Arts. 
In  1799  he  left  the  public  service,  and  died  in  1817. 
Count  Mussin  Puschkin  was  a  warm  friend  and 
connoisseur  of  Russian  Antiquities.  He  rescued 
from  oblivion  many  valuable  materials  for  Russian 
history,  although  a  great  part  of  the  collection  he 
had  made  was  unfortunately  lost  at  Moscow  in  the 
confusion  of  the  year  1812.  Russia  has  to  thank  him 
particularly  for:  1.  The  discovery  in  1796,  and  the 
publication  in  1 800,  of  Igor's  Address  to  his  Army, 
printed  at  Moscow.  2.  The  ascertaining  of  the 
exact  situation  of  the  place  called  Tmutarakana : 
A  Historical  Inquiry  for  fixing  the  position  of  the 
Ancient  Principality  of  Tmutarakana,  St.  Peters- 
burg, 1794.  3.  The  production  in  print  of  the 
Law  of  Russia,  St.  Petersburg,  1792,  and  Moscow, 


RUSSIAN  AUTHORS.  299 

1799.      4.  The  printing  of  the  Canon  Law,  by 
Wladimir  Monomach,  St.  Petersburg,  1793. 

N. 

Nartoff  (A.  A.),  president  of  the  Russian  Aca- 
demy, died  in  the  year  1814.  Many  of  his  writings 
are  published  in  the  Transactions  of  the  Russian 
Academy. 

Narashnuj  (Wassilj  Trofimowitsch),  collegiate 
assessor,  was  born  in  1781,  in  the  Governmental 
Department  of  Poltawa.  He  was  educated  at 
the  University  of  Moscow,  from  1792  to  1801. 
Afterwards  he  was  employed  in  the  cabinet  of  the 
Emperor  Alexander.  His  first  works  were  :  1.  The 
Bloody  Night,  a  tragedy  in  the  old  taste,  in  regular 
verses  of  five  feet.  2.  The  Day  of  Crime  and  Ter- 
ror, a  dramatic  work,  in  prose.  Both  works  are  to 
be  found  inserted  in  the  periodical  called  Agreeable 
and  Useful  Pastime,  Moscow,  1798.  His  other 
printed  works  are  :  3.  The  Pseudo-Dimitrj,  a  tra- 
gedy, in  prose,  Moscow,  1802,  represented  on  the 
stage  at  the  same  place.  4.  Sclavonic  Evenings, 
first  number,  St.  Petersburg,  1809.  Among  others 
of  his  works  not  yet  printed,  is  Helena,  a  tragedy, 
in  the  common  six-feet  measure.  He  is  also  the 
author  of  The  Russian  Gil  Bias,  a  romance  in  six 
parts ;  and  other  works. 

Neledinskj-Melezkj  (Jurj  Alexandrovdtsch),was 
bom  in  1751,  and  entered  the  military  service  in 
his  youth.  From  1770  to  1774  he  served  in  the 
war  against  the  Turks ;  but  after  the  conclusion  of 
peace,  he  was  rewarded  with  the  rank  of  Premier- 


300  A  LEXICON  OF 

Major,  and  sent  to  Constantinople  as  attache  to  the 
embassy.     After  this  he  served  in  Finland,  and  in 
1786  retired  with  the  rank  of  colonel.     The  Em- 
peror Paul  the  First  engaged  him  in  the  public 
service  once  more,  as  councillor  of  state,  and  in- 
trusted to  him  the  reading  and  answering  of  all 
petitions  to  the  government.     In  1797  and  1798 
he  accompanied  that  monarch  to  Moscow,  Casan, 
and  White  Russia.     His  zeal  in  the  service  was  so 
highly  approved  of  by  the  Emperor,  that  he  received 
from  him  the  rank  of  acting  councillor  of  state, 
the  order  of  St.  Anne,  first  class,  and  a  present  of 
several  hundred  subjects  or  serfs  of  his  own  ;  and 
in  1 800  he  was  advanced  to  the  rank  of  a  senator. 
In  1809  he  was  also  decorated  with  the  order  of 
St.  Alexander  Newskj.    In  literature  Neledinskj  ac- 
quired, at  least  among  the  educated  and  refined 
portion  of  the  Russians,  great  reputation  by  his 
songs  and  romances,  which  exhibit  much  elegance 
and  fire  of  feeling.     Of  his  diplomatical  papers. 
The  Address  of  the  Synod,  The  Imperial  Council, 
and  the  Directing  Senate,  to  his  Majesty  the  Empe- 
ror Alexander  the  First,  is  best  known.   It  is  printed 
in  the  second  part,  page  233,  of  Gretsch's  Manual 
of  Russian  Literature.    The  principal  efforts  of  this 
elegant  writer  may  be  found  scattered  over  most  of 
the   periodicals  of  his  day,  and  it   is   a  cause  of 
regret  to  the  real  friends  of  Russian  literature  that 
they  have  not  yet  been  printed  together  in  a  col- 
lected form. 

Nestor  (the  most  revered  name  in  the  whole 
compass  of  ancient  Russian  literature).     A  monk 


RUSSIAN  AUTHORS.  301 

of  the  Subterranean  Monastery  at  KiefF,  and  justly 
surnamed  ''the  Father  of  Russian  History,"  was 
born  in  1056.  The  place  of  his  birth  is  unknown, 
although  it  is  pretty  certain  that  he  was  a  native 
of  Russia.  Of  the  particulars  of  his  life  we  only 
know  so  much,  that  he  came  to  the  above-men- 
tioned monastery  in  the  eighteenth  year  of  his  age, 
that  he  was  admitted  by  the  igumen  Stephen  to 
the  office  of  monk,  and  that  he  was  afterwards  con- 
secrated a  deacon.  In  1091  he  received  the  com- 
mission, in  company  with  two  other  brothers  of  the 
cloister,  to  go  and  search  for  the  bones  of  Saint 
Theodosius,  and  it  was  his  good  fortune  to  find 
them.  After  this,  he  dedicated  his  entire  life  to 
writing  on  the  history  of  his  native  country,  and 
collecting  proper  materials.  It  is  most  probable 
that  his  death  took  place  in  1111.  He  has  left  to 
posterity  a  valuable  memorial  of  his  research  in  the 
Russian  Latopiss,  or  Chronicle ;  many  copies  of 
which  have  descended  to  our  own  time,  illustrated 
with  chronological  notes  from  the  year  852,  and 
which  extends  from  the  oldest  times  to  the  period 
of  his  own  death.  The  best  manuscripts  of  this 
chronicle,  according  to  Karamsin,  were  the  Paper- 
Codices  of  the  14th  and  15th  centuries  ;  the  first 
belonged  to  Count  A.  J.  Mussin  Puschkin,  and  the 
other  to  the  Troizkan  Monastery.  They  were 
both  burnt  at  Moscow  in  1812.  The  MS.  of  the 
Susdalishian  monk  Lawrentj  (Laurentius)  upon 
parchment,  dating  from  the  14th  century,  is  in  the 
Imperial  Public  Library.  The  earliest  printed  co- 
pies were  :  1.  That  of  Radziwill,  or  Konigsberg,  St. 
Petersburg,  1767,  which  however  is  extremely  in- 


302  A  LEXICON  OF 

correct.  From  this  copy  a  French  translation  was 
pubHshed,  under  the  title.  La  Chronique  de  Nestor, 
traduite  en  Fran^ais,  d'apres  Vedition  Imperiale  de 
St.  Petersburg,  MS.  de  Konigsberg,  2  vols,  large 
8vo.  Paris,  HeidelofF  et  Campe,  price  4  thalers.  2. 
That  of  Nikon,  in  8  vols.  St.  Petersburg,  1767, 
1792.  And  3.  that  of  the  Sophia  Library,  St.  Pe- 
tersburg, 1 796.  But  the  most  valuable  edition  of 
Nestor's  Chronicle  is  that  of  Schlozer,  which  he 
did  not  venture  to  publish  till  after  he  had  spent 
forty  years  in  its  completion.  In  it  he  has  thrown 
light  upon  the  obscure  passages,  corrected  the 
faults,  and  recovered  parts  of  it  which  had  been 
lost  in  the  lapse  of  time,  by  carefully  comparing  the 
different  manuscripts  with  each  other,  and  by  re- 
ferring constantly  to  the  Byzantine  annalists,  who 
were  used  by  Nestor  as  a  fountain-head.  Schlo- 
zer's  labours,  which  concluded  with  the  reign  of  Ja- 
ropolk,  appeared  in  the  German  language  at  Got- 
tingen,  1802-1809,  in  5  vols.  JasiikofF  translated 
this  work  into  Russian,  and  pubHshed  it  in  three 
volumes,  under  the  title  of  Nestor,  or  The  Russian 
Latopisse,  in  the  old  Sclavonic  Dialect,  collated, 
translated,  and  illustrated,  by  A.  L.  Schlozer,  1809- 
1819,  St.  Petersburg.  Nestor  was  a  very  learned 
man  in  his  time.  He  understood  perfectly  the  Greek 
language,  and  read  the  Byzantine  historians,  from 
whom  he  translated  many  passages,  and  inserted 
them  in  his  Chronicle.  His  information  he  derived 
from  contemporaneous  traditions  (probably  also  from 
still  more  ancient  Latopisses),  and  he  derived  great 
advantage  from  the  recollections  of  his  brother  in 
the  cloister,  the  monk  Jan,  who  died  in  1106,  at 


RUSSIAN  AUTHORS.  303 

the  age  of  91  years,  and  who  was  born  consequently 
in  1015,  i.  e.  one  year  after  the  death  of  the  Grand 
Prince  Wladirair.    Much  however  of  Nestor's  work 
consists  of  what  he  was  enabled  to  record  as  a  con- 
temporary and  an  eyewitness.     Truth  shines  evi- 
dently in  all  his  writings.     His  style  is  equal,  and 
resembles  the  biblical  books.     The  persons  whom 
he  mentions,  are  made  to  speak  in  the  language 
of  the   historical   books   of   the   Old    Testament. 
He  frequently  interweaves  sentences  taken  from 
Holy  Writ,  and  subjoins  pious  moral  reflections. 
His  illustrious  editor,  Schlozer,  says  of  him, "  With- 
out this  brother  of  the  cloister,  what  should  we 
ever  have  known  about  the  entire  history  of  the 
Upper   North,   down    to    the    eleventh    century ! 
But  this  chronicle  is  still  more  important  in  rela- 
tion to  the  people  for  which  it  ivas  wr^itten  ;  who 
by  following  the  example  of  its  author,  acquired 
a  taste  for  reading  and  writing,  and  never  lost  those 
arts  again  through  all  the  melancholy  times  and 
centuries  of  actual  barbarism  that  followed."     The 
Latopisse  of  Nestor  was  continued  after  his  death 
by  others. 

Newachowitsch  (Leff  Nikolajewitsch),  titular 
councillor,  now  resides  in  Warsaw,  and  is  author 
of  the  drama.  The  Suliotes,  or  The  Spartans  of  the 
Eighteenth  Century,  which  was  first  played  at  St. 
Petersburg  in  1810,  and  afterwards  printed.  This 
drama  is  one  of  the  most  remarkable  productions 
of  its  class  in  Russian.  Besides  this  he  has  pub- 
lished :  1.  Man  in  a  State  of  Nature,  or  The 
Correspondence  of  Two  Enlightened  Friends,  St. 


304  A  LEXICON  OF 

Petersburg,  1804.  2.  The  Lamentation  of  the 
Daughter  of  Israel,  St.  Petersburg,  1803. 

NiEMCEwicz,  a  Pole.     See  article  Wasemskj. 

Newmann.     See  Ewers. 

NiKiPHOR,  metropolitan  of  KiefF  and  all  Russia, 
a  Greek  by  birth,  came  to  Russia  in  1106,  and  died 
in  April,  1121.  He  was  a  modest  and  learned  man. 
Of  his  works  the  following  remain  :  1.  Official  Let- 
ters to  the  Grand  Prince  Wladimir  Wsewolodo- 
witsch  Monomach,  upon  the  Separation  of  the 
Eastern  and  Western  Churches.  2.  Upon  Fasting 
and  Continence.  The  first  is  to  be  found  in  MS. 
in  the  Synodal  Library  at  Moscow,  and  the  second 
is  printed  in  the  first  volume  of  the  Memorabilia, 
which  were  published  by  the  Moscow  Historical 
and  Antiquarian  Society. 

NiKiTiN  (Afanassj),  a  merchant  of  Twer,  made  a 
journey  in  the  year  1470  to  the  East  Indies,  and 
after  having  engaged  in  some  traffic  in  the  kingdom 
of  Golconda,  wrote  a  journal  of  his  travels.  Ka- 
ramsin,  who  discovered  this  journal  in  an  old  chro- 
nicle, speaks  of  it  as  follows  :  "  Although  this  jour- 
nal displays  neither  the  talent  of  observation,  nor 
deep  learning,  yet  it  must  be  in  any  case  interest- 
ing to  us,  when  we  reflect  how  utterly  unacquainted 
we  are  with  the  state  and  condition  of  India  at  the 
time  to  which  it  refers.  This  is  not  the  proper 
place  for  me  to  enter  into  details  ;  I  will  therefore 
only  say  that  this  traveller  left  Twer  by  the  Wolga, 
and  proceeded  to  Astracan  ;  and  even  went  as  far 
as  the  Tatar  towns  of  Usslan  and  Bereksana.  From 
Astracan  he  went  to  Derbent,  Bokhara,  Masande- 


RUSSIAN  AUTHORS.  305 

ran,  Amol,  Kaschan,  Ormus,  Maskat,  Guzerat,  and 
beyond  to  the  countries  behind  the  Indian  moun- 
tains as  far  as  Beder,  where  is  the  capital  of  the 
Great  Sultan  of  Chorasan.  He  saw  the  Indian 
Jerusalem ;  i.  e.  according  to  all  probability,  the 
famous  temple  of  Elora.  He  names  towns  which 
are  now  vainly  sought  for  in  any  map;  notes  all  that 
is  remarkable ;  displays  his  astonishment  at  the 
luxury  of  the  grandees,  and  indigence  of  the  peo- 
ple ;  blames  not  only  the  superstition,  but  also  the 
corrupted  morals  of  the  inhabitants,  who  recognise 
the  religion  of  Brama ;  above  all,  he  is  cautious  for 
the  sake  of  the  orthodox  and  religious  Russians, 
fearing  lest  any  of  his  countrymen,  led  by  the  re- 
port of  Indian  treasures,  should  be  minded  to  fol- 
low him  to  this  pretended  paradise  of  merchants, 
where  there  is  plenty  of  pepper  and  brilliant  co- 
lours, but  little  that  is  proper  for  Russia.  At  last 
he  returns  to  Ormus,  and  having  travelled  through 
Ispahan,  Sultania,  and  Trebisond,  and  arrived  at 
KafFa,  determines  to  write  the  history  of  his  six 
years'  expedition,  which,  except  the  pleasure  of 
writing  about  it,  had  been  productive  of  little  be- 
nefit to  him;  for  the  Turkish  Pachas  took  away 
from  him  a  great  part  of  the  goods  which  he 
had  imported.  This  account,  moreover,  at  least 
proves  that  Russia  had  in  the  fifteenth  century  her 
Taverniers  and  Chardins,  who  were  it  is  true  but 
ill-instructed,  but  yet  so  keen  and  enterprising  that 
the  Indians  received  a  knowledge  of  them  even 
earlier  than  of  Portugal,  Holland,  and  England.  At 
a  time  when  Vasco  di  Gama  was  only  thinking 
about  the  possibihty  of  discovering  the  route  from 


306  A  LEXICON  OF 

Africa  to  Hindostan,  our  Twer  merchant  was  al- 
ready engaged  in  traffick  on  the  Malabar  coast,  and 
conversing  with  the  inhabitants  there  respecting  the 
dogmas  of  their  religion." 

NiKODiM  Sellj,  a  monk  of  the  monastery  of  Alex- 
der  Newskj,  was  born  in   the  Danish  town  Ton- 
dern,  educated  in  the  Lutheran  religion,  and  was 
called  Adam  Burchard  Sellj.     He  studied  philoso- 
phy, medicine,  theology,  and  the  belles  lettres,  at 
several  of  the  German  universities.     In  1722  he 
made  a  journey  to  St.  Petersburg,  became  a  teacher 
at  several  clerical  schools,  served  some  time  as  se- 
cretary to  the  Count  Lestoque,  adopted  in  the  year 
1744  the  Greek  faith,  on  which  occasion  he  took 
the  name  of  Nestor,  and  one  year  later  became  a 
monk,  when  the  additional  name  of  Nikodim  was 
given  him.     He  died  in  1746,  and  was  buried  in 
the  monastery  of  Alexander  Newskj.     Ever  since 
his  first  coming  to  Russia,  he  had  occupied  himself 
upon  the  Russian  language,  and  directed  his  atten- 
tion towards  Russian  history.    He  collected  in  MS. 
and  printed  books  all  that  had  ever  been  written 
about  Russia,  laboured  himself  uninterruptedly  in 
copying  and  translating  his  different  materials,  and 
occupied  himself  in  this  way  with  some  important 
works.     In  1736  the  following  work  was  printed 
by  him  at  Reval  in  the  Latin  language  :  Schediasma 
Literarium  de  Scriptoribus,  qui  Historiam  Politico- 
Ecclesiasticam  Rossice   scripfis  illustrarunt.      The 
Russian  translation  of  this  small  but  useful  book 
appeared  at  Moscow  in  1815.     Another  little  work 
of  his,  A  Historical  Mirror  of  Russian  Monarchs 
from  Rurik  to  the  Empress  Elizabeth  Petrowna, 


RUSSIAN  AUTHORS.  307 

was  written  in  Latin  verse ;  the  original  has  been 
lost,  but  the  Russian  translation  is  printed  in  the 
first  part  of  the  Ancient  Russian  Library.  The 
third  and  most  important  of  his  works,  De  Rosso- 
I'um  Hierarchia,  in  five  books,  contains  some  very 
important  and  interesting  information  respecting 
the  Russian  church  history,  with  a  sketch  of  its 
earliest  origin.  The  original  manuscript  is  pre- 
served in  the  Archives  of  the  Ofiice  for  Foreign 
Affairs,  and  a  translation  of  it  appears  in  the  first 
part  of  the  History  of  the  Russian  Hierarchy.  Be- 
sides this,  Sellj  left  behind  him  a  quantity  of  ma- 
nuscripts, extracts,  journals,  etc.,  which  are  all  pre- 
served in  the  Library  of  St.  Alexander  Newskj. 

NiKOLEFF  (Nikolai  Petrowitsch),  born  in  1758, 
was  educated  in  the  house  of  the  Princess  Dasch- 
kowa,  and  served  in  the  guards.  When  twenty- 
seven  years  old,  he  retired  from  the  service,  on 
account  of  the  weakness  of  his  sight.  Soon  af- 
terwards he  became  quite  blind ;  and  while  in 
this  condition,  literary  occupations  afforded  him 
consolation  and  comfort.  His  most  important  work 
is  Ssorena,  a  tragedy,  in  five  acts,  which  won  the 
applause  of  the  assembled  public  and  the  favour  of 
Catherine.  The  Russian  Academy  elected  Niko- 
lofF  a  member  of  their  body.  He  died  in  January, 
1816. 

-  NiKOLSKj  (Alexander  Ssergejewitsch),  acting  coun- 
cillor of  state  and  knight,  director  of  the  chan- 
cery, and  learned  secretary  to  the  department  of 
H  the  Admiralty,  member  of  the  Russian  Academy, 
H  was  born  in  1 755,  in  the  government  of  Wladimir, 
H  and  studied  at  the  seminary  of  the  Sergian  Monas- 
^*  x2 


308  A  LEXICON  OF 

tery  of  Troizka.  He  published.  First  Principles  of 
Russian  Eloquence,  containing  Grammar,  Rhetoric, 
and  Art  of  Poetry,  St.  Petersburg,  1816,  third  edi- 
tion. Besides  this,  he  translated:  1.  The  Eloquence 
of  the  Scriptures  shown  to  be  Inimitable,  a  work 
of  Nollin.  2.  The  Comforter,  or  upon  Good  and 
Evil,  from  Beausobre.  3.  The  Second  part  of  the 
Travels  of  Anacharsis,  and  the  fourth  part  of  La- 
sarpe's  Lyceum,  which  translations  were  published 
by  the  Russian  Academy.  The  same  society  is  now 
printing  another  translation  of  his  from  de  Brosse, 
viz.  An  Inquiry  into  the  Mechanical  Connection  of 
Languages,  in  two  parts.     His  son, 

NiKOLSKj  (Paul  Alexandrowitsch),  who  died  in 
1816,  in  the  flower  of  his  days,  edited,  1.  The  jour- 
nal called  The  Flower-Bed,  1809  and  1810;  and 
2.  The  Pantheon  of  Russian  Poetry,  1804. 

Nikon,  the  sixth  Patriarch  of  all  Russia,  born  in 
1605,  at  Nischnj  Novogorod,  of  parents  in  humble 
life,  received  his  education  from  a  pious  monk  in 
the  monastery  of  St.  Makarj  Seheltowodskj,  after- 
wards became  a  priest  at  Moscow,  travelled  to  the 
hermitage  of  Ansersche,  on  the  island  of  Solowez,  in 
the  White  Sea,  and  was  then  made  igumen  (1643) 
of  the  Nischeoserschian  Hermitage,  in  which  ca- 
pacity he  visited  Moscow  in  1646.  The  Czar  Alexej 
Michailowitsch,  who  had  learnt  to  admire  the  great- 
ness of  his  intellect,  his  rare  ability,  and  his  strict 
and  virtuous  life,  desired  that  he  should  be  con- 
secrated archimandrite  of  the  Nomospaskian  Mo- 
nastery at  Moscow.  Nikon,  enjoying  the  entire  con- 
fidence of  the  prince,  took  advantage  of  it  to  become 
the  intercessor  for  poor  widows,  orphans,  and  the 


RUSSIAN  AUTHORS.  309 

persecuted  and  oppressed.    In  1648  he  acquired  the 
dignity  of  metropolitan  of  Novogorod.     The  Czar 
gave  him  permission  to  go  into  the  prisons,  and  to 
set  at  liberty  not  only  those  persons  who  had  been 
unjustly  confined,  but  also  real  criminals  whom  he 
found  sincere  in  their  repentance.     Nikon  was  a 
liberal  distributor  of  alms  to  the  poor,  gave  them 
provisions  during  the  time  of  the  famine  which 
took   place,   and   ordered   the   erection    of  many 
almshouses.     On  feast-days  he  made  a  point  of 
preaching,  and  his  sermons  were  attended  by  crowds 
of  people  from  distant  parts,  who  were  often  moved 
to  tears  by  his  eloquence.     He  introduced  into  the 
churches  the  psalmody  of  the  Greek  service,  and 
of  Kieff,  and  gave  a  more  costly  fashion  to  the 
holy  utensils  and  other  furniture  of  the  churches. 
He  was  anxious  to  increase  the  respectability  of 
the    clerical    profession,   and    caused   divine    ser- 
vice  to   be   performed   with   more  devotion.     In 
1650  he  put  down,  at  the  hazard  of  his  own  life, 
the  insurrection  at  Novogorod.     In  1652,  after  the 
death  of  the  patriarch  Joseph,  he  was  elevated  to 
his  place  as  patriarch,  which  enabled  him  to  carry 
on  his  philanthropical  works  upon  a  larger  scale. 
Besides   all   this,  he  took   measures  for  the   im- 
provement of  the  church  books,  and  for  making 
them  more  exact  and  faithful  to  the  Greek  ori- 
ginals.    He  called  on  that  account  the  general  as- 
semblies of  the  church  in  1654  and  1655 ;  and  en- 
gaged persons  to  translate  many  useful  works,  both 
clerical  and  secular,  into  Russian.     The  Czar  con- 
tinued to  him  his  esteem  and  confidence;  and  when 
he  went  to  join  the  army  in  a  campaign,  intrusted 
to  him  the  care  of  the  whole  royal  family  ;    for 


310  A  LEXICON  OF 

which  Nikon  displayed  the  greatest  attention  and 
anxiety  in  the  time  of  the  plague,  which  desolated 
Moscow  in  1653  and  1654.  In  1658  some  of  Ni- 
kon's enemies  contrived  to  inspire  into  the  mind  of 
the  Czar  a  feeling  of  jealousy  or  dislike  towards 
him.  Nikon,  who  remarked  this,  was  incensed  at 
it,  and  retired  to  the  monastery  of  the  Resurrection 
of  Christ ;  which  he  had  himself  built,  about  forty 
wersts  from  Moscow.  The  misunderstanding  be- 
tween the  Czar  and  the  patriarch  grew  continually 
wider.  Nikon  persisted  that  he  would  not  return 
to  Moscow.  In  1667  a  council  was  convened  to 
deliberate  on  his  case,  under  the  presidency  of  the 
eastern  patriarch  ;  and  on  the  12th  of  December  of 
the  same  year,  Nikon  was  deprived  of  the  patri- 
archal dignity,  and  banished  as  a  common  monk  to 
the  Balooserschian  Therapontic  Monastery.  The 
Czar  Feodor  Alexejewitsch  allowed  him  to  remove 
into  the  Monasterv  of  the  Resurrection  of  Christ ; 
but  on  his  journey  thither  he  died  at  Jarosslaw,  in 
1681.  His  body  was  buried  in  the  last-mentioned 
monastery,  in  the  presence  of  the  monarch,  and 
there  the  deceased  was  again  honoured  with  the 
title  of  patriarch.  His  absolution  was  next  obtained 
from  the  eastern  patriarch,  and  he  was  then  pro- 
perly enrolled  among  the  list  of  Russian  patriarchs. 
The  most  important  of  Nikon's  literary  labours, 
was  the  improvement  of  the  Sclavonic  church  books, 
and  setting  them  in  accordance  with  the  original 
Greek.  In  1654  he  despatched  the  hieromonach 
Arsenj  Suchanoff  into  the  east,  and  purchased 
through  him  more  than  500  manuscripts  of  Greek 
books,  from  the  eleventh  to  the  seventeenth  cen- 
tury.    He  also  made  provision  for  the  translation 


RUSSIAN  AUTHORS.  311 

of  a  number  of  historical  and  geographical  works 
from  foreign  languages  into  the  Russian.  Some 
of  these,  signed  by  his  own  hand,  are  still  pre- 
served in  the  Synodal  Library.  He  also  drew  up 
a  collation  of  the  Russian  Chronicles,  the  Stufen- 
books,  and  the  Greek  Chronologists,  which  reaches 
to  the  year  1630,  and  is  well  known  by  the  name 
of  The  Chronicle  of  Nikon.  Of  this  codex,  the 
Academy  of  Sciences  at  St.  Petersburg  pubhshed  a 
fine  edition  in  eight  volumes,  1767-1792.  Com- 
pare article  Schuscherin. 

NiPHONT,  igumen  in  Volhynia,  made  a  continua- 
tion of  the  Chronicle  of  Nestor,  from  1116-1157. 

NowiKOFF  (Nikolaj  Iwanowitsch),  deserves  an 
honourable  place,  if  not  among  the  classical  writers 
of  Russia,  at  least  among  the  most  zealous  and  suc- 
cessful promoters  of  enlightenment  and  literature. 
He  was  born  on  the  27th  of  April,  1744,  at  the  vil- 
lage of  Tichwensk,  near  Moscow.  His  parents, 
people  of  some  property,  gave  him  his  first  educa- 
tion, which  was  however  very  defective,  in  their 
own  house.  At  eighteen  years  of  age  he  was  sent  to 
be  employed  in  the  state  service  at  St.  Petersburg. 
There  he  had  the  fortunate  opportunity  of  im- 
proving his  natural  faculties,  and  to  gain  informa- 
tion in  various  sciences,  but  particularly  the  most 
difficult  science  of  all — the  knowledge  of  the  human 
heart.  He  soon  gave  up  the  military  profession, 
retiring  with  the  rank  of  cornet  in  the  guards ;  and 
occupied  himself  entirely  with  literature.  In  1770 
he  published  a  satirical  journal,  called  The  Painter, 
which  has  not  yet  lost  its  high  pubhc  estimation, 
although  the  subsequent  editions  of  it  have  been 


312  A  LEXICON  OF 

incorrectly  printed.  Soon  after  this,  he  had  printed 
An  Attempt  at  a  Lexicon  of  Russian  Authors  ; 
without  which  the  names  and  memorials  of  many 
Russian  writers  would  have  been  lost  to  the  me- 
mory, if  not  of  the  learned,  yet  of  the  public  in 
general.  But  this  work,  which  is  now  so  much  es- 
teemed, brought  some  of  the  sons  of  Apollo  into 
enmity  with  its  author,  who  is  tolerably  severe  in 
his  remarks  on  many  of  his  contemporaries.  The 
first  labours  of  NowikofF  attracted  the  notice  of 
the  Empress.  He  soon  afterwards  went  to  Mos- 
cow, and  there  a  wide  field  opened  itself  before 
him.  From  the  year  1773  he  edited  The  Ancient 
Russian  Library,  a  collection  of  rare  and  remark- 
able monuments  of  Russian  history  at  all  periods. 
For  the  extension  of  useful  knowledge  in  Russia, 
he  established,  with  the  permission  of  the  govern- 
ment, a  Typographical  Society,  consisting  of  learned 
and  literary  persons,  the  object  of  which  was  to 
pubhsh  good  and  useful  books  in  the  Russian  lan- 
guage, and  to  sell  them  for  a  very  moderate  price. 
To  facilitate  the  means  of  getting  books,  he  founded 
the  first  circulating  library  at  Moscow.  Karamsin 
says  of  him,  "  NowikofF  was  the  chief  encourager  of 
the  book  trade  at  Moscow.  After  he  had  obtained 
a  lease  of  the  university  press,  he  increased  all  the 
mechanical  facilities  for  printing,  procured  the 
translation  of  books,  estabhshed  booksellers'  shops 
in  other  towns,  endeavoured  by  all  the  means  in 
his  power  to  infuse  into  the  pubHc  a  love  of  read- 
ing ;  and  while  he  knew  well  how  to  hit  the  gene- 
ral taste,  did  not  forget  to  supply  suitable  nourish- 
ment for  each   particular  fancy.     He  dealt  with 


RUSSIAN  AUTHORS.  313 

books  as  the  rich  Dutch  or  EngHsh  merchant  deals 
with  the  produce  of  different  countries;  that  is  to  say, 
with  circumspection  and  a  far-sighted  speculation. 
Previously  to  his  time  only  600  copies  of  the  Moscow 
newspaper  were  sold  ;  NowikofF  increased  and  di- 
versified the  nature  of  its  contents,  scattered  a  quan- 
tity of  information  on  all  subjects  in  addition  to 
the  political  articles  ;  and  at  last  published  a  gra- 
tuitous supplement,  called  Reading  for  Children, 
which  brought  the  paper  into  great  credit  with  the 
public  by  its  novelty  and  the  variety  of  its  matter. 
The  number  of  subscribers  increased  considerably 
every  year,  and  at  the  end  of  ten  years  there  were 
as  many  as  4000  copies  regularly  sold.     These  ex- 
ertions of  Nowikoff  for  the  general  good,  were  in- 
terrupted by  the  unhappy  state  into  which  Europe 
was  plunged  by  the  French  revolution.     In  com- 
mon with  many  other  highly  esteemed  men,  he 
was  also  a  victim  of  suspicion,  which  government 
in  those  troublous  times  may  be  well  justified  in 
entertaining.     His  innocence  was  proved  in  the 
reign  of  Paul,  and  that  high-minded  monarch  com- 
pensated him  as  far  as  he  could  for  the  persecution 
he  had  undergone.     Nowikoff  spent  his  latter  days 
at  his  country  estate  at  Tichwensk,  where  he  in- 
structed his  neighbours  both  by  his  precepts  and 
his  example.      He  died  the  31st  of  July,   1818. 
The  works  which  he  published  are  as  follows:   1. 
-The  Ancient  Russian  Library,  ten  vols.  St.  Peters- 
burg, 1773-1775;  the  continuation  of  this  forms 
nine    volumes   more,    St.   Petersburg,   1786-1793. 
2.  Journals :  The  Drone  Bee,  St.  Petersburg,  1769, 
1770;    The   Painter,  two   parts,   St.   Petersburg, 


314  A  LEXICON  OF 

1770;  The  Muses' Pedlar,  St.  Petersburg,  1772; 
The  Evenings,  St.  Petersburg,  1772;  The  La- 
bourer at  Rest ;  The  Self-Maintaining  Citizen ; 
The  Dawn  of  Day,  St.  Petersburg,  1778-1780; 
The  Evening  Twilight,  Moscow,  1782.  3.  An  At- 
tempt at  a  Historical  Dictionary  of  Russian  Wri- 
ters, St.  Petersburg,  1772. 

O. 

Obodowskj,  a  living  poet,  celebrated  for  the  me- 
lody and  power  of  his  verses.  He  has  translated 
Die  Ahnfrau,  or  Banshee  of  Grillparzer,  and  the 
Don  Carlos  of  Schiller. 

Oldekop  (Augustus),  acting  member  of  the  Cour- 
landish  Society  of  Literature  and  Arts,  editor  of  the 
new  St.  Petersburg  German  periodical,  published 
in  1824  at  St.  Petersburg  a  German-Russian  and 
Russian-German  Dictionary.  For  the  achievement 
of  this  work  he  used  the  recently  published  Dic- 
tionary of  the  Russian  Academy,  in  six  volumes, 
and  that  of  the  late  Professor  Heym.  But  his  work 
is  richer  than  that  of  Heym,  by  more  than  2000 
words :  and  so  this  dictionary  may  be  considered 
as  the  completest  that  has  yet  appeared.  The 
same  author  has  also  compiled,  Un  Nouveau  Dic- 
tionnaire  de  poche,  Fran^ais-Russe,  et  Russe-Frangais, 
precede  d'une  Grammaire  abregee  de  ces  deux  Lan- 
gues^  which  was  published  at  Berlin  in  1830,  by 
Asher.  He  has  also  given  us  a  much-admired 
translation  into  German  of  Bulgarin's  romance  of 
Wuishigin.     See  the  article  Bulgarin. 

Olin  has  been  very  happy  in  the  translation  of 
some  of  the  odes  of  Horace. 


RUSSIAN  AUTHORS.  315 

OsEREZKOFSKj  (Nikolai  Jakovvlewitsch),  acting 
councillor  of  state  and  knight,  member  of  the  Up- 
per School  Directory,  and  of  many  learned  societies, 
was  born  in  the  year  1750.  He  received  his  scien- 
tific education  at  the  Academical  Gymnasium.  In 
1768  he  set  out  on  his  travels  with  the  academician 
Lepechin,  and  remained  till  1774.  After  this  he 
continued  his  studies  at  Strasburg  and  Leyden: 
in  1778  took  the  degree  of  doctor  of  medicine : 
in  1779  was  made  an  adjunct,  and  in  1782  a  mem- 
ber of  the  Academy.  In  1785  he  undertook,  at 
the  suggestion  of  the  Academy,  a  journey  to  the 
seas  of  Ladoga  and  Orega,  to  conduct  some  observa- 
tions on  their  physical  phenomena.  He  published, 
1.  A  Description  of  a  Journey  to  the  Lakes  of  La- 
doga and  Orega,  St.  Petersburg,  1786.  ,  2.  The 
Primary  Principles  of  Natural  History,  and  the 
Animal  Kingdom ;  a  translation  from  the  work  of 
Professor  Lesske,  with  additions  and  alterations, 
two  parts,  St.  Petersburg,  1791.  3.  C.  C.  Sallust's 
History  of  Catiline's  Conspiracy  and  the  War  of 
Jugurtha,  St.  Petersburg,  1809.  Many  other  ori- 
ginal works  and  translations  by  him  are  to  be  found 
in  the  Transactions  of  the  Academy  of  Sciences. 

OsEROFF  (Wladisslaff  Alexandrowitsch),  a  major- 
general  and  knight,  honorary  member  of  many 
learned  societies,  was  born  on  the  29th  of  Septem- 
ber, 1770,  in  the  government  of  Twer.  In  1776 
le  was  put  into  the  Land  Cadet  Corps,  where, 
"during  a  stay  of  twelve  years,  he  continued  to  make 
distinguished  progress.  In  1788  he  entered  the 
army  as  lieutenant,  having  won  the  first  gold  medal. 
After  he  had  remained  some  years  in  the  army. 


316  A  LEXICON  OF 

he  was  transferred  to  the  civil  service,  and  was 
associated  with  the  department  of  the  woods  and 
forests.  In  1808  he  retired  from  duty,  and  died 
in  November,  1816,  after  a  tedious  illness,  in  the 
course  of  which  he  entirely  lost  his  mental  faculties. 
OserofF's  most  celebrated  works  are  the  following 
tragedies,  in  verse  :  1.  The  Death  of  Olga,  in  five 
acts,  first  represented  at  St.  Petersburg  in  1798. 
2.  OEdipus  at  Athens,  in  five  acts,  represented  first 
on  the  23rd  of  November,  1804.  3.  Fingal^  in 
three  acts,  with  choruses  and  a  pantomimic  ballet, 
represented  on  the  8th  of  December,  1805,  pubhshed 
at  St.  Petersburg,  1807.  4.  Dmitrj  Donskoj,  in  five 
acts,  represented  on  the  14th  of  January,  1807.  5. 
Polixena,  in  five  acts,  represented  on  the  14th  of  May, 
1809.  Besides  these,  he  wrote  several  lyric  poems, 
and  translated  from  Kolardeau  some  Letters  of 
Heloise  to  Abelard.  A  complete  collection  of  his 
works,  with  notices  respecting  his  life  and  writings, 
written  by  Prince  P.  A.  Wasemskj,  was  printed  at 
St.  Petersburg,  in  two  parts,  in  1818.  "  The  merit 
of  Oseroff,  the  reformer  of  Russian  tragedy,"  says 
his  biographer,  among  other  things,  "  must  ever 
fix  upon  him  the  gratitude  and  regard  of  the  en- 
hghtened  friends  of  literature.  Without  determin- 
ing the  proportional  merit  of  each,  we  may  compare 
him  to  Karamsin,  the  inventor  of  our  modern  prose. 
Both  of  them  have  left  a  wide  gulf  between  them- 
selves and  their  predecessors.     With  the  appear- 

'  Joseph  Koslofskj,  councillor  of  state,  and  for  a  long  time  musical  di- 
rector of  the  imperial  theatre,  who  had  made  himself  a  great  favourite  of 
the  Russian  public  by  some  Polonaises,  which  he  had  composed  for  the 
national  songs  of  Dershawin,  wrote  the  music  for  Fingal.  Koslofskj  died 
at  St.  Petersburg  on  the  11th  of  March,  1831. 


RUSSIAN  AUTHORS.  31 7 

ance  of  OserofF,  the  Russian  Melpomene  asserted 
her  empire  over  the  soul.  We  heard  her  voice, 
which  penetrates  the  heart,  and  awakes  the  feelings 
so  eloquently  described  in  Racine  and  Voltaire. 
The  laws  of  Destiny  and  humanity  permitted  him 
not  to  enrich  the  Russian  theatre  by  perfecting  the 
art  of  tragedy,  which  in  some  measure  was  born  and 
expired  with  him.  It  is  superfluous  to  attempt  to 
prove  that  neither  Knashnin  nor  Sumarokoff  were 
his  models  ;  and  it  would  be  ridiculous  to  remark 
that  the  tragedies  which  have  appeared  since  his 
time,  have  no  resemblance  to  his.  The  best,  both 
of  the  former  and  the  latter,  are  framed  after  one 
and  the  same  original ;  and  can  only  be  consi- 
dered as  lifeless  copies  of  the  French  classical  tra- 
gedies. But  those  of  OserofF  belong  to  a  new  dra- 
matic school,  and  approach  nearer  to  what  is  called 
the  romantic  form,  which  the  Germans  have  bor- 
rowed from  the  Spanish  and  Enghsh  writers.  Ose- 
roff,  as  a  tragic  poet,  stands  in  the  annals  of  litera- 
ture indisputably  as  the  surpasser  of  all  his  prede- 
cessors, and  as  a  formidable  rival  for  his  successors 
to  compete  with.  As  a  poet  in  general,  he  has 
characteristics  which  belong  exclusively  to  himself. 
OserofF  the  tragedian  can,  and  must,  be  considered 
the  first-rate  model  of  our  stage.  OserofF  the  poet, 
although  even  as  poet  he  must  unquestionably  be 
classed  also  in  the  foremost  rank,  cannot  and  must 
not  be  regarded  as  a  model.  In  the  beauties  of 
his  style  itself,  he  is  rather  happy  than  obedient  to 
rules.  In  his  verses  there  is  not  that  freedom,  that 
flexibility,  which  lead  the  reader  to  forget  the  la- 
bour of  their  composition ;  and  perhaps  there  are 


318  A  LEXICON  OF 

too  many  traces  to  be  found  in  them  of  the  masters 
from  whom  he  derived  his  lesson.     The  hand  of 
his  childhood  is  visibly  altered  by  the  lapse  of  years, 
but  was  unable  entirely  to  refashion  itself;  and  the 
harshness  of  the  language  of  Knashnin's  time  is  still 
traceable  in  the  poems  of  Oseroff.     But  neverthe- 
less, what  a  power  of  oratory  is  there,  in  which  the 
heart  speaks !   What  truth  and  loyalty  in  the  echoes 
of  his  sensitive  soul !     What  a  fascination  and  en- 
chantment in  the  power  of  his  enthusiastic  expres- 
sions !    What  a  profound  lowliness  of  spirit  not  en- 
thralled to  earth  by  success!  Where  are  more  living 
colours  to  be  found  in  the  descriptive  style  than  in 
his  tragedies  ?   For  instance,  Dmitrj  Donskoj  is  inter- 
woven with  historical  recollections,  and  local  allu- 
sions ;  but  Fingal  stands  alone,  like  a  Pantheon  of 
the  poetry  of  the  North,  and  in  Polixena  a  rich 
variety  of  material  is  borrowed  from  the  Iliad.     On 
this  side  of  the  view,  Oseroff  more  especially  de- 
mands our  applause,  because  he  found  no  model 
for  his  imitation  among  all  the  Russian  writers  who 
preceded  him.     It  is  not  always  in  the  general  ar- 
rangement of  the  whole  picture,  that  we  must  look 
for  evidence  of  the  painter's  genius ;  oftentimes  a 
single  touch  or  stroke,  not  to  be  detected  by  the 
eye  of  the  uninitiated,  discloses  the  secret  to  the 
penetrating  sight  of  an  experienced  observer.     In- 
dependently of  the  many  prosaic  and  rough  lines 
which  are  scattered  through  his  tragedies,  they  are 
on  the  whole  melodious  and  full;  and  it  may  al- 
most be  said,  that  the  best  Alexdrine  verses  in  the 
Russian  language  may  be  found  among  his  works." 
Some  of  Oseroff's  tragedies  have  been   very  co- 


RUSSIAN  AUTHORS.  319 

piously  reviewed  and  criticised  by  MersliikofF,  in 
his  Amphion  and  European  Messenger. 

OsiNSKj,  a  Pole.     Vide  article  Wasemskj. 

OssiPOFF,  author  of  the  iEneid  Travestied.  This 
burlesque  poem  has  much  original  comic  humour. 

OsTOLOPOFF  (Nikolaj  Fodorowitsch),  councillor  of 
state  and  knight,  was  born  in  1782,  at  Solwiitsche- 
godsk,  and  entered  the  Mine  Cadet  Corps.  He 
served  during  the  time  that  Dershawin  and  Dmitri- 
jeff  were  Ministers  of  Justice,  from  1808  to  1812, 
as  Governmental-Procurator  in  Wologda :  from 
1814  to  1819  as  vice-governor  in  the  same:  and 
has  since  been  engaged  in  the  Bureau  of  Public  In- 
struction. He  is  the  author  of,  1.  Thoughts  upon 
Epic  Poetry,  from  Voltaire,  St.  Petersburg,  1802. 

2.  Eugenia,  or  Modern  Education,  a  tale,  1803. 

3.  A  Collection  of  Poems,  under  the  title  of  Early 
Leisure  Hours,  St.  Petersburg,  1816.  4.  The  Mad- 
ness of  Tasso,  translated  from  the  Italian,  St.  Pe- 
tersburg, first  edition,  1809  :  second  edition,  1819. 
5.  A  Lexicon  of  Ancient  and  Modern  Poetry,  in 
three  volumes,  St.  Petersburg,  1 82 1 .  Besides  these, 
he  edited  the  literary  journal.  The  Lover  of  Lite- 
rature. 

OsTROMiR.     See  Grigorj. 

P. 

Palizun.     See  Abraham. 

Pallas  (Peter  Simon),  acting  councillor  of  state 
and  knight,  member  of  numerous  learned  societies, 
was  born  at  Berhn,in  1 741 ;  studied  at  the  University 
of  Leyden,  and  obtained  a  great  reputation  at  that 


320  A  LEXICON  OF 

time  by  his  writings  on  natural  history,  especially 
botany.  In  1768  he  received  a  summons  to  Rus- 
sia, where  he  was  made  an  academician.  He  tra- 
velled through  many  parts  of  Russia  during  six 
years,  until  1773 ;  and  published  an  account  of  his 
travels  from  1771  to  1776,  in  the  German  language. 
His  companion  in  travel  and  assistant  was  the  ad- 
junct SujefF,  who  died  in  1794,  and  who  also  trans- 
lated the  account  of  their  travels  into  Russian. 
Pallas  was  engaged  in  many  useful  and  important 
works  on  the  subjects  of  geography,  statistics,  and 
natural  history.  He  gave  great  assistance  to  Ca- 
therine the  Great  in  the  compilation  of  the  Com- 
parative Lexicon  of  all  Languages  and  Dialects. 
In  1787  he  was  elected  Historiographer  to  the  Col- 
lege of  the  Admiralty ;  and  in  1796  he  retired  to 
Sympheropol.  In  1810  he  travelled  to  Berlin,  at 
which  place  he  died,  on  the  27th  of  August,  in  the 
following  year.  (In  Richter's  Russian  Miscellany, 
vol.  i.  No.  3,  there  is  an  essay,  entitled  The  Wer- 
ther  of  the  Crimea,  extracted  from  IsmailofF's  Tra- 
vels in  South-Russia,  and  which,  as  we  are  informed, 
contains  an  interesting  notice  of  Pallas  and  his  fa- 
mily). 

Pamwa  (Beriinda),  a  hieromonach,  held  a  situa- 
tion under  the  patriarch  of  Jerusalem,  and  was 
architypographer  of  the  Russian  church  at  KiefF. 
He  was  a  native  of  Moldavia,  and  came  to  KiefF  in 
the  beginning  of  the  seventeenth  century,  where 
he  died  in  the  year  1632.  He  published  (after 
Zissani)  The  Second  Russo-Sclavonic  Lexicon,  and 
Explanation  of  Names,  together  with  all  the  words 
borrowed  from  the  Hebrew,  Latin,  and  other  Lan- 


I 


RUSSIAN  AUTHORS.  321 

guages,  etc.     It  was  published  at  the  Subterranean 
Monastery  of  KiefFm  1627,  in  4to. 

Panajeff  (Wladimir  Iwanowitsch),  titular  coun- 
cillor, member  of  several  learned  societies,  was  born 
in  1792,  in  the  government  of  Casan;  visited  the 
Gymnasium  of  Casan,  and  studied  at  the  univer- 
sity there.  After  the  conclusion  of  the  prescribed 
course  of  study,  he  took  the  degree  of  candidate 
in  the  fine  arts.  He  is  at  present  engaged  as  se- 
cretary to  the  commission  for  clerical  schools.  He 
wrote:  1.  Idyls,  St.  Petersburg,  1820;  almost  the 
only  poems  of  this  class  in  the  Russian  language. 
2.  A  Panegyric  on  the  Emperor  Alexander,  Casan, 
1820.  3.  Iwan  Kostin  ;  a  popular  novel,  which  is 
reprinted  in  the  supplementary  sheets  of  Gretsch's 
periodical,  called  The  Son  of  the  Country.  In, 
many  other  journals  may  be  found  his  smaller 
poems,  novels,  panegyrics  upon  the  Prince  Kutu- 
soff-Smolenskj,  on  Dershawin  and  others,  etc. 

Peter  (Mogila),  metropolitan  of  Kieff,  of  Galli- 
cia,  and  all  Little  Russia ;  exarch  to  the  patriarch 
of  Constantinople,  was  born  in  Moldavia  about  1590. 
He  received  his  education  at  Paris,  then  served  in 
the  Polish  army  ;  was  made  a  monk  at  the  KiefF 
lawra  or  monastery  in  1625;  was  elected  archiman- 
drite of  that  monastery  in  1629,  and  in  1633  ele- 
vated to  the  rank  of  a  metropolitan.  He  died  in 
1647.  This  prelate  arranged  and  improved  the 
academy  of  KiefF,  established  there  classes  in  phi- 
losophy and  theology  in  the  Latin  and  Polish  lan- 
guages, obtained  from  the  Polish  government  per- 
mission to  erect  a  printing-press,  invited  many 
learned  men  to  the  academy,  settled  upon  them 


322  A  LEXICON  OF 

some  sources  of  revenue  which  had  hitherto  be- 
longed to  the  metropoUtans,  presented  to  them  his 
Ubrary,  and  earned  with  justice  the  gratitude  of 
this  distinguished  seat  of  education,  which  con- 
tinues to  this  day  the  annual  custom  of  celebrating 
his  commemoration  by  a  panegyrical  oration.  Be- 
sides this,  this  metropolitan  took  great  pains  in 
eradicating  the  false  doctrines  which  had  crept  into 
the  church  of  Little  Russia  from  the  West,  and  in 
furnishing  the  clergy  with  improved  editions  of  the 
church  books.  In  1645  and  1646  he  had  printed 
the  Short  Catechism,  which  he  had  composed  in 
the  Little  Russian  and  Polish  languages,  and  in- 
tended to  publish  the  Biographies  of  the  Saints 
in  the  Sclavonic  language,  but  he  found  himself 
incapacitated  from  putting  his  good  intention  into 
practice.  He  was  the  author  of  a  number  of  verses 
written  in  the  Polish  or  syllabic  metre  with  rhymes; 
but  he  has  been  incorrectly  considered  to  have  been 
the  first  Russian  writer  in  this  kind  of  verse.  The 
same  was  already  known  in  Russia  in  the  sixteenth 
century. 

Petlin  (Iwan),  a  cossack  of  Siberia,  was  sent  in 
1620  from  Tromsk  into  Siberia,  to  inform  himself 
of  the  exact  boundaries  of  the  Russian  empire, 
the  course  of  the  river  Ob,  and  other  points.  Pet- 
lin accomplished  his  mission,  and  wrote  an  account 
of  his  journey.  These  travels  appeared  in  print  in 
the  eleventh  number  of  the  Siberian  Messenger,  St. 
Petersburg,  1818. 

Petroff  (Wassilj  Petrowitsch),  councillor  of  state 
and  member  of  the  Russian  Academy,  was  born  at 
Moscow  in  1736,  where  his  father  was  a  clergy- 


RUSSIAN  AUTHORS.  323 

man.  PetrofF  received  his  education  at  the  Saiko- 
nospaskish  academy,  where  he  made  remarkable 
progress  in  all  branches  of  literature  and  science, 
but  especially  in  the  ancient  and  modern  languages. 
He  soon  attracted  the  particular  notice  of  the  pa- 
trons and  teachers  of  the  place,  by  the  sermons 
which  he  delivered  on  Sundays  in  the  church  of 
the  Saikonospaskish  Monastery.  In  1763  he  wrote 
an  ode  upon  the  feast  which  was  held  at  Moscow 
to  celebrate  the  coronation  of  Catherine  the  Se- 
cond. Prince  Repnin  presented  this  ode  to  the 
Empress,  who  liberally  rewarded  the  author,  and 
promised  not  to  forget  him.  This  distinction  ac- 
quired him  the  acquaintance  of  many  of  the  great 
people,  and  especially  of  Prince  Potemkin,  who  con- 
tinued to  his  death  to  be  his  benefactor.  In  1769 
he  was  appointed  translator  to  the  cabinet,  with 
the  rank  of  titular  councillor,  and  was  made  reader 
to  the  Empress.  In  1778  he  was  sent  at  his  own 
request  to  England,  where  he  had  the  tact  to  con- 
ciliate the  friendship  and  regard  of  some  of  the 
most  distinguished  Englishmen.  Till  1784  he  con- 
tinued his  travels  in  different  countries  of  Europe, 
and  after  his  return  to  St.  Petersburg  he  found  him- 
self appointed  librarian  to  the  Empress.  Ill  health 
compelled  him  to  relinquish  all  his  appointments ; 
and  in  1790  he  was  excused  from  all  public  service, 
retiring  with  the  rank  of  collegiate  councillor,  and 
the  continuation  of  his  salary ;  upon  which  he  went 
to  settle  in  the  Governmental  Department  of  Orel. 
Even  there  however  the  Empress  did  not  forget  to 
shower  her  favours  upon  him ;  she  promoted  him 

t'le  rank  of  councillor  of  state.     In  his  country 
y2 


324  A  LEXICON  OF 

retreat  he  occupied  himself  with  poetry,  science, 
and  agriculture.  In  the  winter  of  each  year  he 
went  to  Moscow,  where  he  regularly  visited  the 
library  of  the  Saikonospaskish  Monastery.  At  the 
age  of  sixty  he  began  learning  the  modern  Greek 
language.  The  news  of  the  death  of  his  patron, 
Potemkin,  and  his  benefactress,  Catherine,  threw 
him  into  deep  affliction.  He  died  on  the  4th  of 
December,  1799.  PetrofF's  works  were  printed  en- 
tire in  1811,  in  three  parts,  8vo.  They  contain 
festival  odes  on  the  victories,  treaties,  and  other 
celebrations  of  the  times  of  Catherine  and  Paul ; 
besides  epistles  to  various  friends,  etc.  Besides 
these,  he  translated  Virgil's  JEneid,  in  metre,  which 
was  published  at  St.  Petersburg,  in  two  parts,  1781 
and  1786.  Merslakoff  says  of  the  merits  of  this 
poet, "  Petroff 's  odes  are  extremely  beautiful.  They 
distinguish  themselves  from  all  others  by  their  being 
full  of  powerful  thoughts  most  brieJEly  expressed. 
PetrofF  is  a  poet-philosopher.  Perhaps  he  might  be 
compared  with  Lomonossoff,  if  his  style  were  more 
polished.  He  abounds  moreover  in  splendid  and 
fiery  delineations.  Lomonossoff  is  often  a  simple 
and  open  flatterer.  PetrofF  possessed  the  rare  and 
proper  art  of  administering  praise.  His  language 
moreover  is  not  universally  rough  and  uncultivated. 
There  are  entire  odes  which  are  written  in  flowing 
and  melodious  verses." 

PetrofF  (F.),  a  living  poet  at  Irkutsch,  in  Siberia. 
He  has  translated  Goethe's  poem,  Der  Todten  Tanz, 
or  Dance  of  Death;  and  written  some  original  pieces. 

Philaret,  whose  secular  name  was  Wassilj  Dros- 
dofF,  archbishop  of  Moscow  and  Kolomna,  archi- 


RUSSIAN  AUTHORS.  325 

mandrite  of  the  Sergian  Monastery  of  Troizka, 
knight  of  many  orders,  member  of  the  Holy  Di- 
recting Synod,  of  the  Commission  for  Superintend- 
ing Places  of  Religious  Education,  of  the  Upper 
School  Directory,  of  the  Russian  Academy,  and 
several  other  learned  societies  ;  was  born  in  the 
year  1782,  at  Kolomna,  where  his  father,  Michael 
Fodorowitsch,  was  protoijerej  at  the  cathedral  of 
the  Ascension  of  the  Virgin.  He  studied  first  at  the 
Seminary  of  Kolomna,  and  afterwards  at  that  of  the 
Sergian  Monastery.  In  the  last,  where  he  officiated 
also  as  a  teacher,  he  attracted,  by  his  remarkable 
talents,  the  notice  of  the  most  reverend  metropoli- 
tan, Platon;  and  in  1806  he  was  appointed  preacher 
at  the  Sergian  Monastery  of  Troizka.  In  the  year 
1810  he  was  translated  to  the  Academy  of  Alex- 
ander Newskj  at  St.  Petersburg,  as  bachelor  of  the 
theological  science,  and  in  1811  made  archiman- 
drite, and  in  1812  rector  of  that  academy.  In  1817 
he  was  made  bishop  of  Reval,  and  vicar  of  St.  Pe- 
tersburg ;  in  1819  archbishop  of  Twer,  and  member 
of  the  Holy  Synod  ;  in  1820  bishop  of  Jarosslaw  ; 
and  in  1821  of  Moscow.  Of  his  works,  which  fre- 
quently received  the  signal  approbation  of  the  Em- 
peror himself,  and  which  are  in  use  part  in  the  cle- 
rical and  part  in  the  ordinary  schools,  the  follow- 
ing have  been  published :  1.  Conversations  between 
a  Sceptic  and  a  Believer  upon  the  True  Doc- 
trines of  the  Greek-Russian  Church,  St.  Petersburg, 
1815.  2.  A  Sketch  of  Bibhcal  History,  St.  Pe- 
tersburg, 1816  :  second  edition,  1819.  3.  Remarks 
upon  the  Book  of  Genesis,  St.  Petersburg,  1816 
and  1819.     4.  An  Attempt  at  an  Explanation  of 


326  A  LEXICON  OF 

the  Sixty-seventh  Psahn,  St.  Petersburg,  1814.  5. 
Sermons,  preached  and  printed  at  various  times, 
published  collectively  at  St.  Petersburg,  1820.  6. 
A  Selection  from  the  Four  Evangelists  and  the 
Acts  of  the  Apostles,  for  the  use  of  the  ordinary 
schools ;  published  by  the  Upper  School  Direc- 
tory at  St.  Petersburg,  1820.  A  translation  of  this 
has  been  published  in  England.  7.  A  Selection 
from  the  Historical  Books  of  the  Old  Testament ; 
which  is  submitted  to  the  consideration  of  the  Up- 
per School  Directory,  but  not  yet  printed.  8.  Con- 
siderations on  the  Moral  Causes  of  the  Incredible 
Progress  and  Advances  of  Russians  in  the  War  of 
1812.  9.  Many  Sermons,  which  have  been  written 
since  the  appearance  of  the  former  collection,  have 
been  published  at  different  times  at  St.  Petersburg 
and  Moscow.  Some  of  them  have  been  translated 
into  foreign  languages. 

Photj(us),  metropolitan  of  Kieff"  and  all  Russia, 
a  Greek  by  birth,  was  consecrated  to  this  dignity 
in  the  year  1410,  and  afterwards  came  to  Moscow. 
He  died  in  1431.  Of  his  works.  Sixteen  Discourses 
for  Edification,  addressed  to  the  princes  and  bo- 
jars,  and  to  the  entire  clerical,  secular,  and  monas- 
tic population,  have  descended  to  our  time.  A 
very  perfect  manuscript  of  these  discourses  is  pre- 
served in  the  Library  of  St.  Sophia  at  Novogorod. 
Many  epistles  of  Photj  are  also  to  be  found  in  the 
Synodal  Library  at  Moscow. 

PiKETOFF,  author  of  the  Pantheon  of  Russian 
Writers,  in  which  he  gives  biographical  sketches 
of  some  of  the  best  writers  of  his  country. 

PissAREFF  (Alexander  Alexandrowitsch),  a  major- 


RUSSIAN  AUTHORS.  327 

general,  and  knight  of  several  Russian  and  foreign 
orders,  member  of  the  Russian  Academy,  of  the 
Society  for  the  Lovers  of  the  Russian  Language, 
and  numerous  other  learned  bodies,  was  born  at 
St.  Petersburg  in  the  year  1782.  He  received  his 
education  in  the  Land  Cadet  Corps,  from  which  he 
was  removed  into  the  army  as  second-lieutenant  in 
1796.  In  1797  he  was  transferred  to  the  SemenofF 
regiment  of  guards,  served  in  that  corps  till  he  at- 
tained the  rank  of  general  in  1813,  and  took  part 
in  all  the  important  campaigns  and  battles  in  which 
the  guards  and  the  grenadier-regiment  were  en- 
gaged. He  at  present  is  in  command  of  the  gre- 
nadier brigade  at  Kaluga.  Besides  his  original  pro- 
ductions and  translations,  which  have  appeared  in 
the  different  periodicals,  the  following  works  are 
from  his  pen :  1.  Subjects  for  Painters,  taken  from 
the  Russian  History,  from  the  Sclavonic  Theology, 
and  from  Russian  writers  in  verse  and  prose,  two 
parts,  St.  Petersburg,  1807.  2.  A  Sketch  of  the 
Fine  Arts,  or  Rules  for  Painting,  Sculpture,  En- 
graving, and  Architecture,  with  an  Appendix  con- 
taining various  fragments,  in  relation  to  the  fine 
arts,  St.  Petersburg,  1819.  3.  General  Rules  for 
the  Theatre,  selected  from  the  complete  collection 
of  Voltaire's  works,  St.  Petersburg,  1809.  4.  Mi- 
litary Letters  and  Remarks,  relating  chiefly  to  the 
memorable  year  of  1812,  and  to  its  consequences, 
two  parts,  Moscow,  1817. 

Platon  (Beffschin),  metropolitan  of  Moscow, 
archimandrite  of  the  Sergian  Monastery  of  Troizka, 
and  knight  of  numerous  orders,  was  born  on  the 
29th  of  June,  1 737,  at  the  estate  of  Tschaschnikowa, 


328  A  LEXICON  OF 

near  Moscow,  where  his  father  was  the  clergyman. 
Platon  studied  at  the  Academy  of  Moscow,  and  in 
1757  was  appointed  there  as  a  teacher.     In  1758 
he  entered  the  monastic  order,  and  was  nominated 
prefect  of  the  Lawra  Seminary,  and  soon  afterwards 
rector  of  the  same.     Catherine  the  Second  became 
acquainted  with  his  worth,  when  at  her  visit  to  the 
Lawra  he  received  her  with  a  congratulatory  ad- 
dress, and  preached  a  sermon  in  her  presence ;  she 
selected  him  to  be  religious  instructor  to  the  heir 
to  the  throne,  and  to  be  preacher  to  the  court. 
He  filled  this  post  for  about  four  years.     In  1766 
he  was  raised  to  the  dignity  of  archimandrite  of  the 
Sergian  Monastery ;  in  1 768  made  a  member  of  the 
Holy  Synod,  and  in  1770  promoted  to  be  arch- 
bishop of  Twer.     In  1773  he  instructed  in  the  Rus- 
sian-Greek religion  the  Princess  of  Hesse  Darm- 
stadt, Natalia  Alexejewna,  the    first  wife  of  the 
Grand  Prince  Paul  Petrowitsch;  and  in  1776  his 
second  wife,  the  late  Empress'  mother,  Maria  Feo- 
dorowna.     In   1775   he  was  made  archbishop  of 
Moscow,  was  intrusted  with  the  superintendence 
of  the  Moscow  Academy,  and  in  1787  was  raised 
to  the  dignity  of  metropolitan.    The  Emperor  Paul 
the  First  adorned  him  with  the  diamond  orders  of 
St.  Andrew  and  St.  Alexander.    In  1801  he  crowned 
the  Emperor  Alexander  the  First;  in  1809  he  be- 
came knight  of  the  order  of  St.  Wladimir,  first  class; 
in  1811  he  asked  permission  to  resign  his  official 
dignities  and  duties,  and  lived  afterwards  at  his  mo- 
nastery of  Bethania,  where  he  had  already  founded 
an  academy  as  early  as  1797.     In  1812,  just  before 
the  invasion  of  the  French,  he  hastened  to  Moscow, 


RUSSIAN  AUTHORS.  329 

and  encouraged  the  Russians  by  his  eloquent  ha- 
rangue to  be  firm  against  their  foes.  He  died  on 
the  11th  of  November  in  the  same  year,  and  was 
buried  at  his  favourite  monastery.  Platon  belongs 
to  the  number  of  the  most  voluminous  writers,  and 
most  distinguished  preachers.  His  works  are  as  fol- 
lows :  1 .  A  vast  number  of  clerical  discourses,  sermons, 
gratulatory  orations,  etc. ;  which  occupy  as  many 
as  sixteen  volumes  in  the  collection  of  his  works. 

2.  An  Admonition  to  the  Rasskolniks,  composed 
and  printed  by  desire  of  the  Empress,  1766,  which 
is  to  be  found  in  the  sixth  volume  of  his  works. 

3.  Instructions  to  the  Clerical  Inspectors,  Moscow, 
1775.  4.  A  Short  Catechism  for  the  Instruction 
of  Children.  5.  A  Short  Catechism  for  the  Use  of 
Priests  and  the  Servants  of  the  Church.  6.  Ortho- 
dox Doctrines,  or  A  Sketch  of  Christian  Theology, 
composed  for  the  use  of  the  Grand  Prince  Paul  Pe- 
trowitsch,  St.  Petersburg,  1 765.  This  book  has  been 
translated  into  Latin,  German,  (by  Rodde,  Leipsic, 
1770),  English,  French,  Greek,  Armenian,  and 
Georgian.  7.  A  Catechism,  or  First  Instructions 
in  the  Christian  Religion,  the  substance  of  which 
he  delivered  publicly  at  the  Moscow  Academy, 
from  1753  to  1756,  2  vols.  8.  The  Biography  of 
St.  Sergius,  the  Radonischian  worker  of  miracles. 
9.  A  Short  Russian  Church  History,  two  parts, 
Moscow,  1805.  10.  Memorandums  of  a  Journey 
through  the  Governments  of  White  and  Little  Rus- 

Isia  to  Kieff,  in  the  year  1804.  The  collected  works 
of  the  worthy  Platon  were  pubHshed  in  twenty  vo- 
lumes at  Moscow  (from  1779  to  1807),  besides 
two  later  editions.     The  most  venerable  Eugenj, 


330  A  LEXICON  OF 

in  his  Attempt  at  a  Historical  Dictionary  of  Russian 
Authors  of  the  Clerical  Order,  says,  §  561,  of  Pla- 
ton,  "  Of  his  writings,  the  following  may  fairly  be 
considered  the  best :    The  Sketch  of  Theology ; 
The  Instructions  to  the  Inspectors;   The  Exhorta- 
tion to  the  Rasskolniks ;  The  Short  Catechisms ; 
and  many  of  his  sermons  and  discourses."     He 
continues,  by  quoting  Platon's  own  words  relative 
to  the  plan  and  principles  he  followed  in  the  com- 
position of  his  sermons,  and  afterwards  thus  pro- 
ceeds :  "  It  may  be  here  remarked,  that  in  so  great 
a  number  of  sermons  as  were  delivered  by  this  ta- 
lented preacher,  and  from  the  necessity  of  treating 
the  same  subjects  over  and  over  again,  it  is  not 
reasonable   to  expect  always  the  same  attention 
to  invention,  arrangement,  and  ornament  in  the 
arguments ;  and  it  is  difficult  to  avoid  occasional 
repetitions  of  the  same  ideas.     The  most  accom- 
plished preachers  accordingly  have  not  escaped  this 
fault,  of  whose  sermons  not  many,  much  less  all, 
can  be  cited  as  perfect  models  of  eloquence.     The 
first  sermons  of  Platon,  delivered  before  the  court, 
are  remarkable  for  their  sublimity  and  fulness  of 
original  thoughts ;    the  later  ones,   on  the  other 
hand,  for  their  rich  unction.     To  cite  one  parti- 
cular instance,  we  would  wish  to  call  attention  to 
the  gratulatory  discourse  which  he  preached  after 
the  coronation  of  Alexander,  which  will  ever  re- 
main an  undying  memorial  of  his  peculiar  gifts  in 
sublimity  and  truth  of  conception,  in  masterly  ar- 
rangement of  his  subject,  and  in  powerful  and  yet 
elegant  expression." 

Plawilschtschikoff  (Peter  Alexejewitsch),  son 


RUSSIAN  AUTHORS.  331 

of  a  merchant  of  Moscow,  was  born  in  1760,  stu- 
died at  the  University  of  Moscow,  and  chose  when 
twenty  years  old  the  profession  of  an  actor  at  the 
imperial  theatre  of  St.  Petersburg.  He  soon  made 
himself  known  by  his  talents,  and  knew  how  to  at- 
tain the  favour  of  the  Empress,  which  she  fre- 
quently signified  to  him  by  applause  and  by  hand- 
some presents.  In  1793  he  went  to  the  Moscow 
theatre  ;  and  in  1811  he  was  elected  a  member  of 
the  Moscow  Society  of  the  Lovers  of  Russian  Lite- 
rature. He  died  in  October,  1812,  in  the  flight 
from  the  desolated  Moscow.  This  distinguished 
actor  was  also  a  highly-talented  author.  His  works 
are  ;  tragedies  :  1.  Rurik,  in  five  acts,  in  verse.  2. 
Tachmass-Kulii  Khan,  in  five  acts.  3.  Jermak, 
in  five  acts,  in  prose.  Comedies,  in  prose  :  1.  The 
Brothers  Swojeladoff,  in  five  acts.  2.  The  Peasant 
without  Land,  in  five  acts.  3.  The  Shopman,  in 
four  acts.  4.  The  Miller  and  the  Sbit-seller  as  Ri- 
vals, in  one  act.  5.  Kutwikin's  Betrothal,  in  one 
act.  Dramas  :  4.  Count  Waltron,  in  five  acts ;  an 
imitation  of  the  German  play  of  the  same  name. 
2.  Lenssa,  or  The  Savages  in  America,  in  two  acts. 
Besides  these,  PlawilschtschikofF  was  the  author  of 
many  lyrical  and  other  poems,  as  well  as  some  per- 
formances in  prose  ;  among  which  the  answer  to  a 
question  proposed  by  the  Moscow  Society  of  the 
Friends  of  Russian  Literature,  "  Upon  the  peculiar 
characteristics  of  the  ancient  Greek  theatre,"  de- 
serves especial  mention. 

Pleschtschejeff  (Sergj  Iwanowitsch),  acting 
privy  councillor  and  knight,  was  born  at  Moscow 
in  1752,  and  educated  in  England.     He  served  in 


332  A  LEXICON  OF 

the  fleet  in  the  first  Turkish  war,  was  afterwards 
removed  into  the  diplomatic  service,  and  was  em- 
ployed as  secretary  by  the  Emperor  Paul  the  First 
while  he  was  still  Grand  Prince.  In  the  last  years 
of  his  life  he  was  director  of  the  Foundling-House. 
For  the  benefit  of  his  health,  he  travelled  into 
southern  climates,  and  died  at  Montpelier,  January, 
1802.  He  was  the  author  of  the  first  detailed  and 
full  account  of  the  statistics  of  Russia,  by  the  title 
of,  A  Survey  of  the  Russian  Empire  in  its  Present 
and  Newly-organised  Condition,  printed  at  St.  Pe- 
tersburg in  1790.  This  book  was  translated  into 
several  foreign  languages.  In  1773  he  published 
A  Journal  of  his  Travels  from  the  Island  of  Paros 
to  Syria,  which  he  completed  about  the  end  of  the 
year  1772. 

Pletneff,  author  of  the  work.  General  Charac- 
teristics of  the  Russian  Poets,  has  trodden  in  the 
footsteps  of  MerslakofF.  Among  his  poems  is  the 
elegy  Miinnich,  which,  is  considered  his  best  pro- 
duction. 

Pnin  (Iwan  Petrowitsch),  collegiate  councillor, 
member  and.  president  of  the  St.  Petersburg  Society 
of  the  Lovers  of  Literature,  Sciences,  and  Arts, 
was  born  in  1773,  and  educated  in  the  school  for 
young  nobles  attached  to  the  Moscow  University, 
and  in  the  Engineer  Cadet  Corps.  At  first  he 
entered  the  artillery,  but  in  1797  removed  into  the 
civil  service;  in  1803  he  was  appointed  an  assist- 
ant in  the  newly-instituted  department  of  Public 
Instruction;  and  in  1805  he  retired  from  service. 
He  died  on  the  17th  of  September,  1805.  In  the 
year  1798  he  was  editor  of  the  St.   Petersburg 


RUSSIAN  AUTHORS.  333 

Journal,  four  parts.  His  labours  in  prose  and 
verse  are  to  be  found  in  various  periodicals,  and 
the  most  remarkable  of  his  poems  is  The  Ode  to 
Justice.  He  was  also  the  author  of  several  books: 
1.  An  Essay  on  the  Spread  of  Enlightenment,  con- 
sidered with  regard  to  Russia.  2.  The  Complaint 
of  Innocence  oppressed  by  the  Laws.  3.  On  the 
Arousing  of  Patriotism.  And  4.  The  first  act  of 
a  drama,  called  Belisarius.  Which  works  however 
have  not  yet  been  printed. 

PoDOBADOFF.     See  Amwrossj. 

PoDSCHiwALOFF  (Wassilj  Scrgcjewitsch),  coun- 
cillor of  state  and  knight,  was  born  at  Moscow,  on 
the  2nd  of  March,  1 765.  His  father  was  a  dismissed 
soldier.  The  young  Podschiwaloff,  after  he  had 
received  some  lessons  in  reading  from  a  djatschok 
or  minister  of  the  church,  was  placed  in  the  Uni- 
versity Gymnasium;  in  1782  he  was  made  a  stu- 
dent, and  shortly  afterwards  appointed  a  teacher 
in  the  Russian  language  and  logic.  In  1785  he  re- 
ceived an  appointment  in  the  Moscow  archives  of 
the  College  of  Foreign  Affairs,  and  was  engaged 
there  until  1795.  At  that  period  he  became  cen- 
sor and  assistant  to  the  Upper  Inspector  of  the 
Moscow  Foundling-House.  In  1800  he  went  with 
the  rank  of  imperial  councillor  to  act  as  director 
of  the  Trade-School,  which  w^as  newly  removed  to 
St.  Petersburg.  In  1810,  being  allowed  to  give  up 
this  place  with  a  retiring  pension,  he  was  appointed 
President  of  the  Civil  Court  in  Wladimir,  where 
he  died,  on  the  31st  of  July,  1813.  Podschiwaloff 
occupied  himself  from  his  youth  up  with  literature, 
particularly  in  the  Meeting,  or  Union  of  the  Pupils 


3S4>  A  LEXICON  OF 

of  the  University,  which  issued  many  periodical  pub- 
lications, as  1.  The  Twilight.  2.  The  Industrious 
Man.  3.  Lectures  on  Taste,  Intelligence,  and  Feel- 
ing. From  the  year  1 794  he  himself  edited  the  jour- 
nal called  Agreeable  and  Useful  Pastime.  Afterwards 
his  necessary  business  prevented  him  from  engaging 
much  in  literature.  Nevertheless,  in  later  years  he 
began,  1.  To  write  his  autobiography,  under  the  title 
For  My  Children,  which  is  reprinted  in  Gretsch's 
Manual  of  Literature,  vol.  ii.  p.  12.  2.  He  com- 
posed A  Treatise  on  the  Russian  Alphabet,  printed 
in  the  fifth  part  of  the  publications  of  the  Moscow 
Society  for  the  Lovers  of  Russian  Literature.  And 
3.  A  Description  of  all  the  several  kinds  of  Poetry, 
etc.  After  his  death  a  number  of  minor  poems 
were  discovered  among  his  papers.  Of  his  transla- 
tions, the  following  are  known  :  1 .  A  Short  Psych- 
ology, or  Doctrine  of  the  Human  Soul,  from  Campe, 
Moscow,  1789.  2.  The  Book  of  Wisdom  and  Vir- 
tue, or  The  Condition  of  Human  Life,  Moscow, 
1794.  3.  Bianca  Capello,.  from  Meissner,  Moscow, 
1793.  4.  Meissner's  Novels,  three  parts,  Moscow, 
1803.  PodschiwalofF  does  not  so  much  merit  the 
grateful  acknowledgments  of  posterity  on  account 
of  any  classical  works  of  his  composition,  as  by  his 
zealous  and  felicitous  cultivation  of  the  public  taste, 
and  the  fineness  of  style  which  he  adopted  in  his 
department  of  Russian  literature.  In  his  time  he 
was  considered,  and  with  justice,  the  best  trans- 
lator. His  original  compositions,  inserted  in  the 
journals  which  he  himself  edited,  are  distinguished 
by  acuteness  of  thought,  refinement  of  feeling,  and 
a  regularity  and  agreeable  elegance  of  style. 


RUSSIAN  AUTHORS.  335 

PoLiKARP.     See  Simon. 

PoLiKARPOFF  (Feodor),  corrector  of  the  clerical 
press  in  Moscow,  was  author  of  a  Sclavonic-Greek 
and  Latin  Lexicon,  which  was  printed  at  Moscow 
in  1704;  and  in  1721  a  Sclavonic  Grammar  also 
appeared  in  his  name,  which  he  derived  principally 
from  the  works  of  Smotrizkj. 

PoLozKJ.     See  Symeon. 

PopoFF  (Michael),  editor  of  the  Russian  Errata, 
in  three  parts,  8vo.  St.  Petersburg,  1792.  This 
work  is  one  of  the  best  collections  of  Russian  songs. 
See  article  RumanzofF;  and  article  L'wofF. 

PopoFSKj  (Nikolaj  Nikititsch),  was  born  in  the 
year  1 730.  The  exact  particulars  of  his  education 
are  not  known.  The  first  remarkable  circumstance 
of  which  we  are  aware  respecting  him,  is,  that  Lo- 
monossoff,  struck  by  his  translation  of  Pope's  Es- 
say on  Man,  requested  J.  J.  SchuwalofF  to  extend 
his  protection  towards  him.  Popofskj  was  soon 
afterwards,  on  the  2nd  of  May,  1756,  elected  a  pro- 
fessor at  the  University  of  Moscow,  where  he  was 
the  first  professor  who  began  to  deliver  lectures  on 
philosophy.  He  was  also  the  first  rector  of  the 
University  Gymnasium,  and  the  first  editor  of  the 
Moscow  newspaper.  He  died  however  as  early  as 
the  year  1760.  Besides  the  above-mentioned  Essay 
on  Man,  of  which  three  editions  have  appeared,  viz. 
that  of  1757,  1787,  and  1802,  he  translated,  1.  The 
Epistle  to  the  Pisos,  and  some  of  the  Odes  of  Ho- 
race. 2.  Locke's  work  upon  Education,  two  parts, 
1759  and  1788.  He  wrote  also  two  orations:  1. 
On  the  Uses  and  Importance  of  Philosophy;  which 
he  delivered  at  the  opening  of  the  philosophical 


33G  A  LEXICON  OF 

lectures  in  the  university.  2.  A  Celebration  Dis- 
course, on  the  day  of  the  coronation  of  the  Em- 
press EHzabeth,  1759;  in  which  oration  he  displays 
his  clear  intelligence,  fine  taste,  and  the  art,  so 
uncommon  at  that  early  period,  of  writing  in  pure 
and  correct  prose.  Before  his  death  he  burnt  his 
uncompleted  translations  of  Titus  Livius,  of  Ana- 
creon,  and  others,  because  he  judged  them  unworthy 
of  being  handed  down  to  posterity.  Upon  the 
whole  it  must  be  said,  that  Popofskj  deserves  re- 
membrance less  on  account  of  what  he  actually  ac- 
complished, than  of  what  he  might  have  accom- 
plished, had  not  a  premature  death  deprived  us  of 
his  talents. 

Prokopowitsch.     See  Feofan. 

Protassoff.     See  Amwrossj. 

PucHMAYER  (Autou  JarosslafF),  catholic  clergy- 
man at  Radniz  in  Bohemia,  published  in  1820  A 
Manual  of  the  Russian  Language,  in  imitation  of 
the  Abbe  Dobrowsky's  Instructions  for  the  Bohe- 
mian Language,  at  the  expense  of  the  Bohemian 
National  Museum  at  Prague,  in  large  8vo.  And  the 
learned  abbot  Joseph  Dobrowsky,  to  whom  Scla- 
vonic literature  is  so  much  indebted,  accompanied 
this  work  with  a  preface. 

PuscHKiN  (Alexander  Ssergejewitsch),  collegiate 
secretary,  was  born  on  the  26th  of  May,  1799,  at 
St.  Petersburg,  and  brought  up  at  the  Imperial 
Lyceum,  from  which  he  removed  in  1817,  and  was 
placed  in  the  College  for  the  Administration  of  Fo- 
reign Affairs.  In  the  year  1820  he  entered  the 
chancery  of  the  lieutenant-general  InsofF,  governor 
of  Bessarabia.     Puschkin  is  the  author  of  several 


RUSSIAN  AUTHORS.  337 

lyric  poems,  but  his  most  remarkable  poetical  work 
is  the  romantic  poem  called  Russian  and  Ludmila, 
which  was  printed  at  St.  Petersburg  in  1820.  In 
this  poem,  consisting  of  six  cantos,  which  paints 
the  heroic  age  of  Russia  at  KiefF,  an  unwonted 
poetical  spirit,  fancy,  and  taste  are  displayed,  which 
promise  under  favourable  circumstances  to  be  pro- 
ductive of  the  richest  fruits.  A  later  poem  of  his 
is  the  Prisoner  of  the  Caucasus.  In  1824  this  was 
published,  together  with  a  German  translation,  at 
St.  Petersburg.  Another  translation,  published  at 
the  same  place  in  1826,  bears  the  title  of  The  Berg- 
gefangene,  or  The  Mountain  Prisoner,  translated 
from  the  Russian  by  A.  Wulffert.  In  this  poem  is 
introduced  a  Tscherkessian  song,  which  the  au- 
thor of  the  present  Lexicon  inserted  in  the  New 
Breslaw  Newspaper  for  the  17th  of  September, 
1825.  The  last  production  of  his  muse,  which  in 
point  of  internal  merit  far  surpasses  all  his  earlier 
works,  bears  the  title  of  The  Well  of  Baktschissa- 
rai,  a  poem  of  600  lines  long,  for  which  a  book- 
seller at  Moscow  has  paid  him  the  liberal  sum 
of  3000  roubles.  The  contents  of  this  poem  are  to 
be  found  accurately  described  and  discussed  in  Nos. 
231—240  of  the  Newspaper  for  the  Polite  World 
{Zeitungfiir  die  Elegante  Welt)  for  the  year  1825. 
Puschkin  died  at  St.  Petersburg,  on  the  1 0th  of  Fe- 
bruary, 1837,  of  a  shot-wound  in  the  breast  re- 
ceived in  a  duel,  from  his  brother-in-law,  D'Authes, 
Baron  von  Heckeren,  the  adopted  son  of  the  Dutch 
ambassador  at  St.  Petersburg.  The  duel  was  oc- 
casioned by  family  broils,  and  by  the  imputed  infi- 


338  A  LEXICON  OF 

delity  of  the  wife  of  one  of  the  parties  with  the 
other.     Puschkin  found  himself  placed  in  such  a 
situation,  that  to  redeem  his  honour  he  considered 
himself  bound  to  challenge  von  Heckeren.     Alex- 
ander Bestuscheff  says  of  this  admired  Russian 
poet,  "  While   yet   a  child  he   sxirprised   by  the 
manly  vigour  of  his  style  ;  the  mines  of  his  mother 
tongue  laid  themselves  open  to  the  rising  youth, 
and  poured  forth  to  him  the  magic  stores  of  poetry. 
Each  of  his  works  bears  the  stamp  of  originality  ; 
each  one  leaves  an  impression  on  the  memory  or  the 
feeling  of  the  reader.     Puschkin's  thoughts  are  full 
of  acuteness,  bold  and  fiery ;  his  language  is  clear 
and  well-regulated,  the  tones  of  his  verses  are  very 
music.     They  flow  like  pearls  over  velvet,  to  avail 
myself  of  a  genuine  Russian  simile.     Two  of  the 
poems  of  this  young  bard,  Russian  and  Ludmila, 
and  the  Prisoner  of  Caucasus,  are  especially  full  of 
maiden  charms.     The  last,  composed  on  the  green 
hillock  of  Ovid's  tomb,  within  sight  of  the  silver- 
hoary  Caucasus,  glitters  with  the  richest  store  of 
fancy,  and  with  the  peculiar  beauties  of  the  local 
splendours  of  the  natural  scene.     Inequality  in  the 
plan,  and  the  drawing  of  some  of  the  characters, 
are  his  principal  faults,  which  he  possesses  in  com- 
mon with  all  poets,  who  have  equalled  him  in  fire, 
and  been  carried  away  by  their  imagination."    An- 
other publication  in  which  he  took  the  principal 
share,  was  The  Insurrection  of  the  Poles  and  the 
Fall  of  Warsaw,  in   three  cantos,  by  Alexander 
Puschkin,  W.  Schukofskj,  and  ChomjakofF,  St.  Pe- 
tersburg.    One  of  the  cantos  of  this  trilogy  is  su- 


RUSSIAN  AUTHORS.  339 

perscribed  To  Russia's  Defamers.  At  the  same 
time  his  historical  tragedy,  which  is  by  some  con- 
sidered his  masterpiece,  was  published. 

PuscHKiN  (Wassilj  L'wowitsch),  collegiate  asses- 
sor, member  of  several  learned  societies,  was  born 
at  Moscow  on  the  17th  of  April,  1770,  and  edu- 
cated in  his  parents'  house.  He  served  as  lieutenant 
in  the  IsmailofF  regiment  of  guards.  In  1797  he 
retired  from  the  service,  and  went  to  live  at  Moscow. 
From  this  time  forth  literature  and  science  were 
his  only  occupation  and  amusement.  In  1801  he 
travelled  abroad ;  and  on  his  return  applied  him- 
self again  with  redoubled  assiduity  to  his  former 
pursuits.  His  acquaintance  with  Dershawin,  Dmi- 
trijefF,  and  Karamsin,  sustained  his  love  of  htera- 
ture.  His  first  work.  An  Epistle  at  the  Fireside, 
was  printed  in  the  St.  Petersburg  Mercury  in  1793. 
At  Paris  he  became  acquainted  with  the  first  French 
writers  of  the  day,  as  Sicard,  De  Lille,  St.  Pierre, 
Legouvier,  Michaud,  and  others ;  and  as  he  wished 
to  make  them  acquainted  with  the  ancient  Russian 
literature,  he  translated  several  old  Russian  songs 
into  French,  which  were  printed  in  the  French 
Mercury,  and  received  with  general  applause.  In 
London  he  occupied  himself  with  the  English  lan- 
guage, and  translated  some  considerable  specimens 
of  Thomson's  Seasons.  Puschkin  wrote  a  number 
of  lyrical  and  didactic  poems,  chiefly  fables  and 
epistles,  which  are  distinguished  by  their  hghtness, 
regularity,  and  agreeableness  of  style,  and  by  their 
sublimity  of  thought  and  feeling.  He  was  sub- 
sequently engaged  in  making  a  collection  of  his 
works. 

z2 


340  A  LEXICON  OF 


R. 

Raitsch  (A.),  translator  of  Virgil's  Georgics,  181 
pages,  Moscow,  1821  ;  and  of  Tasso's  Jerusalem 
Delivered ;  of  which  last  a  specimen  is  printed  in 
the  Son  of  the  Country,  the  periodical  edited  by 
Gretsch. 

Remesoff  (Semen),  an  inhabitant  of  Tobolsk, 
composed  a  Short  Siberian  and  Kungurian  Lato- 
piss,  or  Chronicle,  with  designs,  which  extends  to 
the  year  1649.  This  book,  which  Miiller  used  in 
the  composition  of  his  History  of  Siberia,  is  filled 
up  with  a  number  of  Mahrchen,  or  old  traditional 
tales.  A  manuscript  copy  of  it  is  preserved  in  the 
Library  of  the  Academy  of  Sciences. 

RiCHTER  (Wilhelm  Michailowitsch),  emeiitus  pro- 
fessor at  the  University  of  Moscow,  physician  in  or- 
nary  and  president  of  the  Moscow  Society  for  Me- 
dical and  Physical  Science,  acting  councillor  of  state, 
and  knight,  was  born  at  Moscow,  November  28th, 
1767.  He  was  educated  at  the  Gymnasium  at 
Reval,  and  at  the  University  of  Moscow.  After- 
wards he  travelled  in  foreign  countries  to  perfect 
himself  in  the  practice  and  theory  of  medicine. 
From  1790  he  was  engaged  in  the  service  of  the 
university.  He  wrote  in  the  German  and  Russian 
languages,  A  History  of  the  Medical  Science  in 
Russia,  three  parts,  printed  at  Moscow,  from  1814 
to  1820.  Besides  this,  many  works  of  his  on  phy- 
sical and  medical  subjects  have  been  pubhshed  in 
various  languages. 

RiLEJEFF,  born  in  1795,  is  the  author  of  the  His- 


RUSSIAN  AUTHORS.  341 

torical  Hymns,  in  which  the  great  actions  of  the 
ancestors  of  his  fellow-countrymen  are  celebrated. 

RoDDE  (Jacob),  a  German,  secretary  and  trans- 
lator to  a  high  official  councillor  in  the  imperial 
town  of  Riga,  wrote,  1.  A  Russian  Grammar,  1773, 
first  edition:  1784,  second  edition:  1789,  third  edi- 
tion ;  together  with  Tales  for  Translating,  and  Dia- 
logues. 2.  A  Russo-German  and  German-Russian 
Dictionary,  Riga,  1784. 

RosoNOFF,  Foma  (Thomas),  collegiate  councillor, 
wrote  Sketches  of  Sclavonic  Etymology,  large  8vo. 
120  pages,  Moscow,  1810. 

RoTTScHEFF,  the  translator  of  the  Bride  of  Mes- 
sina, and  the  William  Tell,  of  Schiller.  These 
translations  are  not  thought  particularly  good.  His 
prose  translation  of  The  Robbers,  published  in 
1829,  is  far  better.  Rottscheff  nevertheless  does 
not  want  poetical  talents. 

Rtischtscheff.     See  Epiphanj. 

RuBAN  (Wassilj  Grigorjewitsch),  collegiate  coun- 
cillor and  knight,  member  of  the  Free  Economical 
Society,  director  of  the  schools  of  Jekaterinosslaw, 
was  born  in  Little  Russia  in  1739.  He  was  edu- 
cated, first  at  the  Academy  of  Kieff,  afterwards  at 
the  University  of  Moscow,  and  in  1776  he  made 
himself  known  in  the  field  of  literature.  He  pub- 
lished: 1.  A  Collection  of  Inscriptions,  1771.  2.  The 
weekly  papers:  Neither  This  nor  That,  1769;  The 
Industrious  Ant ;  Ancient  and  Modern,  1771-1773. 
3.  A  Short  Account  of  Little  Russia,  St.  Peters- 
burg, 1773.  4.  The  New  Calendar,  St.  Peters- 
burg and  Moscow,  for  the  years  1775,  1776,  1778, 
and  1780,  with  a  quantity  of  historical  and  statis- 


342  A  LEXICON  OF 

tical  information.  5.  A  Geographical  Account  of 
Little  Russia,  etc.  St.  Petersburg,  1777.  6.  The 
Universal  Courier  and  Route-book,  or  complete 
Traveller's  Companion,  in  three  parts,  St.  Peters- 
burg, 1778;  second  edition,  1791;  third  edition, 
1793.  7.  Easter  Canons,  composed  in  metre,  St. 
Petersburg,  1779.  8.  The  Memorial  of  the  Princes 
of  Russia,  or  A  Historical  Lexicon  of  the  Rus- 
sian Rulers,  Male  and  Female,  from  the  earliest 
times,  for  whom  Masses  for  the  dead  are  cele- 
brated in  the  Russian  Churches,  St.  Petersburg, 
1780.  9.  A  Description  of  the  Capital  Town  of 
Moscow,  St.  Petersburg,  1782.  Besides  these,  he 
printed  a  number  of  translations,  and  assisted  in 
the  publication  of  several  foreign  works.  He  died 
at  St.  Petersburg  in  1795.  Of  his  original  com- 
positions little  will  descend  to  posterity  but  the 
inscription  which  he  wrote  for  the  monument  of 
Peter  the  Great,  and  which  is  printed  in  the  third 
part  of  Gretsch's  Manual  of  Russian  Literature, 
p.  260. 

RuMANZOFF  (Count  Nikolai  Petrowitsch),  chan- 
chellor  of  the  empire,  after  he  had  given  up  all 
official  employments,  directed  his  noble  efforts  to 
the  enrichment  of  Russian  history,  and  devoted 
his  great  riches  to  this  purpose.  Under  his  di- 
rection, and  at  his  expense,  were  printed  :  1.  The 
Collection  of  the  Public  Records  of  the  Empire  ; 
compare  article  Malinofskj.  2.  The  Statutes  of 
the  Grand  Prince  John  Wassiljewitsch ;  compare 
the  same.  3.  The  Works  of  the  late  Acade- 
mician Lehrberg,  (who  was  born  1770  and  died 
1813,)  in  a  Russian  translation  prepared  by  Jas- 


RUSSIAN  AUTHORS.  343 

tiikoff.  4.  Ewer's  works :  Inquiries  on  the  Sub- 
ject of  Russian  History.  5.  Herberstein's  Bio- 
graphy, and  The  Merits  of  Catherine  the  Second, 
written  by  Adelung.  6.  A,  Lexicon  of  Russian 
Writers  of  the  Clerical  Profession,  by  Bishop  Eu- 
genj  ;  compare  article  Eugenj.  7.  Ancient  Rus- 
sian History;  compare  article  Malinofskj.  8.  The 
History  of  Leff  (Leo),  Deacon  of  Kalish,  published 
by  Herr  Hase  from  the  manuscript  in  the  Royal 
Library  at  Paris,  1819,  and  translated  into  Russian 
by  Popoff,  St.  Petersburg,  1820  ;  and  a  number  of 
other  works.  In  1813  he  expended  the  sum  of 
25,000  roubles  on  the  production  of  the  best  edi- 
tion of  Nestor.  Learned  men  were  employed  in 
many  of  the  deposits  of  the  archives  in  Russia  and 
other  countries,  at  the  expense  of  this  patriotic  no- 
bleman, to  search  out  materials  and  to  copy  manu- 
scripts connected  with  Russian  history.  In  Paris 
this  duty  was  undertaken  by  Herr  Hase  and  M.  St. 
Martin  ;  the  first  made  extracts  from  the  Byzan- 
tine historians,  the  other  from  the  oriental  authors. 
Count  RumanzofF,  who  has  raised  for  himself  an 
imperishable  monument  in  the  Pantheon  of  Rus- 
sian history,  died  in  1 826. 

RuMOFSKJ  (Stephan  Jakowlewitsch),  acting  coun- 
cillor of  state  and  knight,  was  born  on  the  29th  of 
October,  1734,  of  indigent  parents,  in  the  govern- 
ment of  Wladimir.  He  entered  the  Gymnasium  of 
the  Academy  as  student,  and  after  he  had  become 
adjunct  he  went,  for  the  sake  of  perfecting  his  stu- 
dies in  mathematics,  to  read  under  Leonhard  Eu- 
ler,  at  Berlin,  from  1754  to  1756,  and  in  compli- 
ance with  a  ukase  of  the  directing  senate,  he  un- 


344  A  LEXICON  OF 

dertook  a  journey  to  Selenginsk,  to  take  observa- 
tions on  the  transit  of  Venus  over  the  sun's  disk. 
In  1763  he  found  himself  advanced  to  be  ordinary 
professor  of  astronomy,  and  in  1769  the  Academy 
of  Sciences  sent  him,  at  the  express  command  of 
the  Empress,  to  Kola,  to  observe  another  transit  of 
Venus.  Afterwards,  from  1775  to  1782,  he  was 
appointed  inspector  in  the  office  for  the  superin- 
tendence of  Foreign  Religious  Sects  in  Russia.  In 
1800  he  was  vice-president  of  the  St.  Petersburg 
Academy  of  Sciences  ;  and  in  1803  member  of  the 
Upper  School  Directory  and  Curator  of  the  Uni- 
versity of  Casan.  He  died  in  1812.  Rumofskj 
was  the  first  man  who  wrote  a  mathematical  in- 
struction book  in  the  Russian  language,  which  was 
published  in  1760,  and  by  its  clearness  obtained  for 
its  author  the  surname  of  the  Russian  Wolf.  Be- 
sides this,  he  translated :  1.  Letters  on  various  Phi- 
losophical and  Physical  Matters,  from  Leonhard 
Euler,  three  parts.  2.  The  Annals  of  Cornelius 
Tacitus,  four  volumes,  St.  Petersburg,  1808.  Many 
of  his  mathematical  and  astronomical  inquires  are 
deposited  among  the  records  of  the  Academy  of  Sci- 
ences at  St.  Petersburg. 

RiJLO.     See  Wassian. 

RiJTSCHKOFF  (Nikolaj  Petrowitsch),  a  captain  ; 
travelled  from  1768  to  1771,  and  published  a  Jour- 
nal of  his  Travels,  in  three  volumes,  at  St.  Peters- 
burg, from  1 769  to  1772.  Specimens  of  this  in  the 
Russian  language  are  to  be  found  in  Rodde's  Rus- 
sian Instruction  Book ;  as  for  instance,  from  his 
Topography  of  Orenburg,  his  History  of  Casan,  etc. 
He  died  in  1780. 


RUSSIAN  AUTHORS.  345 


S. 


Sablofskj  (Eudokin  Felippowitsch),e»im^«*  pro- 
fessor at  the  University  of  St.  Petersburg,  coun- 
cillor of  state  and  knight,  was  born  on  the  31st  of 
July,  1 763,  in  the  government  of  Orel.  He  received 
his  education  at  the  Gymnasium  for  Teachers  at 
St.  Petersburg.  After  finishing  his  studies  he  was 
appointed  a  teacher;  and  in  1797  he  undertook 
the  office  of  professor  of  history  and  geography  at 
the  Gymnasium  for  Teachers  at  St.  Petersburg. 
When  this  Gymnasium  in  1805  became  the  Pse- 
dagogical  Institute,  and  in  1819  the  University, 
Sablofskj  ascended  the  chair  of  geography,  and 
at  the  same  time  of  history  and  statistics.  In 
1805  he  was  professor  extraordinary,  in  1809  ordi- 
nary professor,  and  in  181 8  he  was  emeritus  (i.  e.  had 
served  a  sufficient  time  to  obtain  leave  to  retire 
with  a  pension).  He  published,  among  other  works, 
the  following :  1.  The  Most  Recent  Geography 
of  the  Russian  Empire,  two  parts,  St.  Peters- 
burg, 1807.  2.  A  Statistical  Account  of  Russia, 
five  parts,  St.  Petersburg,  1808  :  second  edition, 
1815.  3.  A  Geographical  Account  of  the  Rus- 
sian Empire,  adapted  for  the  Reading  of  all  Classes, 
six  volumes,  St.  Petersburg,  1810.  4.  A  Course  of 
Universal  History,  three  parts,  St.  Petersburg,  1811, 
1812.  5.  A  Course  of  Universal  Geography,  ac- 
cording to  the  present  Divisions  of  Territory,  four 
volumes,  St.  Petersburg,  1 8 1 8, 1 8 1 9.  Besides  these, 
he  wrote,  by  the  request  of  the  Upper  School  Di- 
rectory, An  Introduction  to  General  and  Russian 
Geography,  for  the  gymnasiums  and  district  schools. 


346  A  LEXICON  OF 

which  was   printed   at  St.  Petersburg,  1820  and 
1821. 

Sacharj.     See  Zacharias. 

Sagoskin  (M.),  author  of  the  comedy  called  The 
Village  Philosopher,  which  contains  some  laughable 
sketches  of  Russian  village  grandees  ;  and  of  the 
romances  :  1.  Jurj  Miloslafskj,  or  The  Russians  in 
the  Year  1612,  a  historical  romance  in  three  vols. 
8vo.  Moscow,  1829,  which  was  translated  into  Ger- 
man by  Erh.  Goring,  two  vols.  8vo.  Konigsberg, 
1830.  Of  the  original,  three  editions  have  already 
been  called  for.  2.  Rostlawleff,  or  The  Russians 
in  the  Year  1812,  translated  into  German  by  the 
same  hand,  Leipsic,  1822,  two  vols.  8vo. 

Samblak.     See  Grigorj. 

Sanin.     See  Joseph. 

Satschenoff.     See  Dimitrj. 

ScHACHOFSKOJ  (Princc  Alexander  Alexandro- 
witsch),  privy  councillor  of  state,  member  of  the 
Russian  Academy,  and  other  learned  societies,  was 
born  on  the  21st  of  April,  1777,  in  the  govern- 
mental department  of  Smolensk.  When  seven 
years  old  he  entered  the  school  attached  to  the 
University  of  Moscow ;  and  in  1 793  he  was  placed 
in  the  Preobrashenskish  regiment  of  the  guards  as 
sergeant,  where  he  advanced  to  the  rank  of  cap- 
tain. In  December,  1801,  he  received  the  title  of 
Hofrath,  or  imperial  councillor,  and  was  made  a 
member  of  the  directory  of  the  theatre.  In  1803, 
when  he  returned  from  a  tour  abroad,  in  which  he 
had  concluded  engagements  with  several  first-rate 
foreign  artists  for  the  St.  Petersburg  theatre, he  found 
himself  promoted  to  be  a  chamberlain,  and  in  1810 


RUSSIAN  AUTHORS.  347 

privy  councillor  of  state.     In  1812  he  entered  the 
Twer  militia,  and  commanded  a  polk  of  cossacks  ; 
and  in  October  of  the  same  year  he  marched  with 
the  division  of  adjutant-general  Winzingerode  to 
Moscow.     In  1813  he  was   appointed   general,  to 
command  the  corps  then  in  occupation  of  Cour- 
land  and  Livonia,  and  intrusted  with  the  perform- 
ance of  some  difficult  and  important  services.   After 
the  conclusion  of  the  w^ar,  he  resumed  the  direc- 
tion of  the  theatre,  and  continued  a  member  of  the 
directory  until  1818,  when  he  retired  with  a  pen- 
sion.    Of  the  numerous  dramatic  works  of  Scha- 
chofskoj,  we  will  name  the  following.    Tragedies  in 
verse  :  1.  The  Chinese  Orphan,  in  five  acts,  from 
Voltaire,  1809.    2.  Deborah,  in  five  acts,  1810.     3. . 
Abufar,  in  three  acts,  from  the  French,  1815.     4. 
The  Horatii,  in  five  acts,  from  Corneille>  in  con- 
junction with  Katenin,  Shandr,  and  Tschepegoff, 
1817.     Comedies  in  verse:    1.  Woman's  Jest,  in 
one  act,  1795.     2.  The  Bath  of  Lipezk,  in  five 
acts,  1813.     3.  The  Family  Circle,  in  three  acts; 
two  acts  of  this  were  written  by  GribojedofF  and 
Chmelnizkj,  1818.     4.  If  you  don't  like  it,  don't 
listen,  in  one  act,   1818.      5.  Disorderly  House- 
keeping, in  five  acts,  1819.     6.  The  Cockatoo,  in 
one  act,  1820.     In  prose  :  1.  The  Cunning  Man, 
in  five  acts,  1804.     2.  The  New  Sterne,  in  one  act, 

1805.  3.  Half-Gentlemanly  Manners,  in  five  acts, 
1808.  4.  The  Dispute,  or  The  Two  Neighbours, 
in  five  acts,  1810,  etc.  Operas:  1.  Love's  Post- 
Office,  in  two  acts,  1806.     2.  The  Woman-hater, 

1806.  3.  Crispin  in  the  Seraglio,  in  one  act,  from 
the  French,  1812.     4.  Iwan  Susanin,  in  two  acts. 


348  A  LEXICON  OF 

1815.  5.  Animal  Magnetism,  in  one  act,  1818,  etc. 
Vaudevilles:  1.  The  Peasants,  or  The  Reception 
of  the  Unbidden  Guest,  in  two  acts,  1814.  2.  Lo- 
monossofF,  in  three  acts,  1814.  3.  Modern  Bed- 
lam, in  one  act,  from  the  French,  1818.  4.  The 
Two  Schoolmasters,  in  one  act,  from  the  French, 
1819.  5.  The  Advocate,  in  two  acts,  from  Mo- 
liere,  1820.  6.  The  Soothsayer,  in  one  act,  1820. 
7.  The  Night- Wanderer,  in  three  acts,  from  the 
French,  1821.  8.  The  Bachelor  of  Salamanca,  in 
one  act,  from  the  French,  1821.  9.  The  Phoenix, 
in  one  act,  from  the  French,  1821,  etc.  The  ro- 
mantic comedies  :  Iwanoj,  in  five  acts,  1821,  and 
The  Tempest,  from  Shakspeare,  1 82 1 .  The  follow- 
ing have  not  yet  been  represented :  1.  The  Aunt, 
or  Not  so  stupid  after  all,  a  comedy,  in  one  act,  in 
verse.  2.  The  Mysterious  Dwarf,  a  romantic  co- 
medy, in  five  acts,  taken  from  Walter  Scott.  3. 
Aristophanes,  a  comedy,  in  three  acts,  in  verse, 
etc.  Besides  these  dramatic  works.  Prince  Scha- 
chofskoj  has  written  other  things,  as,  1.  The  Stolen 
Skins,  a  comic  poem,  in  four  cantos,  which  was 
publicly  read  before  the  Society  of  the  Friends  of 
the  Russian  Language,  and  printed  in  the  Trans- 
actions of  the  same.  2.  Two  Satires,  and  several 
smaller  poems,  printed  in  the  Dramatic  Intelli- 
gencer, 1808.  3.  Letters  from  Italy  to  N.  M.  C, 
printed  in  the  Son  of  the  Country,  for  the  year 
1808.  Prince  Schachofskoj  occupies  decidedly  the 
first  place  in  the  number  of  living  dramatic  writers 
in  Russia ;  and  he  has  not  only  enriched  the  thea- 
tre by  the  contribution  of  so  many  excellent  pieces, 
but  has  done  much  for  the  promotion  of  dramatic 


RUSSIAN  AUTHORS.  349 

art  by  the  education  of  young  actors  and  actresses 
for  the  St.  Petersburg  stage.  Of  his  works,  his 
smaller  comedies  (The  Dispute,  or  the  Two  Neigh- 
bours: Half-Gentlemanly  Manners:  The  Cockatoo: 
and  The  Family  Circle)  and  his  vaudevilles,  are 
usually  considered  the  best. 

ScHACHOFSKOJ  (Priuce  Semen),  lived  at  the  be- 
ginning of  the  seventeenth  century  ;  fell  into  dis- 
grace with  the  Czar  Michael  Feodorowitsch,  and 
was  banished  to  the  Monastery  of  Miracles  at 
Tschudow.  There  he  wrote  several  epistles,  viz.  1. 
To  a  Friend,  upon  Adversity,  and  also  respecting 
certain  usages  in  the  church,  and  moral  subjects. 
2.  To  the  Patriarch  and  Archbishop  of  Siberia  upon 
Divorces.  3.  An  Epistle  to  the  Most  High  and 
Mighty  Schah  Abbass,  King  of  Persia  and  Media, 
in  the  name  of  the  supreme  Archbishop  and  Ser- 
vant of  God,  the  most  holy  Patriarch  Philaret 
Nikititsch,  of  Moscow,  and  all  Russia,  respecting 
The  Orthodox  Faith.  In  this  epistle  he  thanks 
the  Schah  for  a  piece  of  Rifii,  which  he  had  sent 
as  a  present  to  the  Czar  Michael  Feodorowitsch, 
and  advises  him  to  be  baptized.  The  writings  of 
Prince  Semen  Schachofskoj  are  to  be  found  in  MS. 
in  the  Synodal  Library. 

ScHALiKOFF  (PHuce  Pctor  Iwanowitsch),  has  pub- 
lished the  following  works  :  1.  The  Fruits  of  In- 
voluntary  Feelings,  three   parts,   Moscow,  1798- 

1801.  2.  Travels  in  Little  Russia,  two  parts,  Mos- 
cow, 1803.     3.  Flowers  of  the  Graces,  Moscow, 

1802.  4.  A  New  Journey  through  Little  Rus- 
sia, Moscow,  1804.  5.  Thoughts,  Characters,  and 
Portraits,  Moscow,  1805.     6.  Historical  Account 


350  A  LEXICON  OF 

of  the  Stay  of  the  French  in  Moscow,  Moscow, 
1813.  7.  Stories,  1819.  8.  Epistles,  in  verse, 
Moscow,  1816.  9.  A  Journey  to  Cronstadt,  in  the 
year  1805,  Moscow,  1817.  10.  The  Works  of 
Prince  Schalikoff,  collected  from  the  journals  in 
which  they  originally  appeared,  two  parts,  Moscow, 

1816.  This  author  has  translated  some  of  the 
works  of  Chateaubriand  :  as,  1.  A  Journey  to  Je- 
rusalem,  three  parts,  Moscow,  1815-1816.  2.  Re- 
collections of  Italy,  England,  and  America;  and 
of  Madame  de  Genlis  :  as  1.  The  Duchess  de  la 
Vahere,  three  parts,  1815,  1816.  2.  The  His- 
tory of  Henry  the  Great,  three  parts,  Moscow, 
1817  ;  and  3.  Modern  Tales,  two  parts,  Moscow, 
1818.  In  the  year  1806  he  published  in  the  Mos- 
cow Journal,  The  Moscow  Spectator,  and  from 
1808  to  1812  his  Aglaia.  SchalikofF's  works  and 
translations  deserve,  in  point  of  lightness,  regu- 
larity, and  pleasantness  of  style,  especial  attention 
and  regard.  He  endeavoured  openly  to  form  his 
language  upon  the  newest  models  of  the  Russian 
literature,  and  contributed  not  a  little  in  so  doing 
to  explode  the  harsh  Sclavonicisms  which  still  con- 
tinued to  prevail  in  Russian  books. 

ScHANDR,  a  modern  writer,  principally  in  the  dra- 
matic line ;  he  wrote  a  considerable  part  of  the 
translation  of  the  play  of  The  Horatii  of  Corneille 
into  Russian  verse,  in  which  Prince  Schachofskoj 
also  took  part.     It  was  represented  in  the  year 

1817.  He  is  the  author  besides  of  several  original 
works. 

ScHATROFF  (Nikolaj  Michailowitsch),  collegiate 
councillor,  was  born  at  Moscow  in  1765,  where  he 


RUSSIAN  AUTHORS.  351 

still  continues  to  live.  He  began  first  to  write 
poetry  in  the  year  1790.  His  first  work  was  a 
Song  to  Catherine  the  Second,  which  was  printed 
in  the  Northern  Messenger  of  1805.  His  other 
poems,  chiefly  of  the  lyrical  class,  have  appeared 
from  time  to  time  in  the  Russian  Messenger. 

ScHiCHMATOFF  (Priucc  Scrgj  Alexandrowitsch), 
lieutenant-captain  of  the  navy,  member  of  the  Rus- 
sian Academy,  and  of  the  Society  of  Lovers  of  the 
Russian  Language,  was  brought  up  in  the  Naval 
Cadet  Corps,  where  he  still  continues  in  service. 
His  poetical  performances,  amongst  others,  are,  1. 
An  Essay  on  Criticism,  a  poem  in  three  cantos, 
from  the  English  of  Pope,  St.  Petersburg,  1806. 

2.  Posharskj,  Minin,  and  Hermogenes,  or  The  De- 
liverance of  Russia,  a  poem,  St.  Petersburg,  1807. 

3.  Satires,  an  imitation  of  the  Eight  Satires  of  Boi- 
leau,  St.  Petersburg,  1807.  4.  A  Song  addressed 
to  the  Russian  Language,  St.  Petersburg,  1809. 
5.  Peter  the  Great,  a  poem  in  eight  cantos,  St. 
Petersburg,  1810.  6.  The  Return  to  his  Native 
Country  of  a  beloved  brother  Prince,  P.  A.,  from  a 
Sea  expedition  of  five  years'  duration,  St.  Petersburg, 
1810.  7.  A  Song  to  the  Creator  of  the  Universe, 
St.  Petersburg,  1817.  8.  A  Version  of  the  Hymns 
which  are  sung  in  the  Churches  of  the  Orthodox 
Faith  in  honour  of  the  Divine  Being,  St.  Petersburg, 
1821.  Many  poems  of  Prince  SchichmatofF  are  to 
be  found  in  the  publications  of  the  Russian  Aca- 
demy, and  in  the  printed  transactions  of  the  Society 
of  the  Lovers  of  the  Russian  Language. 

ScHiDATA.     See  Lukas. 

ScHiscHKOFF  (Alexander  Semenowitsch),  admiral. 


S52  A  LEXICON  OF 

and  minister  of  Public  Instruction,  and  general  di- 
rector of  Ecclesiastical  Affairs  for  all  foreign  pro- 
fessions of  faith  tolerated  in  Russia,  president  of 
the  Russian  Academy,  knight  of  several  orders,  was 
born  in  1754,  and  educated  from  the  year  1761  in 
the  Naval  Cadet  Corps.     After  that  time  he  tra- 
velled a  great  deal  as  an  officer  of  the  navy,  both 
by  sea  and  land — to  Sweden,  Denmark,  England, 
Germany,  Prussia,  Italy,  Turkey,  etc.     In  1812  he 
was  made  secretary  of  state  :  in  1816  president  of 
the  Russian  Academy  ;  and  in  1820  member  of  the 
Imperial  Council.     While  still  a  cadet  he  began 
already  to  occupy  himself  with  literature  and  poetry. 
His  first  labours  were  :  Translations  from  Kampe's 
Library  for  Children,  (which  were  several  times  re- 
printed, and  of  which  a  new  edition  was  published 
at  St.  Petersburg  in  1808,  in  two  parts,   entitled 
Histories  for  Children),   and   Gessner's  Daphnis ; 
several  little  poems,  and  the  drama  Slavery;  which 
last  was  first  represented  at  the  imperial  theatre, 
and  afterwards  at  the  public  theatre,  in  presence 
of  the  heir  to  the  throne  (the  late  Emperor  Paul 
the  First),  for  the  benefit  of  the  prisoners  confined 
in  the  jails,  and  which  brought  in  no  less  a  sum 
for  that  purpose  than   15,000  roubles.     In  later 
times  he  devoted  himself  exclusively  to  the  sea-ser- 
vice, and  translated  and  composed  several  books 
connected  with  his  favourite  and  professional  sub- 
ject, as,  1.  Naval  Science,  two  parts,  St.  Peters- 
burg, 1793.     2.  A  Marine  Lexicon,  in  the  Eng- 
lish, French,  and  Russian  Languages,  two  parts, 
St.  Petersburg,  1795.      3.  A  Collection  of  Jour- 
nals during  Voyages   at  Sea,  two  parts,  St.  Pe- 


RUSSIAN  AUTHORS.  353 

tersburg,  1800.  4.  Historical  Records  of  the  Navy, 
a  work  extending  from  the  earliest  establishment 
of  the  navy.  Besides  these,  he  occupied  much 
time  and  labour  in  preparing  a  complete  Marine 
Lexicon,  which  should  contain  the  meanings  of  all 
words  of  which  the  diversified  and  peculiar  lan- 
guage of  ship-building  and  navigation  consists,  in 
respect  to  all  the  arts  and  sciences  which  they  com- 
prise. But  this  work,  which  has  never  been  com- 
pleted, remains  only  in  manuscript.  After  twenty 
years'  exclusive  labour  on  subjects  connected  with 
the  navy,  he  once  more  came  back  to  his  original 
literary  pursuits.  As  at  the  end  of  the  last  century 
a  passion  sprung  up  among  the  young  Russian 
literateurs,  of  imitating  the  French  idioms  in  the 
Sclavonic  language,  and  thereby  corrupting  greatly 
the  purity  of  the  real  Russian,  he  resolved  for  this 
reason  to  publish  his  Considerations  on  the  Old 
and  New  Styles  of  the  Russian  Language,  St.  Pe- 
tersburg, 1802 :  second  edition,  1813  :  third  edition, 
1818.  In  this  book  he  shows  how  prejudicial  and 
unseemly  certain  innovations  of  the  young  Russian 
authors  must  be,  inasmuch  as  they  were  grounded 
upon  the  imitation  of  one  eminent  Russian  writer 
only,  on  his  weaker  side.  This  work,  in  spite  of 
some  exaggerations,  and  errors  in  judgment,  arising 
from  the  author  being  too  much  carried  away  by 
his  zeal  in  the  cause,  exercised  a  most  wholesome 
influence  on  Russian  literature  in  general.  The 
following  may  be  considered  as  supplementary  to 
the  above-mentioned  work :  1.  Additional  Remarks 
upon  the  Considerations  on  the  Old  and  New 
Styles  of  the  Russian  Language,  St.  Petersburg, 

A  a 


354  A  LEXICON  OF 

1804;  which  contains  also  A  Reply  to  some  cri- 
ticisms which  had  appeared  upon  the  former  work. 
2.  Translations  of  two  Essays  of  La  Harpe,  with 
Observations  upon  their  contents,  St.  Petersburg, 
1808.  These  translations  gave  occasion  to  a  warm 
party-quarrel  on  the  Russian  Parnassus.  In  Nos. 
XI.  and  XII.  of  The  Flower-Bed  for  the  year  1810, 
appeared  a  severe  criticism  upon  these  essays.  The 
author  replied  to  the  reviewer  in  the  fourth  part  of 
the  Transactions  and  Translations  of  the  Russian 
Academy  ;  and  the  reviewer  soon  afterwards  an- 
swered again  by  the  publication  of  a  little  book 
intitled,  On  the  Easiest  Way  of  Replying  to  a 
Criticism,  St.  Petersburg,  1811,  which  may  be  cited 
here  as  at  once  the  strongest  and  most  acute  po- 
lemical work  which  has  yet  been  written  in  the 
Russian  language.  3.  Dialogues  upon  Literature, 
St.  Petersburg,  1811.  4.  Supplement  to  the  Dia- 
logues on  Literature,  St.  Petersburg,  1811.  In  the 
year  1812,  at  the  commencement  of  the  French 
war,  Schishkoff  was  invested  with  the  rank  of  se- 
cretary of  state,  and  as  he  accompanied  the  Em- 
peror Alexander  in  the  memorable  campaigns  that 
followed,  he  wrote  a  number  of  manifestoes,  orders, 
ukases,  rescripts,  etc.,  which  were  printed  in  a  se- 
parate collection  at  St.  Petersburg  in  1816,  and 
which  are  distinguished  by  their  warm  spirit  of 
patriotism,  and  by  a  sublimity  of  eloquence  which 
steals  upon  the  heart.  The  most  remarkable  of 
these  works  is  The  Official  Narrative  of  the  taking 
and  occupation  of  Moscow  by  the  Enemy,  which 
may  be  found  reprinted  in  the  second  volume,  page 
230,  of  Gretsch's  Manual  of  Russian   Literature. 


I 


RUSSIAN  AUTHORS.  355 

In  1814,  at  the  death  of  A.  A.  Nartoff,  he  was  chosen 
president  of  the  Russian  Academy,  and  while  hold- 
ing this  office  he  formed  an  entirely  new  organisa- 
tion of  that  distinguished  society.  In  1818  he  pub- 
lished at  St.  Petersburg  a  prose  translation  from  the 
Italian  of  Tasso's  Jerusalem  Delivered.  In  the  re- 
ports of  the  Russian  Academy  are  to  be  found  his 
translations  On  the  Origin  and  Variations  of  the 
Sclavonic  Languages.  Some  years  afterwards  he 
received  an  appointment  in  the  ministry. 

ScHLOZER  (August  Ludwig),  was  born  on  the  5th 
of  July,  1735,  in  the  Hohenlohe-Kirchbergish  vil- 
lage of  Jagstadt,  studied  in  1751  at  Wittenberg, 
and  from  1754  at  Gottingen.  In  1755  he  went  to 
Sweden  ;  from  1756  he  lived  at  Upsal  and  Stock- 
holm ;  he  spent  the  winter  of  1 758-1759  at  Lubeck; 
and  in  the  spring  of  1759  returned  to  Gottingen  to 
make  preparations  for  his  journey  into  the  East. 
From  that  place  he  went  in  1761  to  St.  Petersburg, 
at  the  invitation  of  professor  Miiller,  who  under- 
took to  supply  him  there  with  everything  which 
he  might  require  for  his  projected  travels.  After 
his  aiTival  there,  he  was  made  adjunct  to  the  Aca- 
demy of  Sciences  in  1762;  and  in  1764  was  re- 
called to  Gottingen  to  undertake  the  duties  there 
of  a  professor ;  nevertheles  in  the  same  year  he  re- 
ceived by  command  of  the  Empress  Catherine  the 
Second,  the  appointment  of  Ordinary  Professor  of 
History  to  the  Academy,  with  special  directions  to 
apply  himself  to  the  study  of  ancient  Russian  his- 
tory. In  1769  he  took  leave  of  his  Russian  ap- 
pointments, and  went  as  ordinary  professor  of  phi- 
losophy to  Gottingen,  where,  after  the  death   of 

A  a  2 


356  A  LEXICON  OF 

Achenwall,  the  Hanoverian  government  intrusted 
to  him  also  the  duty  of  lecturing  on  statistics,  po- 
litics, and  the  history  of  the  European  states.  In 
1773-1774  he  visited  France;  and  in  1780-1782 
Italy.  In  1782  he  became  imperial  councillor,  and 
was  the  first  protestant  who  received  the  compli- 
ment of  a  doctor's  degree  in  laws  at  Inspruck.  In 
1802  he  was  made  knight  of  the  order  of  St.  Wla- 
dimir,  fourth  class,  in  acknowledgment  of  his  edi- 
tion of  Nestor ;  and  in  1807  he  received  from  the 
Hanoverian  government  the  dignity  of  Privy  Coun- 
cillor of  Justice.  He  died  on  the  9th  of  September 
1809.  Of  his  fifty-four  works  on  historical,  poli- 
tical, and  statistical  subjects,  we  will  confine  our- 
selves here  to  mentioning  those  which  were  either 
published  in  the  Russian  language,  or  relate  to 
Russia.  1.  On  the  Election  of  the  Kings  of  Po- 
land, St.  Petersburg,  1764.  2.  Russian  Jurispru- 
dence, St.  Petersburg,  1 764.  3.  The  Russian  Chro- 
nicles according  to  Nikon's  Manuscript,  which 
was  edited  under  his  superintendence.  4.  A  Rus- 
sian Grammar,  St.  Petersburg,  1763.  This  work 
only  goes  as  far  as  the  declension  of  adjectives. 
The  nine  sheets  of  it  however  which  were  printed, 
of  which  only  a  few  copies  are  now  extant,  contain 
a  number  of  excellent  and  important  rules,  of  which 
the  authors  of  more  recent  Grammars  have  plenti- 
fully availed  themselves.  5.  Modernised  Russia, 
four  parts,  1767  to  1771.  6.  Specimens  of  Rus- 
sian Annals,  1768.  7.  Laxeman's  Siberian  Let- 
ters. 8.  Oskold  and  Dir.  9.  Historical  Inquiries 
into  the  first  Origin  of  Russian  Law.  10.  Nestor; 
his  Russian  Annals,  collated,  translated,  and  illus- 


RUSSIAN  AUTHORS.  357 

trated.  By  his  edition  of  this  last  work  (compare 
article  Nestor)  he  did  a  vast  service  to  ancient 
Russian  history.  A  copious  biography  of  Schlozer 
has  been  published  by  his  son  Christian  von  Schlo- 
zer^  under  the  title  The  Public  and  Private  Life 
of  Aug.  Ludw.  V.  Schlozer,  taken  from  Original 
papers,  and  illustrated  by  many  personal  recollec- 
tions, two  volumes,  Leipsic,  1828. 

Schmidt  (J.  A.  E.),  lecturer  in  the  Russian  and 
modern  Greek  languages  at  the  University  of  Leip- 
sic, has  pubHshed  the  following  instruction-books 
in  the  Russian  language  :  1.  A  Practical  Grammar 
of  the  Russian  Language,  etc.  Leipsic,  1813.  2. 
The  most  recent  Russo-German  and  German-Rus- 
sian Pocket  Dictionary,  two  parts,  Leipsic,  1815. 
3.  A  Russo-German  and  German-Russian  Diction- 
ary for  the  Hand,  Leipsic,  by  Tauchnitz,  stereotype 
edition.  4.  A  Guide  to  the  Acquirement  of  the 
Russian  Language,  in  two  parts:  L  Specimens  of 
exercises  to  be  translated  into  Russian ;  H.  Selec- 
tions of  Russian  pieces  for  reading  with  a  voca- 
bulary, Leipsic,  1830.  The  hand-dictionary  men- 
tioned in  number  three,  is  particularly  to  be  re- 
commended. 

ScHTSCHERBATOFF  (Priucc  Michacl  Michailo- 
witsch),  privy  councillor,  senator,  president  of  the 
College  of  the  Chamber,  knight  of  the  order  of  St. 
Anne,  honorary  member  of  the  Academy  of  Sciences 
at  St.  Petersburg,  acting  member  of  the  Russian 
Academy,  and  of  the  Free  Russian  Learned  So- 


"  An  imperial  Russian  councillor  of  state,  professor  emeritus,  and 
knight  of  the  order  of  St.  Anne,  second  class. 


358  A  LEXICON  OF 

ciety  of  the  Moscow  University,  was  born  on  the 
22nd  of  June,  1733,  and  instructed  in  the  French 
and  Italian  languages,  and  various  branches  of  sci- 
ence under  the  paternal  roof.  In  1746  he  entered 
the  body  guards  in  the  regiment  of  Semenoff,  in 
which  he  served  upwards  from  the  lowest  rank ; 
but  was  in  1756  promoted  by  express  desire  of  the 
crown,  to  be  cornet  in  the  same  regiment ;  in  1761 
to  be  lieutenant;  in  1762  to  be  lieutenant-captain; 
and  in  the  same  year  he  took  leave  of  the  service 
with  the  rank  of  full  captain.  In  1767  he  was 
chosen  by  the  nobility  of  Jarosslawl  to  be  their 
deputy  in  the  commission  for  projecting  a  design 
for  a  new  statute-book ;  in  the  same  year  he  was 
made  gentleman  of  the  bedchamber;  in  1768  as- 
sessor to  the  trade  commission;  in  1771  was  pro- 
moted to  be  master  of  the  Heralds'  Office ;  in  1773 
to  be  acting  chamberlain ;  in  1778  to  be  privy  coun- 
cillor and  president  of  the  Board  of  Revenue  ;  in 
the  same  year  assessor  of  the  department  for  the 
collection  of  the  duties  on  spirits;  and  on  the  1st 
of  January,  1779,  a  member  of  the  directing  senate. 
He  died  on  December  12, 1790.  Prince  Schtscher- 
batofF  felt  from  his  earliest  youth  a  strong  inclina- 
tion for  Russian  history,  and  was  careful  in  the  col- 
lection of  all  possible  books  which  bore  on  his  fa- 
vourite subject.  When  Catherine  the  Second  heard 
of  his  zeal  in  the  year  1768,  she  intrusted  to  him 
the  arrangement  of  the  cabinet  of  archives  of  Peter 
the  Great,  and  ordered  that  all  the  libraries  and 
archives  in  the  empire  should  be  open  to  him.  As 
soon  as  he  had  drawn  the  necessary  materials  from 
these  illustrious  sources,  he  began  composing  A 


RUSSIAN  AUTHORS.  359 

History  of  Russia.  The  first  volume  of  this,  which 
is  dedicated  to  the  Empress  Catherine  the  Second, 
was  printed  in  quarto  at  St.  Petersburg  in  1770, 
where  as  many  as  fifteen  books  of  it  had  come  out 
in  the  year  1772.  He  however  never  brought  this 
work  to  a  conclusion,  and  only  carried  it  down  to 
the  time  of  the  Czar  Michael  Feodorowitsch.  Here 
we  are  bound  to  observe  that  his  history  is  com- 
posed in  a  dry  and  difficult  style,  without  a  know- 
ledge of  criticism,  and  is  full  of  inaccuracies.  The 
major-general  Boltin,  in  writing  his  remarks  upon 
the  history  of  Le  Clerc,  impugned  these  inaccura- 
cies. Schtscherbatoif,  offended  at  Boltin's  remarks, 
published  in  1789  at  Moscow,  A  Justificatory  Let- 
ter to  a  Friend,  intended  to  repel  certain  public 
and  private  attacks  made  upon  his  history  by  ma- 
jor-general Boltin  in  his  notes  to  Le  Clerc's  His- 
tory. Boltin  again  retorted  upon  this  letter  in  his 
Answer  of  G.  M.  Boltin  to  the  Letter  of  Prince 
Schtscherbatoff,  author  of  the  History  of  Russia, 
St.  Petersburg,  1789;  and  Schtscherhatoff  once 
more  rejoined  with  Remarks  upon  this  retort,  un- 
der the  fictitious  name  of  a  nobleman  returned 
home  after  a  long  sojourn  in  foreign  countries. 
These  Remarks  were  first  published  (after  the  death 
of  the  author)  at  Moscow  in  1792.  In  the  mean- 
time Boltin  has  occupied  himself  in  a  still  closer 
scrutiny  of  the  works  of  Prince  Schtscherbatoff. 
This  last  critical  production  appeared  after  the 
death  of  both  authors,  at  St.  Petersburg,  1793  and 
1794,  in  two  vols.,  by  the  title  of  Critical  Notices, 
by  M.  G.  Boltin,  upon  the  two  first  parts  of  Prince 
Schtscherbatoff's  Russian  History.    Schtscherbatoff 


360  A  LEXICON  OF 

wrote,  besides  the  above-mentioned  History  of  Rus- 
sia, and  the  controversial  works  to  which  it  gave 
occasion,  the  following  books  :  1.  On  the  Ancient 
Distinctions  of  Rank  among  the  Russians,  printed 
at  Moscow,  1784  :  as  also  in  the  Ancient  Russian 
Library,  where   also   the   family  pedigree  of  the 
princes  of  SchtscherbatofF  and  some  other  princely 
families  which  were  drawn  out  by  him,  are  pre- 
served.     2.  A   Short   Historical    Information    re- 
specting the  Descent  of  the  Russian  Princes  who 
are  of  the   lineage  of  the  Grand   Prince   Rurik, 
printed  at  Moscow,  1785.     A  number  of  essays 
from  his  pen  are  to  be  found  in  all  the  periodicals 
of  the  time ;  as  for  instance,  in  the  St.  Petersburg 
Monthly  Register,  an  article  On  the  Use  of  Laws  : 
in  the  Academical  Reports,  an  Essay  on  the  An- 
cient Coins  of  Russia.     Besides  these,  he  pubhshed 
A  Short  Account  of  the  Usurpers  of  the  Russian 
Crown,  St.  Petersburg,  1774.     2.  The  Book  of  the 
Czars,  St.  Petersburg,  1 769.     3.  Chronicles  of  the 
Czars,   St.   Petersburg,  1772.     4.  A  Chronicle  of 
many  Insurrections  in  Russia,  principally  taken  from 
the  chronicle  of  Paliziin,  St.  Petersburg,  1771.     5. 
A  Biography  of  Peter  the  Great,  after  an  original 
work  printed  at  Venice,  but  including  many  novel 
remarks  and  additional  matter.     6.  The  Journal, 
or  Day-Book,  of  Peter  the  Great,  two  parts,  St. 
Petersburg,  1 770  and  1 77 1 .     7.  All  the  Letters  and 
Notes  of  Business  from  the  same  Journal  for  the 
years  1704,  1705,  and  1706  ;   with  many  original 
notes  respecting  the  officers  of  state,  and  of  the 
household  of  that  Emperor,  printed  at  St.  Peters- 
burg, 1774.     8.  Sketches  of  the  Government  of 


RUSSIAN  AUTHORS.  361 

Monomach,  etc.  Not  long  before  his  death  he 
wrote  also  Consolatory  Reflections  of  a  Mourning 
Father  on  the  death  of  a  Beloved  Son,  printed  at 
Moscow,  1790.  The  occasion  of  this  work  was  the 
death  of  his  son,  Colonel  Prince  Iwan  Michailo- 
witsch,  who  died  at  Kislar.  Schtscherbatoff  left 
behind  him  a  number  of  other  works,  which  have 
not  yet  been  printed.  His  library  contained  15,000 
volumes,  and  he  possessed  a  vast  collection  of  cu- 
riosities, and  mechanical  instruments. 

ScHUWALOFF  (Iwau  Iwauowitsch),  acting  privy 
councillor,  upper  chamberlain,  etc.,  was  born  at 
Moscow  in   1727,  and  received  a  careful  educa- 
tion in  his  parents'  house.     While  very  young  he 
came  as  a  page  to  the  court,  afterwards  he  served 
there  in  the  capacity  of  gentleman  of  the  bedcham- 
ber and  chamberlain,  and  in  1754,  at  the  time  of 
the  foundation  of  the  University  of  Moscow,  which 
was  principally  owing  to  his  zealous  advocacy  of  it, 
he  was  already  made  lieutenant-general.    Peter  the 
Third  promoted  him  to  be  Director  of  the  Land 
Cadet  Corps.     In  the  first   years  of  Catherine's 
reign,  SchuwalofF  travelled  throughout  Europe,  and 
spent  some  years  at  Rome,  from  which  place  he  sent 
to  the  Academy  of  Arts  costly  impressions  from  the 
ancient  statues.    After  his  return  to  his  native  coun- 
try, in  1777,  he  was  most  graciously  received  by  the 
Empress,  and  appointed  curator  of  the  University 
of  Moscow.     He  died  in  1798.     Schuwaloff  was  a 
passionate  lover  of  sciences,  arts,  and  literature ; 
especially  of  those  of  his  native  land.     To  his  en- 
couragement and  support  Russia  is  indebted  for 
some  of  her  best  authors — as  for  instance,  Lomo-- 


362  A  LEXICON  OF 

nossoff,  Dershawin,  and  many  others.  He  received 
from  his  contemporaries  the  name  of  the  Russian 
Maecenas,  and  impartial  posterity  has  confirmed  the 
propriety  of  the  appellation. 

Sellj  (Sellius).     See  Nikodem. 

Semiwlack.     See  Grigorj. 

Sera^h^  SKJ  (Fodor  Iwanowitsch),  teacher  at  the 
Seminary  of  Rasan;  translated  some  of  the  speeches 
from  Titus  Livius,  which  are  printed  in  the  Eu- 
ropean Messenger  for  the  year  1809. 

Sestrenzewitsch-Bogusch  (StanisslafF),  metro- 
politan of  the  Roman  Catholic  Church  in  Russia, 
and  knight  of  several  orders,  member  of  the  Rus- 
sian Academy  and  other  learned  societies,  president 
of  the  free  Economical  Society,  was  born  on  the 
31st  of  December,  1731.  He  was  the  author  of 
the  following  historical  works  :  1.  The  History  of 
the  Tauris  from  the  earliest  times  till  the  period 
of  its  complete  subjugation  by  Russia,  two  vols.  St. 
Petersburg,  1 806.  2.  An  Inquiry  into  the  descent 
and  origin  of  the  Russian  People,  St.  Petersburg, 
1818. 

Shukofskj  (Wassilj  Andrejewitsch),  councillor  of 
state,  knight,  and  member  of  the  Russian  Academy, 
was  born  in  the  year  1783.  He  received  his  scien- 
tific education  at  the  school  at  Tula,  afterwards  at 
the  Institute  for  young  nobles  attached  to  the  Mos- 
cow university,  and  after  the  completion  of  his 
course  of  studies  there,  entered  the  service  of  the 
state.  In  the  year  1812  he  made  the  campaign  in 
the  ranks  of  the  Moscow  volunteers,  and  earned 
by  his  services  the  order  of  St.  Anne,  second  class. 
The  Emperor  Alexander,  in  the  year  1816,  settled 


RUSSIAN  AUTHORS.  S6S 

on  him  a  yearly  pension  for  life  of  4000  roubles, 
and  in  1817  summoned  him  to  the  court  to  teach 
her  Majesty,  the  present  Empress  Alexandra,  the 
Russian  language.     Afterwards  he  was  inspector 
of  the  studies  of  his  Imperial  Highness  the  Grand 
Prince,  the  heir  to  the  throne  ;  and  in  1821  he  re- 
ceived the  Prussian  order  of  the  Red  Eagle.     Shu- 
kofskj  began  his  literary  career  in  1802,  while  yet 
a  student  in  the  University.     His  first  poetical  at- 
tempts excited   the   general   attention   of  all  the 
friends  of  literature.     In  1808  he  was  editor  of  the 
European  Intelligencer;  and  in  1809  he  was  asso- 
ciated with  Katschenofskj  in  the  same  duty.    Never- 
theless lyric  poetry  continued  ever  to  be  his  most 
favourite  pursuit.     In  1816  appeared  at  St.  Peters- 
burg the  first  edition  of  his  Poems,  and  in  1818 
another  edition,  in  four  parts,  was  published.     In 
the  first  three  parts  are  lyric  poems  (of  which  the 
most  celebrated  is  The  Bard  in  the  Camp  of  the 
Russian  Warriors  of  1812),  romances,  songs,  ballads 
(first  introduced  by  Shukofskj  among  the  Russians), 
elegies,  and  several  minor  poems.     In  the  fourth 
part  are  contained  his  prose  works ;  for  instance, 
Marien's  Forest,  which  has  been  translated  into 
elegant  French,  by  the  title  of  Le  Bois  de  Marie, 
and  constitutes  a  highly  original  and  interesting 
novel,  which  we  recommend  to  the  reader :  Upon 
Criticism :  Upon  the  Fable  :  Upon  the  Fables  of 
Kruloff:  Upon  the  Satires  of  Kantemir:  The  Three 
Sisters,  etc.  etc.     After  this  Shukofskj  translated 
some  acts  of  Schiller's  Jungfrau  von  Orleans,  and 
a  fragment  of  Moore's  romance  of  Lalla  Rookh, 
called  Paradise  and  the  Peri  (see  article  Alexander 


364  A  LEXICON  OF 

Puschkin).  Shukofskj  is  a  pupil  in  the  school  of 
romantic  poetry,  and  the  founder  of  it  in  Russia. 
Deep  feeling  and  bold  imagination  constitute  the  ro- 
mantic beauties,  and  equally  those  of  Shukofskj's 
poetry.  None  of  the  modern  Russian  poets  awakens 
more  enthusiasm  than  he.  Who  can  resist  the  en- 
chantments of  the  muse  of  his  favourite  Swetlana  ? 
His  prose  is  equally  a  model.  His  original  novel, 
Marien's  Forest,  may  be  named  as  no  unworthy 
companion  by  the  side  of  Karamsin's  Marfa  Posad- 
niza.  In  many  of  his  translations,  which  besides 
their  fidelity  and  closeness,  are  remarkable  for  the 
flowing  fulness  of  the  language,  Shukofskj  has  sur- 
passed his  originals.  Compare,  on  the  subject  of 
himself  and  his  works,  Pletneff's  Characteristics  of 
Russian  Authors,  and  A.  BestuschefF's  Review  of 
Russian  Literature. 

Shuscheuin  (Iwan  Korniljewitsch),  a  hypo-dea- 
con, was  employed  in  the  service  of  the  patriarch 
Nikon,  and  was  born  at  Novogorod.  He  en- 
joyed the  especial  favour  of  that  venerable  ecclesi- 
astic ;  after  whose  fall,  suspicion  fell  also  on  Shus- 
cherin  ;  he  was  detained  eleven  days  before  the 
secret  chancery,  and  was  afterwards  imprisoned 
for  more  than  three  years.  At  last  he  was  sent  to 
Novogorod,  where  he  lived  in  exile  for  ten  years; 
but  at  the  expiration  of  that  term,  was  restored  to 
liberty,  and  permitted  to  return  to  Moscow.  Shus- 
cherin  is  the  author  of  The  Life  of  Nikon,  which 
was  published  at  St.  Petersburg  in  1784,  under  the 
title  of  The  Biography  of  the  most  holy  Patriarch 
Nikon,  composed  by  a  servant  of  the  church. 

SiMONj  first  bishop  of  Susdal  and  Wladimir  (con- 


I(USSIAN  AUTHORS.  365 

secrated  in  1215,  and  died  in  1226),  and  his  rela- 
tion, who  lived  with  him,  Policarp,  a  monk  of  the 
Subterranean  Monastery  at  KiefF,  wrote  the  bio- 
graphies of  some  of  the  saints  of  that  monastery, 
which  are  known  by  the  name  of  the  Petscherisch- 
Paterikon.  The  first  edition  of  this  was  printed 
in  foHo  at  Kieff  in  1661,  with  illustrative  figures, 
under  the  following  title.  The  Paterikon,  or  Otetsch- 
nik  of  KiefF  (see  Appendix),  containing  the  Lives  of 
the  Saints  and  most  venerable  Fathers  who  have 
been  renowned  in  our  Cloister.  This  book  was 
afterwards  several  times  reprinted  at  KiefF  and  at 
Moscow.  The  first  and  third  parts  are  by  Simon, 
but  the  second  is  the  work  of  Polikarp.  Of  Simon's 
writings,  the  following  are  also  appended  to  the 
Paterikon  :  The  Traditions  of  the  Miracle-Work- 
ing Church  of  the  Subterranean  Monastery  at  KiefF: 
and  the  Official  Letter  to  Policarp. 

Skorina  (Franciscus),  doctor  of  medicine,  born 
at  Polozk,  lived  at  the  beginning  of  the  sixteenth 
century,  in  the  house  of  the  old  burgomaster  Jakoff 
Babitsch  at  Wilna.  He  translated  the  whole  of  the 
Bible  from  the  Latin  into  the  Russian  of  his  own 
time,  under  the  title  of  The  Russian  Bible,  translated 
by  the  Doctor  of  Medicine,  Franciscus,  son  of  Sko- 
rina, of  the  famous  town  of  Polozk,  for  the  Honour 
of  God,  and  for  the  Instruction  and  Improvement 
of  the  Polish  People.  Of  this  translation  only  cer- 
tain portions  are  now  known  :  viz.  some  of  the 
books  of  the  Old  Testament,  and  one  Evangehst  of 
the  New.  They  appeared  in  the  following  order  : 
1.  The  Book  of  Job.  2.  Jesus,  Son  of  Sirach.  3. 
The  Proverbs  of  Solomon,  1517.     4.  The  Wisdom 


36G  A  LEXICON  OF 

of  Solomon.  5.  The  Preacher  of  Solomon.  6. 
Song  of  Solomon.  7.  The  Four  Books  of  Kings, 
1518.  8.  The  Five  Books  of  Moses.  9.  Joshua. 
10.  The  Book  of  Judges.  11.  Ruth.  12.  Judith. 
13.  Esther.  14.  The  Lamentations  of  Jeremiah. 
15.  Daniel,  1519.  16.  The  Acts  of  the  Apostles, 
1525.  The  fifteen  first  books  were  printed  at 
Praga,  near  Warsaw,  in  Sclavonic  letters,  in  quarto, 
and  the  Acts  of  the  Apostles  at  Wilna,  in  octavo. 
To  these  books  Skorina  furnished  a  preface,  an 
index,  and  a  number  of  wood-cuts. 

Slawinezkj.     See  Epiphanj. 

Slapuschkin  (Feodor),  a  peasant,  is  a  poet  of  na- 
ture, and  has  also  acquired  the  art  of  painting  en- 
tirely self-taught.  His  poems  bear  the  title  of 
Hours  of  Leisure,  by  a  Villager, 

Smotrizkj.     See  Meletj. 

SoKOLOFF  (Peter  Iwanowitsch),  councillor  of  state 
and  knight,  ordinary  member  and  perpetual  secre- 
tary to  the  Russian  Academy,  librarian  and  (since 
1795)  editor  of  the  political  newspaper  of  the  Aca- 
demy of  Sciences,  member  of  numerous  learned 
societies,  was  born  at  Moscow  in  the  year  1766. 
He  received  his  early  education  at  the  Academy  of 
Moscow,  next  studied  at  the  University  of  that 
place,  and  last  of  all  at  the  Gymnasium  of  the  Aca- 
demy of  Sciences  at  St.  Petersburg.  While  yet  a 
student,  he  was  elected  one  of  the  members  of  the 
Russian  Academy  at  its  first  institution;  in  1786 
he  was  appointed  a  teacher  at  the  academical  Gym- 
nasium ;  in  1 793  he  was  made  ordinary  member 
of  the  Russian  Academy;  and  in  1802  chosen  per- 
petual secretary.     SokoloiF  took  an  active  part  in 


RUSSIAN  AUTHORS.  367 

the  compilation  of  the  famous  Dictionary  of  the 
Russian  Academy,  and  of  the  Grammar  published 
by  the  same  society,  of  which  a  third  edition  ap- 
peared in  1819.  He  himself  published  Rudiments 
of  the  Russian  Grammar,  which  was  printed  five 
times  from  1788  to  1810.  He  also  wrote  A  Short 
Russian  Grammar,  which  the  Upper  School  Direc- 
tory pubhshed  again  in  1809.  In  1805  he  appeared 
as  the  author  of  the  first  part  of  The  Bee,  or  a  Col- 
lection of  various  poetical  and  prose  Essays  from 
Russian  authors.  Besides  this  (assisted  by  other 
hands)  he  translated:  1.  The  Biography  of  the 
Chancellor  de  L'Hopital,  St.  Petersburg,  1787. 
2.  Ovid's  Metamorphoses,  one  part,  printed  toge- 
ther with  the  Latin  original  in  1808.  3.  The  se- 
cond and  third  parts  of  the  Lyceum  of  La  Harpe, 
published  by  the  Russian  Academy.  After  this  he 
engaged  in  the  translation  of  Livy,  and  of  Virgil's 
iEneid.  SokolofF  died  at  St.  Petersburg,  January 
22,  1835. 

SoLOTAREFF  (Pctcr),  the  son  of  a  bojar,  was  em- 
ployed in  the  ministry  under  Joseph  the  metropo- 
litan of  Astracan,  and  wrote  A  History  of  the  As- 
tracan  Rebellion  of  the  Cossack  Stenek  Rasin,  and 
of  the  Murders  which  then  took  place  of  the  Me- 
tropolitan Joseph,  the  Bojar  Prince  Prosorofskj, 
and  a  number  of  Woiwodes,  1669.  Manuscripts  of 
this  book  are  to  be  found  in  the  Moscow  Synodal 
Library,  and  the  Library  of  Alexander  Newskj,  at 
St.  Petersburg. 

SooGRAPH.     See  Dimitrj. 

Sophia  Alexejewna,  imperial  princess,  was  born 
in  1656,  and  died  in  1704.     In  the  Pantheon  of 


368  A  LEXICON  OF 

Russian  Writers,  the  following  passage  occurs : 
"  Here  is  not  the  place  to  paint  the  character  of 
Sophia,  who  was  one  of  the  greatest  women  that 
Russia  has  produced.  We  will  only  remark,  that 
in  point  of  intelligence  and  the  qualities  of  her  soul, 
she  is  well  worthy  to  be  called  one  of  the  sisters 
of  Peter  the  Great ;  but  dazzled  by  the  love  of 
power,  she  wished  to  rule  and  command  alone,  and 
she  imposes  on  her  historian  in  some  cases  the 
ungrateful  duty  of  being  her  accuser.  Sophia  also 
occupied  herself  much  with  literature.  She  com- 
posed tragedies,  and  herself  took  part  in  their  re- 
presentation before  the  circle  of  her  immediate  and 
intimate  friends.  We  have  read  one  of  her  dramas 
in  manuscript,  and  are  of  opinion  that  this  princess 
might  be  ranked  by  the  side  of  the  most  eminent 
female  authors  of  all  ages,  if  only  a  more  pure 
and  cultivated  taste  had  guided  the  power  of  her 
imagination." 

SoPHRONJ  (Sophronius),  a  priest  of  Rasan  ;  lived 
at  the  end  of  the  fifteenth  century,  and  wrote  The 
History  or  Narrative  of  the  Invasion  of  the  Un- 
godly Czar  Mamai,  with  a  countless  host  of  Aga- 
rans  (Tatars).  This  poem  has  been  considered  by 
some  authors  to  be  an  authentic  narration  of  facts. 
It  is  inferior  to  the  Address  to  the  Array  of  Igor, 
and  contains  some  passages  which  prove  that  the 
author  must  have  been  acquainted  with  that  com- 
position. Of  the  same  date  there  exists  a  Pa- 
negyric upon  the  Grand  Prince  Dimitrj  Johanno- 
witsch,  which  is  most  likely  the  composition  also  of 
Sophronius.  A  manuscript  copy  of  the  poem  on 
the  invasion  of  Mamai  is  preserved  in  the  library  of 


RUSSIAN  AUTHORS.  360 

Count  F,  A.  Tolstoj  ;  and  extracts  with  translations 
from  both  works  may  be  found  printed  at  the  end 
of  the  fifth  volume  of  the  History  of  the  Empire  of 
Russia. 

SopiKOFF  (Wassilj  Stepanowitsch),  busied  himself 
for  a  long  time  with  the  Russian  book-trade/ and 
since  1811  has  been  employed  in  the  Imperial  Pub- 
lic Library.  He  wrote  an  Essay  on  Russian  Bib- 
liography, which  appeared  at  St.  Petersburg,  in  five 
parts,  1813-1821.  The  fifth  part,  which  was  printed 
after  the  death  of  the  author,  which  occurred  in 
1818,  was  completed  and  carried  through  the  press 
by  Wassilj  Grigorjewitsch  Anastassewitsch. 

SoTOFF,  imperial  councillor,  is  the  author  of  the 
following  romances  :  1.  The  Mysterious  Monk,  or 
Some  Passages  in  the  Time  of  Peter  the  Great.  2. 
Leonid,  or  Some  Passages  in  the  Life  of  Napoleon. 
For  the  former  work  he  was  rewarded  by  a  valu- 
able diamond  ring  from  the  Emperor.  Besides  these, 
he  has  written  A  History  of  Europe,  under  the 
Reign  of  Alexander  the  First.  He  is  still  living,  as 
we  beheve,  at  St.  Petersburg. 

Spasskj  published  at  St.  Petersburg  the  Siberian 
Courier,  in  which  are  to  be  found  many  curious 
and  interesting  articles  upon  Siberia,  with  which 
Europeans  are  still  so  little  acquainted. 

Speranskj  (Michael  Michailowitsch),  has  done 
good  service  both  to  literature  and  Christian  ethics 
by  an  excellent  translation  of  the  work  of  Thomas 
a  Kempis  On  the  Imitation  of  Jesus  Christ,  St.  Pe- 
tersburg, 1819.  This  work,  so  highly  valued  both 
by  Catholics  and  Protestants,  has  been  translated 

Bb 


370  A  LEXICON  OF 

into  almost  all  the  languages  of  Europe ;  but  has 
only  recently  appeared  in  a  Dutch  version,  by  Per- 
poncher  and  Schrant^. 

SsoMOFF,  author  of  an  essay  On  the  Romantic, 
which  appeared  in  a  journal  published  at  St.  Pe- 
tersburg by  the  Society  for  the  Promotion  of  En- 
lightenment and  Beneficence. 

Stephan  (Jaworskj,  baptized  Symeon),  metropo- 
litan of  Rasan,  and  president  of  the  Holy  Synod, 
was  born  in  1658,  at  Lemberg,  of  noble  Russian 
parents,  who  afterwards  settled  in  Little  Russia. 
He  received  his  education  at  the  Academy  of  Kieff, 
and  afterwards  visited  with  the  most  beneficial  re- 
sult the  seats  of  education  in  Poland.  After  this 
he  took  the  tonsure  at  the  Subterranean  Monastery 
at  Kieff,  and  exercised  the  duties  of  teacher  and 
preacher  at  the  Academy  there.  In  the  year  1700 
he  was  despatched  to  Moscow,  where  he  drew  upon 
him  the  notice  of  the  monarch  by  his  delivery  of 
a  funeral  sermon.  Peter  desired  him  to  continue 
at  Moscow,  and  soon  advanced  him  to  the  dignity 
of  metropolitan  of  Rasan.  In  1702  the  duties  of 
patriarch  were  intrusted  to  him,  with  the  rank  and 
titles  of  administrator,  exarch,  vicar,  and  conser- 
vator of  the  Patriarchal  Chair  ;  and  besides  this,  he 
was  appointed  protector  of  the  Clerical  Academy 
at  Moscow.  In  1712  the  superintendence  of  the 
improvements  which  were  made  about  this  time  in 
the  Sclavonic  Bible  was  intrusted  to  him.  Ste- 
phan resided  for  the  most  part  with  his  royal  pa- 
s' See  N.  G.  van  Kampen's  Beknopte  Geschiedenis  der  letteren  en 
Wetenschappen  in  de  Nederlanden,  etc. 


RUSSIAN  AUTHORS.  371 

tron,  at  Moscow  and  St.  Petersburg,  where  he  was 
constantly  engaged  either  in  preaching  or  in  the 
services  of  the  cathedral,  or  else  at  court  in  the 
management  of  the  affairs  of  the  Russian  church. 
In  1721,  at  the  opening  of  the  Holy  Synod,  he  was 
elected  its  president,  but  soon  after  died  at  Mos- 
cow, viz.  on  the  27th  of  November,  1722.  This 
prelate  is  highly  illustrious  among  the  clerical 
orators  of  his  time.  The  sermons  and  funeral 
discourses  of  his  composition  were  printed  at  Mos- 
cow in  1804 ;  and,  as  Katschenofskj  remarks  in 
his  Review  of  the  Progress  of  Russian  Eloquence  in 
the  First  Half  of  the  Eighteenth  Century,  "They  are 
remarkable  for  their  fulness  of  thought,  although  not 
always  select,  and  taken  wholesale  from  the  an- 
cient Greek  and  Roman  writers."  Stephan's  great- 
est work  is  The  Rock  of  Faith  for  the  Orthodox 
Catholic  Eastern  Church,  etc.,  in  which  he  endea- 
voured to  controvert  the  various  false  doctrines 
which  had  insinuated  themselves  into  the  Catholic 
church.  This  book,  which  was  not  printed  until 
1728,  was  the  occasion  of  long  controversies  be- 
tween the  Russian-Greek  and  the  Protestant  theo- 
logical writers. 

Storch  (Andrej  Karlowitsch),  an  academician, 
acting  councillor  of  state  and  knight,  was  born  at 
Riga,  in  1766,  was  educated  at  the  universities 
of  Jena  and  Heidelberg,  and  afterwards  travelled 
through  the  principal  countries  of  Europe.  In 
1788  he  was  made  professor  of  literature  and  his- 
tory to  the  Land  Cadet  Corps  :  in  1789  placed  at 
the  College  for  Foreign  Affairs  :  in  1798  appointed 
tutor  to  the  Grand  Princesses,  and  afterwards  to 

Bb2 


S72  A  LEXICON  OF 

the  Grand  Princes  also,  and  in  1804  chosen  an  aca- 
demician. He  published  in  the  German  language 
many  important  works  relative  to  the  statistics  of 
the  Russian  Empire ;  for  instance,  1.  Pictures  of 
St.  Petersburg,  two  parts,  1792.  2.  A  Statistical 
Survey  of  the  Russian  Empire,  in  tables,  1795.  3. 
Sketches  of  the  Russian  Empire,  three  parts,  1796- 
1802.  4.  Russia  under  Alexander  the  First,  nine 
parts,  1803-1807.  In  the  French  language  he 
published,  5.  Cows  d'Economie  Politique,  six  parts, 
1815  ;  and  in  the  Russian  language,  in  conjunction 
with  the  councillor  of  state  Adelung,  6.  A  Review 
of  Russian  Literature  from  1801  to  1805,  two  parts, 
1808.     Storch  died  at  the  end  of  the  year  1835. 

Stritter  (Johann  Gotthilf),  councillor  of  state 
and  knight,  was  born  at  Stettin,  in  the  year  1740, 
became  adjunct  at  the  Academy  of  Sciences  at  St. 
Petersburg,  lived  during  that  time  at  St.  Peters- 
burg, and  in  1785  was  placed  at  Moscow  in  the 
archives  of  the  College  for  Foreign  Affairs,  and 
died  at  Moscow  in  1801.  He  deserves  our  especial 
acknowledgments  for  his  publication  of  Information 
respecting  the  Byzantine  Historians  who  have  il- 
lustrated the  Early  History  of  Russia.  This  work, 
which  was  written  in  Latin,  and  printed  in  four  vo- 
lumes at  St.  Petersburg,  1771-1780,  was  translated 
into  Russian  by  Wassilj  Swatoff,  and  printed  at  the 
same  place  in  1770-1775.  Besides  this,  Stritter  was 
the  author  of  A  History  of  Russia,  in  three  parts, 
of  which  the  third  part,  which  reaches  to  the  year 
1462,  was  pubhshed  at  St.  Petersburg  in  1800- 
1803. 

Strojeff.     See  Malinofskj. 


RUSSIAN  AUTHORS.  373 

Strugoffschtschikoff  (Alex.  Stepanowitsch), 
imperial  councillor,  member  of  several  academies 
and  learned  societies,  translated  an  excellent  work 
of  Colonel  Reiis  into  Russian,  called  Elements,  or 
Fundamental  Rules  in  Philosophy,  Politics,  and 
Morals.  The  first  volume  was  pubhshed  in  1807, 
St.  Petersburg. 

SuDOFTscHiKOFF  wi'otc  the  comcdy.  The  Un- 
heard-of Wonder,  or  The  Honest  Secretary.  It  is 
composed  in  metre,  and  contains  much  truth  in  a 
lively  form. 

SujEFF.     See  Pallas. 

SuMAROKOFF  (Alcx.  Petrowitsch),  acting  coun- 
cillor of  state  and  knight,  was  born  in  1718.  His 
father,  a  major-general,  began  his  education  at 
home ;  afterwards  he  was  placed  in  the  Land  Cadet 
Corps,  in  which  he  soon  distinguished  himself  by 
his  abilities.  At  the  same  time  that  Lomonossoff 
was  busily  engaged  at  Marburg  in  endeavouring  to 
imitate  Giinther  and  other  poets  of  Germany,  Su- 
marokoff  was  reading  Racine  and  Corneille,  and 
improving  the  barbarous  chorusses  of  Tredjakofskj. 
In  the  year  1748  he  first  began  writing  tragedies, 
which  were  enacted  by  the  cadets,  and  considered 
not  unworthy  of  notice  by  the  Empress  Elizabeth, 
who  caused  him  to  be  appointed  in  1756  director 
of  the  Russian  Court-Theatre.  In  1759  he  pub- 
lished the  journal  called  The  Industrious  Bee.  He 
died  at  Moscow,  October  1st,  1777.  His  collected 
works  were  published  by  Nowikoff  in  1787,  in  ten 
volumes.  They  contain,  in  prose,  among  other 
things,  1.  A  Short  Chronicle  of  Moscow.  2.  A 
Description  of  the  Two  First  Insurrections  of  the 


374  A  LEXICON  OF 

Strelitzes,  incomplete.  3.  An  Introduction  to  the 
History  of  Peter  the  Great,  incomplete.  4.  Some 
Essays  on  Virtue.  5.  The  First  Principles  of 
Worldly- Wisdom.  6.  OfRussian  Pulpit  Eloquence. 
7.  Various  Minor,  Moral,  Satirical,  and  Historical 
Treatises.  8.  Dialogues  in  the  Kingdom  of  the 
Dead.  9.  Comedies :  among  others.  The  Guardian ; 
The  Usurer;  The  Revengeful  Man ;  Narcissus,  etc. 
10.  Operas:  Alceste  ;  Cephalus  and  Procris.  11. 
The  Hermit,  a  drama.  12.  Orations:  Upon  Pe- 
ter the  Great ;  To  Catherine  the  Second ;  To  the 
Grand  Prince  Paul  Petrowitsch ;  On  the  Opening 
of  the  Imperial  Academy  of  Arts  ;  On  the  Laying 
of  the  Foundation  of  the  Kremlin  Palace ;  Upon 
the  Love  of  One's  Neighbour.  In  verse,  1.  Tragedies : 
Choreff;  Hamlet;  Sinaff  and  Truwor ;  Aristome  ; 
Semira;  Jaropolk  and  Demisa;  WiischesslafF;  The 
Pseudo  Dimitrj  (his  best  work,  translated  in  1800 
into  French,  and  still  more  recently  into  English)  ; 
Mstisslaff.  2.  Translations  or  Versions  of  almost 
all  David's  Psalms.  3.  Various  Spiritual  and  Moral 
Poems.  4.  Inscriptions.  5.  Epistles.  6.  Festival 
Odes.  7.  Allegories  ;  in  six  books,  which  were 
for  a  long  time  considered  to  be  perfect  models, 
but  which  have  now  little  to  recommend  them 
but  their  antiquity.  8.  Satires.  9.  Eclogues  and 
Idylls.  10.  Songs  and  Chorusses.  11.  Elegies. 
12.  Sonnets,  Epigrams,  Madrigals,  and  other  small 
poems.  Alexander  Bestuscheff  characterizes  this 
prolific  writer  in  the  following  words  :  "  Suma- 
rokoff,  the  cotemporary  and  rival  of  LomonossofF, 
is  the  creator  of  the  Russian  theatre.  He  wrote 
in    every   different    species   of   poetry  ;    but   the 


RUSSIAN  AUTHORS.  375 

laurels  he  so  hardly  earned,  are  fast  fading  and 
withering  away,  for  inexorable  posterity  refuses  to 
him  the  fame  of  a  classical  author.  In  the  Russian 
drama,  constant  imitation  of  the  French,  the  most 
complete  contempt  of  the  unity  of  place,  indistinct- 
ness of  character  in  the  persons  represented,  cold- 
ness of  passion,  and  complicated  plots — these  are 
faults  which  are  not  easily  to  be  got  over.  The 
simphcity  in  his  Fables  and  Idylls  is  affected :  the 
wit  in  his  comedies  is  forced ;  and  above  all,  the 
charms  of  imagination  and  feeling,  few  and  far  be- 
tween as  they  are,  are  enveloped  always  in  a  diffi- 
cult and  thorny  style."  Merslakoff  too,  in  his  Cha- 
racteristics of  Russian  Authors,  says  very  happily, 
in  drawing  a  comparison  between  LomonossofF  and 
SumarokofF,  "  LomonossofF  is  the  slow,  uniform, 
and  heavy  eagle,  that  poises  himself  in  the  air  and 
floats  there  :  SumarokofF  is  rather  like  the  bird 
which  flutters  above  the  surface  of  the  earth,  and 
pursues  its  object  with  the  most  tortuous  and  rapid 
gyrations." 

SumarokofF  (Pankratj).  The  particulars  of  the 
life  of  this  author  are  not  accurately  known  to  us. 
We  only  know  that  he  lived  in  the  year  1790  at 
Tobolsk,  and  afterwards  at  Moscow.  In  the  former 
town  he  edited,  in  1793,  the  journal  called  The 
Irtiisch,  transformed  into  the  Hippocrene  ;  and  at 
Moscow,  in  1802,  The  Journal  of  Agreeable,  In- 
structive, and  Entertaining  Reading.  In  the  year 
1799  his  poems  were  printed  at  Moscow,  in  two 
parts.  Amongst  them,  two  novels  are  particularly 
good,  viz.  Love  Robbed  of  his  Sight,  and  Al'nass- 
kar ;  besides  some  Mahrchen,  or  popular  tales. 


376  A  LEXICON  OF 

SwATOFF.     See  Stritter. 

SwiNJiN,  author  of  the  work.  Travels  of  a  Painter 
in  America. 

SwiNSius,  the  editor  of  Patriotic  Papers,  St.  Pe- 
tersburg. These  contain,  among  other  excellent 
articles.  Characteristic  Traits  of  the  Manners  of 
the  Russian  People. 

Sylvester,  bishop  of  Perejaslawl,  died  in  April, 
1124  ;  he  was,  as  TatischtschefF  tells  us,  one  of  the 
continuers  of  Nestor's  Chronicle,  certainly  from 
1111  to  1116. 

Sylvester  (properly  Symeon  Medwadjeff),  prior 
of  the  monastery  of  Saikonospaskj  at  Moscow,  a 
scholar  of  Symeon  Polozkj,  wrote  a  number  of  po- 
lemical works,  which  are  remarkable  for  their  warm 
support  of  the  Romish  church ;  on  which  account 
also  he  was  punished  by  being  deprived  of  his  be- 
nefices, and  being  immured  in  a  monastery.  At 
last,  in  the  year  1691,  he  was  condemned  to  death 
for  being  implicated  in  a  conspiracy  against  the 
government,  and  an  insurrection  of  the  Strelitzes. 
He  wrote  a  very  partial  account  of  the  revolt  of 
the  Strelitzes,  and  composed  a  number  of  poems ; 
for  instance,  1.  A  Poem  on  the  Marriage  of  the 
Czar  Feodor  Alexejewitsch.  2.  The  Complaint 
and  Consolation  of  Russia  for  the  Death  of  the 
Czar  Feodor  Alexejewitsch.  3.  A  Letter  to  the 
Princess  Sophia  Alexejewna,  upon  the  Presentation 
of  the  Statutes  of  the  Moscow  Academy,  etc. 

Symeon  Medwadjeff.     See  Sylvester. 

Symeon  Polozkj,  (or  as  he  wrote  it  himself,  Sy- 
meon Petrofskj  Sitianowitsch  Polozkj,)  born  at  Po- 
lozk  in  1628,  was  educated  at  different  foreign  uni- 


RUSSIAN  AUTHORS.  377 

versities,  relinquished  the  monk's  vow  in  White 
Russia,  and  was  consecrated  a  hieromonach.  After 
Smolensk  was  united  with  Russia,  he  went  with 
many  other  ecclesiastics  from  White  Russia,  in  the 
year  1667,  to  Moscow,  was  received  by  the  Czar 
with  great  goodwill,  and  appointed  tutor  to  the 
Zarewitsch  Feodor  Alexejewitsch.  The  patriarch 
Joassaph  consigned  to  him  the  composition  and 
compilation  of  a  number  of  chm'ch  books.  In  1668 
Symeon  wrote  in  praise  of  the  Czar  Alexej  Mi- 
chailowitsch  a  large  book  in  verse,  entitled  The 
Russian  Eagle  surrounded  by  the  Sunbeams.  Af- 
ter this  he  composed  a  great  many  things  in  prose 
and  verse,  and  some  theological  and  dramatic  works, 
which  however  he  did  not  print.  His  plays  how- 
ever were  sometimes  represented  in  the  private 
apartments  of  the  Princess  Sophia  Alexejewna. 
After  the  death  of  the  Czar  Feodor  Alexejewitsch, 
he  continued  at  the  court,  where  he  was  always 
regarded  with  great  esteem.  He  was  the  first 
man  who  began  in  Russia  to  write  sermons,  and 
to  deliver  them  freely  before  the  people  in  the 
churches  of  Moscow,  after  the  manner  practised  by 
the  priests  of  Lesser  Russia  and  Poland;  for  till 
his  time  it  had  been  customary  to  read  to  the 
people  homilies  selected  from  the  Fathers,  and 
approved  of  by  the  patriarch  and  synod.  For  the 
printing  of  his  works  he  erected  a  private  press  of 
his  own  at  the  court,  in  the  year  1680.  Various 
innovations  and  deviations  from  the  practice  of  the 
orthodox  church,  brought  upon  him  the  ill-will  of 
the  patriarch,  and  caused  misunderstandings  be- 
tween them,  which  only  ceased  with  the  death  of 


378  A  LEXICON  OF 

Symeon,  which  took  place  on  the  25th  of  August, 
1680.  Of  his  works,  the  following  were  printed  : 
1.  The  Staff  of  Government,  which  he  wrote  at 
the  suggestion  of  the  patriarch  Joseph,  and  which 
was  published  in  1668,  in  the  names  of  the  united 
Russian  clergy,  to  refute  the  heresies  of  the  Rass- 
kolniks.  2.  Lessons  on  Proper  Behaviour  in  the 
House  of  God,  and  at  the  Hearing  of  the  Holy 
Liturgy.  3.  Instructions  of  the  Priests  to  their 
Flocks,  etc.  4.  The  Psalter  in  Verse,  printed  at 
the  above-mentioned  court-press.  This  book  de- 
serves especial  mention,  because  it  was  the  read- 
ing of  this  which  first  excited  in  LomonossofF  the 
love  of  poetry.  5.  Spiritual  Dinner ;  and  6.  Spi- 
ritual Supper,  two  collections  of  spiritual,  edify- 
ing discourses.  Of  his  manuscripts  which  have 
never  been  printed,  we  may  afford  to  notice  here 
the  Rythmologion,  or  poems  on  various  occasions, 
among  which  are  to  be  found  the  comedy  of  The 
Lost  Son,  and  the  tragedy  of  Nebuchadnezzar,  The 
Golden  Image,  and  The  Three  Children  in  the  Fiery 
Furnace. 

T. 

T  *  *  *  (P.),  wrote  the  comedy  of  The  Heirs, 
in  one  act,  St.  Petersburg,  1799. 

Tappe  (August  Wilhelm),  professor  at  the  Royal 
Forest  Institute  at  Tharand,  near  Dresden,  and 
knight  of  the  order  of  St.  Anne,  third  class,  has 
merited  well  of  the  Russian  language  and  hterature, 
and  has  contributed  much  to  facilitate  and  acce- 
lerate the  acquirement  of  them  by  the  following 
works :  A  New  Theoretical  and  Practical  Russian 


RUSSIAN  AUTHORS.  379 

Grammar  for  Germans,  with  many  examples,  and 
passages  for  translating  from  Russian  into  Ger- 
man, and  from  German  into  Russian,  according  to 
the  best  Grammarians ;  with  a  sketch  of  Russian 
history  to  be  translated  into  Russian  ;  of  which 
work  the  first  edition  appeared  in  1810,  and  the 
sixth  in  1826,  at  St.  Petersburg,  Riga,  and  Leipsic. 
2.  A  New  Russian  Elementary  Reading-book  for 
Germans,  seventh  edition,  St.  Petersburg,  1827.  3. 
A  Russian  Historical  Reading-book,  extracted  from 
Karamsin's  History  of  Russia;  accentuated  through- 
out, for  the  use  of  schools  and  the  purposes  of 
self-instruction,  with  explanations  of  the  words, 
and  the  mode  of  pronunciation  in  the  German 
and  French  letters,  together  with  References  to  the 
Grammar,  as  a  third  part  to  the  sixth  edition  of 
the  Russian  Grammar,  two  parts,  St.  Petersburg, 
1819;  second  edition,  1825.  Of  the  last  work, 
Tappe  made  a  much-admired  translation,  with  the 
following  title.  The  History  of  Russia,  by  Karam- 
sin,  rendered  into  German  from  the  original,  ac- 
companied with  numerous  notes  and  explanatory 
remarks,  in  one  vol.,  Dresden  and  Leipsic,  1825. 
This  work,  clothed  as  it  is  in  elegant  and  beautiful 
language,  may  be  regarded  as  a  real  addition  to  our 
historical  literature.  A  good  critique  on  this  au- 
thor is  to  be  found  in  Dem  Correspoiidentem  von 
und  fur  Deutschland,  for  the  30th  of  September, 
1828,  under  the  head  of  Literary  Notices.  Tappe 
died  on  the  3rd  of  April,  1830. 

Tatischtscheff  (Wassilj  Nikititsch),  privy  coun- 
cillor, born  in  1686,  received  his  early  education 
beneath  the  parental  roof,  and  in  1704  was  sent 


380  A  LEXICON  OF 

out  by  Peter  the  Great,  along  with  other  distin- 
guished young  Russians,  to  travel  in  foreign  coun- 
tries, where  he  acquired  an  extensive  acquaint- 
ance with  the  sciences,  and  learned  the  German 
and  Pohsh  languages.  After  his  return  to  Rus- 
sia, he  was  placed  in  the  College  of  Mines  and 
Manufactures,  and  was  frequently  employed  by 
the  Emperor  in  difficult  affairs,  particularly  in  Si- 
beria. In  1723  he  was  appointed  upper  master 
of  the  ceremonies  at  the  court;  in  1724  sent  to 
Sweden  on  a  secret  mission,  and  was  promoted 
to  the  rank  of  colonel  of  artillery.  On  his  re- 
turn from  thence,  he  went  again  to  the  Mining  Col- 
lege, where  he  was  invested  with  many  honours; 
and  in  1734  he  was  sent  out  w^ith  the  rank  of  act- 
ing councillor  of  state,  to  superintend  the  working 
of  the  mines  in  Siberia,  with  unlimited  powers. 
In  1737  he  was  promoted  <to  be  privy  councillor 
and  master-general  of  the  mining  department,  with 
an  extension  of  the  powers  which  had  been  be- 
fore granted  him.  Wassilj  Nikititsch  paid  the  most 
assiduous  attention  to  the  duties  of  his  office ;  he 
opened  several  new  mines ;  improved  the  old  ones ; 
abohshed  numerous  abuses;  encouraged  the  miners 
to  persevere  in  their  labours ;  and  composed  a 
book  of  mining  directions.  In  1737  the  mihtary 
expedition  to  Orenburg  was  intrusted  to  him ;  and 
in  1741  he  came  as  governor  to  Astracan,  being 
sent  thither  chiefly  to  organise  as  far  as  possible 
the  Calmuck  tribes;  but  in  1745  his  misunder- 
standing with  the'  chief-governor  of  the  Calmucks 
was  seized  on  as  an  occasion  to  transfer  all  his  Cal- 
muck and  Astracan  duties  and  honours  to  general 


RUSSIAN  AUTHORS.  381 

Jeropkin.  Upon  this  he  quitted  Astracan,  and 
retired  to  his  estate,  called  Boldin,  which  still 
belongs  to  his  descendants,  seventy  wersts  from 
Moscow,  where  he  died  on  the  15th  of  July,  1750. 
Of  his  writings  the  following  are  best  known  :  1. 
A  History  of  Russia  from  the  Earliest  Times,  col- 
lected and  composed  during  an  interval  of  thirty 
years.  This  work  may  rather  be  considered  as  an 
old  Russian  latopiss  illustrated  with  notes.  The 
cause  of  his  undertaking  this  work  was  the  project 
of  Count  Bruce  to  make  a  complete  Russian  Geo- 
graphy. TatischtschefF  helped  him  in  this  design, 
and  very  soon  saw  that  such  a  work  could  not  be 
properly  accomplished  without  a  detailed  History  to 
accompany  it.  He  in  consequence  began  to  col- 
late the  different  manuscripts  of  Nestor's  Chronicle, 
which  he  discovered  in  Siberia,  and  to  illustrate 
these  he  extracted  tlj^e  most  applicable  passages 
that  he  could  find  in  German  or  Polish  historical 
works,  and  directed  his  assistants  in  the  same  way 
to  translate  from  French,  Latin,  and  Tatar  works. 
On  the  same  plan  he  also  had  recourse  to  extracts 
from  the  archives  of  Siberia,  Casan,  and  Astracan. 
TatischtschefF  had  intended  to  continue  this  History 
to  1613,  that  is  to  say,  to  the  accession  of  the  Czar 
Michael  Fodorowitsch.  He  did  not  however  get 
so  far,  and  it  is  not  now  known  at  what  precise 
point  he  discontinued  his  work,  as  his  original  ma- 
nuscript is  unfortunately  lost.  This  History  was 
for  a  long  period  preserved  in  MS.,  and  accord- 
ing to  the  notions  of  the  time,  was  looked  upon 
like  a  state  secret,  as  unfit  for  publication.  After 
the  accession  of  Catherine  the  Second,  however^ 


382  A  LEXICON  OF 

these  prejudices  were  quickly  dispelled.  The  his- 
torian, Miiller,  received  directions  for  the  publica- 
tion of  the  History  of  TatischtschefF,  which  he  had 
to  prepare  from  a  very  incorrect  manuscript,  which 
the  son  of  the  author  had  presented  to  the  Moscow 
University.  Miiller  corrected  many  of  the  mistakes, 
overruled  a  great  many  arbitrary  decisions  of  the 
author,  and  published  the  first  division  of  this  His- 
tory at  the  Moscow  university  press,  in  4to.  1769 ; 
the  second,  in  1773  ;  and  the  third,  in  1774.  The 
fourth  division,  by  far  the  most  incorrect,  and  less 
illustrated  than  the  others  by  TatischtschefF's  an- 
notations, was  also  published  at  St.  Petersburg  by 
Catherine's  order,  in  1784.  He  brought  it  down 
to  the  year  1462.  This  History  has  been  consi- 
dered till  our  times  as  a  sort  of  collation  of  the 
Russian  Latopisses,  which  view  is  also  supported 
by  the  able  critic,  Schlozer;  but  he  refutes  such 
a  notion  respecting  the  Scythian  and  Sarmatian 
chronicles,  and  also  with  regard  to  the  spurious 
chronicle  of  Joachim.  Boltin  followed  Tatischts- 
chefF implicitly.  It  is  to  be  lamented  that  an  inva- 
luable collection  of  Latopisses  and  other  documents, 
which  had  served  for  the  compilation  of  this  His- 
tory, fell  a  sacrifice  to  the  flames.  2.  Tatischts- 
chefF also  laboured,  as  has  been  said  above,  at 
making  a  complete  Russian  Geography.  He  sent 
land-surveyors  into  the  Siberian  provinces,  collected 
from  various  places  geographical  information  and 
plans,  arranged,  compared,  and  improved  all  the 
intelligence  he  received,  and  in  1736  and  1739  he 
laid  before  the  cabinet  of  the  Academy  of  Sci- 
ences the  maps  of  Siberia,  and  a  large  atlas  of  the 


RUSSIAN  AUTHORS.  383 

same  country,  which  was  published  in  1745,  in 
twenty  leaves.  3.  A  Russian  Historical-Political- 
Municipal  Lexicon,  which  although  only  continued 
to  the  letter  I,  was  printed  at  St.  Petersburg  in 
1793.  Besides  this,  he  left  behind  him  some  his- 
torical writings,  which  were  destroyed  by  fire,  and 
wrote  annotations  to  the  Russian  Rights,  and  to 
the  Sudebnik  (see  Appendix)  of  the  Czar  Johann 
Wassiljewitsch,  which  was  published  and  printed 
from  his  copy  at  Moscow  in  1768  and  in  1786, 
together  with  the  Russian  Rights,  in  the  First 
Part  of  the  continuation  of  the  Ancient  Russian 
Library. 

Teploff  (Grigorj  Nikolajewitsch),  privy  coun- 
cillor, senator,  and  knight,  died  on  the  30th  of 
March,  1779.  In  his  youth  he  was  occupied  in 
learned  pursuits,  was  adjunct  to  the  Academy  of 
Sciences,  and  composed  a  work  entitled  Notions 
on  Philosophy  in  general,  St.  Petersburg,  1751. 

TiMKOFSKJ  (Roman  Fodorowitsch),  professor  of 
Antiquities  and  the  Latin  Language  in  the  Univer- 
sity of  Moscow,  collegiate  councillor  and  knight, 
died  in  1820,  in  the  34th  year  of  his  age.  Besides 
the  business  which  necessarily  engaged  him  in  the 
study  of  Roman  antiquities  in  connection  with  his 
office,  he  also  took  an  active  part  in  the  labours  of 
the  Moscow  Society  for  Russian  History  and  Anti- 
quities, and  prepared  a  collated  edition  of  the  Chro- 
nicle of  Nestor.  His  labour  was  lost  through  the 
invasion  of  1812. 

TiMOTHEus,  a  sacristan,  is  mentioned  by  Ta- 
tischtscheff  as  the  continuer  of  the  Chronicle  of 
Nestor.     It  is  probable,  however,  that  like  Johann, 


i 


384.  A  LEXICON  OF 

a  priest  of  Novogorod,  he  was  only  a  transcriber 
who  copied  it. 

ToLOTSCHANiNOFF.     See  Ijewleff. 

ToLSTOj  (Count  Feodor),  still  living  at  St.  Pe- 
tersburg, is  an  author  well  known  to  the  public, 
and  is  a  still  more  indefatigable  collector  of  old  ma- 
nuscripts and  printed  books.  His  library  is  a  mine 
of  wealth  to  historians  and  antiquarians,  as  well  in 
bibliography  as  in  various  other  branches  of  archae- 
ological research.  In  the  year  1830  his  collection 
contained  nine  hundred  and  seventy-five  MSS.  of 
the  old  and  middle  ages,  that  is,  from  the  thirteenth 
to  the  seventeenth  century,  two  hundred  and  nine- 
teen of  which  date  from  the  beginning  to  the  mid- 
dle of  the  sixteenth  century.  Karamsin  used  this 
library  almost  daily  during  the  fifteen  years  that  he 
was  occupied  in  the  compilation  of  his  History,  and 
as  he  himself  says,  has  drawn  his  most  interesting 
materials  from  the  old  manuscripts  which  he  found 
here.  It  has  not  been  of  less  service  in  the  pre- 
paration of  the  recently  published  collection  of  old 
Russian  laws.  The  Emperor  has  lately  bought, 
for  the  sum  of  150,000  roubles,  this  whole  collec- 
tion of  old  MSS.  and  rare  Russian  printed  works, 
for  the  Imperial  ^Library.  We  believe  that  Count 
Tolstoj  is  also  desirous  of  seUing  his  collection  of 
old  books  and  MSS.  in  foreign  languages,  which  is 
scarcely  less  valuable. 

Tranquillion.     See  Cyrill. 

Tredjakofskj  (Wassilj  Kirilowitsch),  imperial 
councillor,  professor  of  eloquence,  was  born  at  As- 
tracan,  on  the  22nd  of  February,  1703.  In  his 
youth  he  travelled  through  France,  England,  and 


RUSSIAN  AUTHORS.  385 

Holland,  studied  various  sciences  at  the  Univer- 
sity of  Paris,  and,  among  others,  eloquence  and 
history  under  the  celebrated  Rollin.  In  1713  he 
was  a  student  at  the  St.  Petersburg  Academy  of 
Sciences  ;  in  1733  he  was  made  secretary,  and  in 
1 745  appointed  by  an  ukase  to  the  professorship  of 
eloquence.  In  1763  he  received,  at  his  own  re- 
quest, permission  to  retire  with  the  rank  of  impe- 
rial councillor.  He  died  on  the  6th  of  August, 
1769.  His  works  are  :  1.  An  Introduction  to  Rus- 
sian Poetry,  St.  Petersburg,  1735.  2.  A  Dialogue 
between  a  Foreigner  and  a  Russian  on  the  Ancient 
and  Modern  Orthographies,  and  on  all  matters  con- 
nected with  that  subject,  St.  Petersburg,  1748.  3. 
Deidamia,  a  tragedy,  in  five  acts.  4.  The  Tele- 
machid,  or  a  translation  of  Fenelon's  Telemaque 
into  metre,  St.  Petersburg,  1766.  5.  Some  Festival 
Odes  on  different  occasions.  Idylls,  Fables,  etc., 
which  are  printed  in  the  collection  of  his  works, 
and  also  in  different  numbers  of  the  monthly  Trans- 
actions of  the  Academy  of  Sciences.  6.  Thoughts 
on  the  Old,  Middle,  and  New  Styles  of  Russian 
Poetry,  reprinted  in  the  June  number  of  the  Aca- 
demical Transactions  for  1755.  7.  Three  Essays 
on  the  most  remarkable  Russian  Antiquities,  St. 
Petersburg,  1773.  Of  his  translations  the  follow- 
ing deserve  notice  :  1.  Rollin's  Ancient  and  Roman 
History,  twenty-six  parts,  which  he  translated  en- 
tirely a  second  time  over,  the  first  manuscript 
having  been  destroyed  by  the  flames,  St.  Peters- 
burg, 1749-1761,  and  1762-1767.  2.  Of  the  Ro- 
man Emperors,  four  parts,  St.  Petersburg,  1767- 
1769.     3.  The  Military  Condition  of  the  Ottoman 

cc 


i 


386  A  LEXICON  OF 

Empire,  St.  Petersburg,  1737.  4.  The  Genealogy 
of  Tatar  History,  St.  Petersburg,  1769.  5.  Les- 
sons on  the  Art  of  Poetry,  from  Boileau,  printed  in 
the  first  volume  of  his  works  and  translations ; — 
and  many  others.  We  pass  here,  without  special 
mention,  a  quantity  of  operas,  prologues,  inter- 
mezzos, odes,  etc.,  which  he  composed.  Tredja- 
kofskj  earned  by  his  industry,  learning,  and  love 
of  science,  as  well  as  by  his  enlightenment  in  gene- 
ral, an  honourable  place  on  the  Russian  Parnassus. 
Some  of  his  works  (as  for  instance,  the  Reflections 
on  the  Art  of  Poetry,  from  RoUin)  still  retain  their 
favour  with  the  public.  He  first  explained  the 
true  province  of  Russian  poetry,  and  shewed  how 
ill  adapted  the  syllabic  verse  is  to  the  Russian  lan- 
guage ;  but  yet  he  had  not  the  talent  to  exemplify 
the  correctness  of  his  own  theories  and  assertions 
by  his  own  works.  The  style  of  his  prose  is  re- 
gular, but  inelegant  and  dull.  His  verses,  how- 
ever, evince  a  total  deficiency  of  taste  and  poetic 
talent.  The  Telemachid  and  Deidamia  remain  as 
memorials  of  his  vain  endeavours  to  grasp  the 
laurels  of  poetry. 

TscHEBOTAREFF  (Chariton  Andrejewitsch),  coun- 
cillor of  state  and  knight,  studied  at  the  University 
of  Moscow,  but  had  previously  frequented  the 
Gymnasium  of  the  same  place;  and  in  1778,  on 
the  death  of  professor  Reichel,  he  succeeded  to  his 
chair.  He  died  in  1815,  after  having  been  first 
rector  of  the  university,  and  first  professor  emeritus. 
He  founded  the  Society  for  History  and  Russian 
Antiquities,  was  the  main  supporter  of  it,  and 
worked  hard  on  extracts  from  old  Russian  Chro- 


RUSSIAN  AUTHORS.  387 

nicies  for  the  Empress  Catherine,  when  she  was  oc- 
cupied in  the  collection  of  materials  for  the  History 
of  Russia.  Tschebotareff  wrote  several  learned  and 
festival  odes>  as  well  as  a  Russian  history  for  his 
pupils,  which,  however,  has  never  been  printed. 

TscHEGLOFF,  Profcssor,  commenced  in  the  year 
1830  a  journal  called  The  Northern  Bee,  which 
professes  to  contain  the  newest  intelligence  con- 
nected with  mechanics,  physics  and  chemistry,  hus- 
bandry, housekeeping,  and  commerce,  with  illus- 
trative engravings. 

TscHEPAGOFF,  a  dramatic  writer  of  the  present 
day.  He  assisted  Schachofskoj  in  the  translation 
of  The  Horatii,  from  Corneille. 

TscHULKOFF  (Michael  Dmitrijewitsch),  upper  se- 
cretary to  the  senate  ;  composed  a  History  of  Rus- 
sian Commerce,  in  twenty-one  parts,  St.  Peters- 
burg, 1781;  and  published  a  Juridical  Lexicon,  in 
five  parts,  at  St.  Petersburg,  1792-1795.  He  died 
in  1793. 

TuRGENEFF  (Nikolaj),  author  of  an  Essay  on  the 
Theory  of  Taxation,  368  pages,  St.  Petersburg, 
1818. 

U. 

UsTiALOFF,  a  learned  man  at  Moscow.  He  has 
pubhshed  Notices  of  the  Pseudo-Demetrius  and  his 
Times,  which  are  in  everybody's  hand  in  Russia. 

V. 

Vater  (Johann  Severin),  professor  of  theology 
and  the  oriental  languages  at  Konigsberg,  and  af- 
terwards at  Halle,  was  born  in  1771.     He  occupied 

c  c  2 


I 


388  A  LEXICON  OF 

himself  with  the  grammars  and  lexicography  of  all 
the  languages  in  the  world ;  and  in  1808  pubhshed, 
in  the  German  language,  his  Practical  Grammar  of 
the  Russian  Language,  arranged  in  easy  and  com- 
plete tables  and  rules,  with  Exercises  for  gramma- 
tical analysis,  and  for  translating  into  Russian.  Of 
this,  the  second  edition  appeared  at  Leipsic  in  1814. 
This  work  is  distinguished  by  a  number  of  new 
ideas,  especially  as  regards  etymology.  The  Em- 
peror Alexander  complimented  the  author  for  it 
with  the  order  of  St.  Wladimir.  Besides  this,  he 
pubhshed  a  Reading-Book,  with  a  Russo-German 
and  German-Russian  Dictionary,  and  a  Treatise  on 
the  excellences  of  the  Russian  Language,  Leipsic 
and  Petersburg.  Vater  died  on  the  16th  of  March, 
1826,  at  Halle. 


W. 

Wasemskj  (Prince  Peter  Andrejewitsch),  colle- 
giate councillor  and  knight,  honorary  member  of 
the  Moscow  University,  and  of  the  Academy  of  the 
free-town  of  Cracow,  was  born  on  the  12th  of  July, 
1792,  at  Moscow;  received  his  education  in  the 
school  of  the  St.  Petersburg  Gymnasium,  and  af- 
terwards at  Moscow,  where  he  attended  the  lec- 
tures at  the  university.  In  1807  he  entered  the 
public  service  in  the  College  for  Foreign  Affairs ; 
and  in  1811  he  was  made  groom  of  the  chamber. 
In  1812  he  entered  the  Moscow  mihtia,  and  was 
under  the  command  of  Count  Miloradowitsch  at 
the  battle  of  Borodino,  where  two  horses  were 
killed  under  him.     For  the  courage  displayed  by 


RUSSIAN  AUTHORS.  389 

him  on  this  occasion,  he  received  the  order  and 
riband  of  St.  Wladimir;    but  on  account  of  his 
weak  health,  he  was  unable  to  persevere  longer  in 
the  military  profession.     In  1817  he  was  engaged 
to  assist  the  privy  councillor  Nowossilzoff  at  War- 
saw; but  in  July,  1821,  he  asked  leave  to  retire 
from  public  service,  and  from  his  duties  as  groom 
of  the   chamber.      His   father,  W.  G.  R.  Prince 
A.  J.  Wasemskj,  had  endeavoured  in  his  youth  to 
inspire  him  with  a  love  for  the  mathematical  sci- 
ences, but  in  vain ;  even  in  his  very  childhood,  he 
began  to  write  poetry.     His  love  for  literature  was 
increased  by  his  intimate  acquaintance  with  Ka- 
ramsin,  to  whose  care  his  father  committed  him  on 
his  death-bed.    But  he  wrote  verses  for  a  long  time 
without  showing  them  to  his  Mentor.     Karamsin's 
severe  judgment   offended   his    self-love,   and   he 
sought  a  more  indulgent  critic.     He  has  to  thank 
the  late  Peter  Iwanowitsch  Bogdanoff,  a  teacher 
at  the  school  attached  to  the  Moscow  University, 
for  his  acquaintance  with  the  rules  of  poetry,  and 
of  the  Russian  language ;    it  was  he,   who  by  a 
course  of  light  reading,  and  foreign  poets,  nourished 
his  taste  for  poetry,   which   in  succeeding  years 
rapidly  developed  itself  in   his   close   connection 
and  intimate  acquaintance  with  Shukofskj  and  Bat- 
juschkoff.    Prince  Wasemskj  has  distinguished  him- 
self by  some  exceedingly  beautiful  poetry,  of  the 
lyrical  and  didactic  kinds.     His  epistles  and  satiri- 
cal poems  are  read  universally  with  delight.    Fancy 
and  feehng  form  chiefly  the  characteristics  of  the 
poetry  of  his  friends  Shukofskj  and  Batjuschkoff. 
Sharp  and  penetrating  intelligence  is  the  peculiarity 


390  A  LEXICON  OF 

of  Prince  Wasemskj.  His  style  is  concise,  terse, 
and  original.  KriilofF  catches  at  the  homely  Rus- 
sian phrases  of  ordinary  life  ;  Shukofskj  invents  new 
ones  by  the  force  of  art  and  taste,  but  Wasemskj 
wins  the  palm  in  preference  to  either  of  them,  in- 
asmuch as  he  readily  admits  expressions  into  his 
verse  which  are  in  common  use,  provided  they  feli- 
citously and  exactly  convey  his  meaning.  He  does 
not  always  seem  to  be  thinking  of  the  school-rules 
of  poetry  and  grammar,  but  dares  to  offend  against 
them,  as  is  the  case  with  men  of  talent  and  acute- 
ness.  The  same  remarks  are  equally  applicable 
to  his  prose  writing.  Pity  that  he  should  have 
written  so  little  in  prose!  His  essays  are  well 
known :  On  the  Death  of  Dershawin,  and  On  the 
Life  and  Writings  of  Oseroff".  The  last,  indeed, 
is  printed  uniformly  with  the  works  of  that  trage- 
dian. His  poetical  works  are  to  be  found  scattered 
plentifully  through  most  of  the  periodicals.  During 
the  latter  part  of  his  stay  in  Poland,  when  he  be- 
came a  httle  better  acquainted  with  the  Polish 
language,  and  the  literati  of  Warsaw,  as  for  in- 
stance, with  Niemcewicz,  the  Nestor  of  Polish  li- 
terature, with  Osinskj,  the  successful  translator  and 
rival  of  the  tragedian  Corneille,  with  Morawskj, 
the  Shukofskj  of  Poland — he  became  anxious  to 
prepare  a  survey  of  the  literature  of  Poland  ;  and 
by  the  reciprocal  operation  of  translations  to  esta- 
blish an  interchange  of  literary  treasures  between 
two  nations,  so  closely  related  by  their  languages, 
so  early  separated  by  ancient  enmity,  but  now 
bound  together  by  political  ties.  Small  essays  of 
the  kind  were  made  on  both  sides  ;  but  Wiiscmskj's 


RUSSIAN  AUTHORS.  391 

absence  from  Warsaw  has  hindered,  for  the  present 
at  least,  the  fulfilment  of  this  intention,  which  pro- 
mised to  be  so  advantageous  to  both  parties. 

Wassian  (surnamed  Riilo),  archbishop  of  Ros- 
tow,  pupil  of  the  most  venerable  Paphnutj,  igumen 
or  abbot  of  Borow,  after  having  been  archimandrite 
of  the  monastery  of  Nowosspask,  was  consecrated 
archbishop  of  Rostow,  in  the  year  1468,  and  died 
at  the  same  place,  on  the  23rd  of  March,  1481. 
This  prelate  distinguished  himself  by  his  piety,  his 
enlightenment,  and  his  eloquence.  The  Grand 
Prince  John  Wassiljewitsch  not  unfrequently  made 
use  of  his  services  in  his  negociations  with  princes. 
In  1480,  when  John,  alarmed  at  an  invasion  of  the 
Tatar  Cham,  Achmet,  was  half  resolved  to  abandon 
Moscow  to  him  as  a  prey,  and  to  fly  with  his  whole 
court  to  Balvosero  and  the  shores  of  the  ocean, 
Wassian  alone  opposed  with  firmness  this  pusalli- 
nimity  of  the  Grand  Prince  and  his  woiwodes.  He 
sent  to  the  place  where  he  was  encamped,  a 
letter,  in  which  he  encouraged  him  to  go  and 
meet  the  Tatar  with  a  bold  heart.  But  when  the 
Grand  Prince,  not  so  much  through  fear  of  the 
•  Tatars  as  through  the  cowardice  of  his  bojars,  he- 
sitated to  do  so,  Wassian  met  him  at  the  gates  of 
Moscow,  and  addressed  him  in  the  following  words : 
"  The  blood  of  all  Christendom  falls  upon  thy  head, 
because  thou  fliest  before  the  Tatar,  and  strivest 
not  with  him  in  the  field.  Dost  thou  fear  death  ? 
But  truly  thou  wilt  nowhere  be  secure  from  him ; 
for  thou  art  not  born  immortal.  Give  up,  then,  to 
me  that  army.     Although  old  and  grey,  I  will  not 


392  A  LEXICON  OF 

spare  myself,  nor  turn  away  my  face  before  the 
foe!"  The  Grand  Prince,  encouraged  by  Was- 
sian's  exhortations,  returned  back  to  his  army  which 
he  had  abandoned  on  the  banks  of  the  Ocka.  The 
Tatars  were  quickly  expelled  ;  and  thus  Russia 
was  emancipated  from  their  yoke  for  ever.  Was- 
sian  likewise  was  the  author  of  the  biography  of 
his  master,  Paphnutj  von  Borow.  The  letters  of 
Wassian  to  the  Grand  Prince,  are  to  be  found  in 
the  Stufen-book,  and  in  the  Russian  Chronicle,  pub- 
lished in  1792 ;  but  Paphnutj's  Life,  is  only  in  the 
Tschetj  Minej  (Legends  of  the  Saints)  of  the  first 
of  May. 

Wassilj,  probably  a  monk  or  priest,  lived  at  the 
end  of  the  eleventh  century,  and  described  the  then 
existing  condition  of  South-western  Russia.  He 
was  employed  by  David,  Prince  of  Wladimir,  in  his 
negotiations  with  the  unfortunate  Wasil'ko.  (Com- 
pare articles,  Johann,  priest  of  Novogorod ;  Sylves- 
ter; Simon,  bishop  of  Susdal ;  and  Timotheus). 

Weltzien.     See  Heym. 

Wereffkin  (Michael  Iwanowitsch),  acting  coun- 
cillor of  state,  was  correspondent  of  the  St.  Peters- 
burg Academy  of  Sciences,  and  died  in  1795.  He 
is  known  by  the  following  translations :  1.  Memoirs 
of  the  Due  de  Sully,  ten  parts,  Moscow,  1770-1777. 
2.  On  Navigation,  two  parts,  Moscow,  1782.  3, 
La  Harpe's  Thoughts  on  the  Passions,  twenty-two 
parts,  Moscow,  1782-1788.  4.  The  History  of 
Turkey,  from  the  Abbe  Minot,  four  parts,  St.  Pe- 
tersburg, 1789.  5.  The  Koran,  two  parts,  St.  Pe- 
tersburg, 1790.     6.  The  Educator,  or  The  Uni- 


RUSSIAN  AUTHORS.  S93 

versal  System  of  Education,  from  Ebert  and 
Schrockh,  twelve  parts,  St.  Petersbm'g,  1789-1792. 
7.  A  Universal  Geographical  Lexicon,  from  Vos- 
gine,  five  parts ;  and  many  others. 

WiCHMANN  (Burchard  von),  school-director  in 
the  government  of  Courland,  and  knight  of  the 
order  of  St.  Wladimir,  fourth  class,  was  born  at 
Riga,  on  the  24th  of  August,  1786.  The  collec- 
ting of  materials  for  Russian  history  and  statistics, 
and  the  publication  of  useful  books  on  these  sub- 
jects, were  the  favourite  occupation  of  Wichmann 
from  the  time  when  he  concluded  his  studies  at  the 
Universities  of  Jena,  Gottingen,  and  Heidelberg. 
He  published  in  the  German  language  :  1.  A  Pic- 
ture of  the  Russian  Monarchy,  Leipsic,  1813.  2. 
Records  respecting  the  Election  of  Michael  Ro- 
manoff, a  translation,  with  original  historical  re- 
marks, Leipsic,  1820.  3.  A  Collection  of  little 
Works  never  before  printed  on  the  subject  of  Rus- 
sia, one  part,  Berlin,  1820.  4.  The  National  Mu- 
seum of  Russia,  Riga,  1820.  A  translation  of  this 
little  book  is  to  be  found  in  No.  xxxiii.  of  the  Son 
of  the  Country  for  the  year  1821.  5.  A  Chrono- 
logical Review  of  the  most  recent  Period  of  Rus- 
sian History,  two  parts,  Leipsic,  1821. 

WiNOGRADOFF  (Pctcr),  professor  at  the  Seminary 
of  Alexander  Newskj  at  St.  Petersburg,  wrote  a 
short  Sclavonic  Grammar,  St.  Petersburg,  1818, 
1 1 2  pages,  8vo. 

WisiN  (Deniss  Iwanowitsch  van),  councillor  of 
state,  member  of  the  Russian  Academy,  was  born 
at  Moscow  in  1745.  He  studied  at  the  University 
of  Moscow,  and  made  great  progress  in  the  Latin 


394  A  LEXICON  OF 

and  German  languages.  He  learnt  French  in  two 
years,  without  any  master,  so  perfectly,  that  he 
could  understand  Voltaire,  and  began  to  translate 
his  Alzira.  In  1762  he  was  appointed  sergeant  in 
the  guards,  and  soon  afterwards  he  entered  the  Col- 
lege of  Foreign  Affairs  in  the  capacity  of  translator, 
and  was  shortly  afterwards  sent  into  Germany.  In 
1763  he  became  employed  under  the  minister  Count 
N.  J.  Panin,  and  obtained  his  especial  favour.  At 
this  time  he  wrote  the  comedy.  The  Brigadier,  and 
translated  the  poem  of  Joseph,  from  Bitaube.  The 
repute  of  his  talents  reached  the  ears  of  Catherine 
the  Second,  before  whom  he  had  the  good  fortune 
to  read  his  comedy.  A  sharp  word  drew  upon  him 
enemies  and  persecution.  He  was  dismissed,  and 
for  some  time  travelled  about  Europe.  From  Paris 
he  wrote  some  Letters  on  France,  in  which  his  ob- 
servant and  satiric  wit  are  displayed.  On  his  re- 
turn from  his  travels,  he  wrote,  in  1782,  the  comedy. 
The  Mother's  Pet.  Son;  after  which,  however,  he 
wrote  nothing  more  for  the  public.  A  stroke  of 
paralysis  soon  after  deprived  him  of  the  use  of  his 
hands,  his  feet,  and  partly  of  his  speech.  In  this 
melancholy  condition  he  lingered  through  about 
ten  years,  until  the  time  of  his  death,  which  ensued 
on  the  1st  of  October,  1792.  The  following  are 
the  whole  of  his  works:  1.  The  Mother's  Pet  Son,  a 
comedy,  in  five  acts,  printed  for  the  first  time  in  1 783. 
2.  The  Brigadier,  a  comedy,  in  five  acts,  printed 
in  1764.  3.  Letters  to  My  Servants,  Schumiloff, 
Wanka,  and  Petruschka,  a  burlesque  poem,  in 
which  he  ridicules  the  ambition  and  self-seeking  of 
the  world.     Shortly  before  his  death,  he  shewed 


RUSSIAN  AUTHORS.  395 

great  contrition  for  having  indulged  a  little   too 
much  license  of  thought  in  this  poem.     4.  A  Dis- 
course, delivered  on  the  second  day  of  Whitsuntide, 
by  the  Priest  Wassilj,  printed  by  the  Society  of  the 
Lovers  of  the  Russian  Language.     5.  KaUisthenes, 
a  Greek  Tale,  printed  in  the  book  called  The  Friend 
of  Truth,  or  The  Wise  Man's  Pocket  Companion, 
published  at  St.  Petersburg  in  1801.     6,  Letters  to 
different  Persons  ;  Two  Letters  written  to  a  Distin- 
guished Correspondent  from  Paris :  printed  in  the 
St.  Petersburg  Journal  of  Herr  Pnin.     A  Letter  on 
the  compilation  of  the  Great  Russian  Dictionary  to 
O.  P.  K.  is  dated  in  the  year  1784,  from  Moscow ; 
it  was  printed  in  the  Em'opean  Messenger  for  the 
year  1803.     7.  A  Discourse  on  the  Recovery  of  the 
Grand  Prince  Paul  Petrowitsch,  printed  in  1776. 
8.  His  Confessions  or  Acknowledgments;  not  com- 
plete :  printed  in  the  St.  Petersburg  Journal.     The 
following  are  not  yet  printed  :  9.  The  Chattering 
Aunt,  a  satirical  poem.     10.  An  Attempt  at  a  Court 
Grammar.    Also  the  translations :  1.  Holberg's  Fa- 
bles, from  the  German,  third  edition,  Moscow,  1763. 
2.  The  Life  of  Sifa,  ruler  of  Egypt,  four  parts,  from 
the  French,  1764.     3.  Alzira,  or  the  Americans,  a 
tragedy  of  Voltaire,  translated  into   metre,  1762, 
printed  1786.     4.  Joseph,  a  poem,  from  Bitaube, 
after  the  French,  printed  at  Moscow,  1 769.     5. 
The  Nobility  of  Commerce  opposed  to  the  Nobility 
of  the  Army,  from  the  French,  St.  Petersburg, 
1766.     6.   Sidney  and  Silly,  or  Beneficence  and 
Gratitude,  an  Enghsh  story,  from  the  French,  St. 
Petersburg,  1769;   second  edition,  Moscow,  1788. 
7.  A  Panegyric  upon  Marcus  Aurelius,  from  Thomas, 


396  A  LEXICON  OF 

after  the  French,  St.  Petersburg,  1777.  8.  The 
Loves  of  Charita  and  Polydore,  a  tale,  from  Bar- 
thelemj,  after  the  French,  St.  Petersburg,  1763. 
9.  Sidney,  a  poem,  from  the  French.  Van  Wisin 
belongs  to  the  most  distinguished  order  of  men  of 
Catherine's  time.  Those  who  have  known  him 
well,  speak  loudly  of  his  liberality,  his  generosity, 
his  candour,  his  amiableness  of  behaviour,  and 
his  wit,  through  which  last  quahfication  he  not 
unfrequently  entailed  unpleasant  consequences  on 
himself.  The  most  remarkable  of  his  works  is  the 
comedy  of  The  Mother's  Pet  Son  ;  although  the  per- 
fectly original  characters  drawn  in  it  are  already  be- 
ginning to  be  lost  among  the  Russians,  yet  its  witty 
and  comic  thoughts,  and  its  entertaining  scenes, 
will  always  preserve  its  value.  It  may  be  said, 
that  this  comedy  was  of  great  advantage  to  the 
Russians ;  to  its  appearance  may  be  traced  a  visi- 
ble and  beneficial  alteration  in  the  habits  and  way 
of  thinking  of  many  of  the  country  gentlemen  of 
Russia.  Van  Wisin  was  the  first  prose  writer  of 
his  time ;  yet  it  cannot  now  be  said  that  his  writings 
may  be  regarded  as  a  model.  The  style  of  his  co- 
medies is  a  true  copy  of  the  language  spoken  at 
that  time  by  the  persons  he  undertakes  to  repre- 
sent. In  his  serious  translations  (as  for  instance, 
the  •  Panegyric  on  M.  Aurelius),  his  purity,  clear- 
ness, and  power  (which  he  could  have  acquired 
only  by  the  studious  reading  of  Sclavonic  books) 
deserve  peculiar  praise  ;  but  a  sort  of  forced  rhythm, 
similar  to  the  effect  of  poetical  measure,  is  dis- 
agreeable to  the  ear  which  is  accustomed  to  the 
modern  and  more  easy  style  of  prose.     His  letters 


RUSSIAN  AUTHORS.  397 

are  witty,  natural,  and  easy,  but  not  studied  enough 
in  point  of  style ;  he  wrote  as  if  he  were  not  writing 
for  the  public.  It  is  much  to  be  wished  that  there 
were  a  complete  collection  of  the  works  of  this 
writer,  but  as  far  as  we  know,  nothing  of  the  sort 
has  as  yet  been  attempted. 

WissKowATOFF  (Stephan  Iwanowitsch),  titular 
councillor,  ordinary  member  of  the  Society  of  the 
Lovers  of  the  Russian  Language,  and  of  the  St.  Pe- 
tersburg Free  Society  for  the  Lovers  of  Russian 
Literature,  was  born  in  the  government  of  Pskow, 
on  the  27th  of  July,  1786.  He  received  his  edu- 
cation in  his  parents'  house,  and  has  been  engaged 
in  public  service  since  the  year  1800.  At  the  time 
of  the  raising  the  militia,  he  was  chosen  by  the  no- 
biUty  as  a  captain.  In  1808  he  became  an  officer 
and  librarian  in  the  Mining  Cadet  Corps,  and  taught 
there  Russian  history,  literature,  and  geography. 
Since  the  year  1811  he  has  been  engaged  in  the 
private  chancery  of  the  Minister  of  the  Interior. 
His  works  consist  chiefly  of  tragedies  in  verse  :  1. 
Xenia  andTemir,  in  five  acts,  enacted  at  St.  Peters- 
burg, and  printed  in  1 809.  2.  Rhadamistus  and  Ze- 
nobia,  from  Crebillon,  played  and  printed  in  1809. 
3.  Hamlet,  played  and  printed  in  1810.  4.  Hy- 
permnestra,  from  Crebillon,  played  at  St.  Peters- 
burg and  Moscow,  and  printed  in  1811.  5.  Inez 
di  Castro,  represented  in  1812.  6.  Wladimir  Mo- 
nomach,  1816.  7.  The  Rising  of  the  Country,  a 
heroic  play,  in  three  acts,  played  at  St.  Petersburg 
on  the  30th  of  August,  1812.  In  this  piece  the 
celebrated  Dmitrefskj  appeared  on  the  boards  for 
the  last  time.     Many  minor  works  of  WisskowatofF 


S98  A  LEXICON  OF 

were  printed  in  the  journals.  He  has  been  still 
more  recently  occupied  in  preparing  for  the  press 
a  complete  collection  of  his  works  and  translations, 
in  five  parts. 

WojEjKOFF  (Alexander  Fodorowitsch),  collegiate 
councillor,  member  of  the  Russian  Academy,  and 
many  other  learned  societies,  was  born  at  Moscow, 
on  the  15th  of  November,  1773,  and  received  his 
education  at  the  school  attached  to  the  Moscow 
University,  from  1791  to  1796.     Afterwards  he  en- 
tered the  military  service.     In  August,  1814,  he 
was  appointed  Professor  of  the  Russian  Language 
and  Literature  in  the  University  of  Dorpat.     In 
1820  he  served  in  the  department  for  Ecclesiastical 
Affairs  ;  in  1821  he  was  inspector  of  classes  at  the 
Artillery  School.     His  works  and  translations  are 
the  following  :  1.  The  Garden,  a  poem  of  Delille, 
translated  into  metre,  St.  Petersburg,  1816.      2. 
The  Eclogues.    3.  The  ^neid  ;  and  4.  The  Geor- 
gics,  of  Virgil.     Fragments  of  a  complete  transla- 
tion of  this  poem  in  the  same  metre  as  the  original. 
5.  Fragments  from  Delille's  poem  of  Fancy.     6. 
The  Arts  and  Sciences,  a  didactic  poem,  in  four 
cantos,  of  which  three  are  complete.     Fragments 
of  these  works  of  his  are  printed  in  the  different 
annual  series  of  the  European  Messenger  and  The 
Son  of  the  Country.     7.  Satires,  Epistles,  and  lit- 
tle poems  scattered  about  different  periodicals.  Wo- 
jejkofF  has  received  great  applause  for  the  manner 
in  which  he  has  translated  some  of  the  above  poems; 
but  his  peculiar  talent  is  to  be  found  in  his  Epis- 
tles.    Many  of  them  may  be  cited  as  perfect  mo- 
dels. 


RUSSIAN  AUTHORS.  390 

WoLTSCHKOFF  (Sei'gj  Sawitscli),  collegiate  coun- 
cillor, secretary  of  the  Academy  of  Sciences,  after- 
wards director  of  the  senatorial  printing-house,  died 
at  St.  Petersburg  in  1773.  He  published  a  copious 
French  Lexicon  for  Travellers  in  1755,  second  edi- 
tion, 1768  ;  third  edition,  1785  :  and  he  translated 
the  following  books  :  1.  The  Courtier  of  Balthazar 
Gracian,  printed  at  St.  Petersburg,  1742  and  1760. 

2.  Florin's  Economy,  in  nine  volumes,  five  times 
published,  viz.  in  1738,  1750, 1760, 1775,  and  1794. 

3.  The  Life  and  Actions  of  Marcus  Aurelius  Anto- 
ninus, the  Roman  Emperor,  comprising  his  wise 
judgments  upon  himself,  two  parts,  published  1740- 
1760,  and  1775.  4.  Extracts  from  Savari's  Trade 
Lexicon,  1747.  5.  ^sop's  Fables,  with  Morals  and 
Remarks,  1747  and  1760.  6.  Short  Dialogues  upon 
several  curious  things  connected  with  the  Sciences 
and  Natural  Wonders,  published  in  questions  and 
answers  by  Paul  Tavernier,  1761.  7.  The  School 
of  the  World,  or  A  Father's  Advice  to  his  Son 
upon  Entering  Life,  by  Le  Noble.  8.  The  Essays 
of  Michael  Montaigne,  1 762.  9.  The  Art  of  being 
Happy,  1775.  10.  On  Contentment,  by  Johann 
Adolph  Hoffmann,  1750.  11.  The  Book  of  Lan- 
guages, 1751. 

WosTOKOFF  (Alexander  Christophorowitsch),  col- 
legiate assessor  and  knight,  member  of  the  Russian 
Academy,  and  many  other  learned  societies,  was 
born  in  Febmary,  1781,  at  Arensburg,  in  the  island 
of  Oesel.  In  1788  he  entered  the  Land  Cadet 
Corps  ;  in  1794  he  studied  in  the  Academy  of 
the  Arts,  where  he  pursued  architecture  till  the 
year  1800.     As  he  had  a  stronger  natural  taste  for 


400  A  LEXICON  OF 

elegant   literature,   he  gave  up  architecture,  and 
got  himself  appointed  under-librarian  and  translator 
at  the  same  academy.     In  1804  he  was  employed 
by  the  Statutes  Commission  as  translator,  which 
place  he  occupied  for  some  time.     In  1815  he  re- 
ceived in  addition  the  office  of  assistant  to  the  conser- 
vator of  manuscripts  in  the  Imperial  public  library ; 
and   in    1818  the   still  further  place  of  secretary 
to  the  department  for  ecclesiastical   affairs.     His 
first  poetical  attempts  appeared  in  a  collection  of 
poems  published  by  the  Society  of  Lovers  of  Li- 
terature, the  Sciences,  and  the  Arts,  intitled.  The 
Paper    Scroll    of  the  Muses.     In    1805-1806    he 
published    his    works,   under  the  title  of  Lyrical 
Attempts,  in  two  parts.     Later,  he  printed  in  va- 
rious periodicals  his  works  in  poetry  and  prose, 
the  latter  class  of  which  belong  chiefly  to  the  sub* 
jects  of  philology  and  grammar.     In  1817  appeared 
separately.  An  Essay  on  Russian  Poetry  ;  and  in 
1821  his  collected  poems  were  published,  with  the 
title.  The  Poems  of  A.  WostokofF.     From  1808  he 
employed  himself  in  grammatical  and  lexicograph- 
ical inquiries ;  he  brought  into  etymological  order 
the  three  first  parts  of  Linde's  Dictionary,  and  wrote 
a  Grammar  of  the  Sclavonic  Language.     These 
useful  labours,  however,  have  not  yet,  we  are  sorry 
to  say,  been  printed.     In  vol.  xvii.  of  the  Transac- 
tions of  the  Moscow  Society  of  the  Lovers  of  the 
Russian  Language,  his  Treatise  on  the  Sclavonic 
Language,  which  was  intended  as  an  introduction 
to  this  Grammar,  may  be  found  printed. 

WsEwoLoscHSKJ  (N.  W.),  a  vaudeville  and  play 
writer.     See  Chmelnizkj. 


RUSSIAN  AUTHORS/  401 

Z. 

Zacharias  Kopustenskj,  archimandrite  of  the 
Subterranean  Monastery  of  KiefF(he  died  in  1626), 
whose  funeral  discourses  upon  the  archimandrite 
Pletenezkj  :  1.  under  the  title.  An  Oration  delivered 
over  the  Grave  of  the  Holy  Man,  and  most  Worthy 
Father  Kir  Jelissj  ;  and  2.  by  the  title  of  Homilies; 
were  printed  at  KiefF.  St.  Dimitrj  alludes  to  the 
defence  of  the  Russian-Greek  church,  which  was 
composed  by  Zacharias,  under  the  title  of  Pali- 
nody,  in  the  White-Russian  dialect. 

Zerteleff  (Prince),  author  of  A  Critique  upon 
the  Writers  of  Russia,  which  may  be  found  in  the 
St.  Petersburg  Journal  of  the  Society  of  the  Friends 
of  Enlightenment  and  Beneficence.  There  has 
also  appeared  of  his  making.  An  Attempt  at  a  Col- 
lection of  the  Ancient  Songs  of  Lesser  Russia,  St. 
Petersburg,  1819,  8vo. 

ZiNowj,  a  monk  of  the  monastery  at  Novogordd, 
lived  in  the  middle  of  the  sixteenth  century,  and 
wrote  fifty-six  dialogues  in  defence  of  the  true  faith 
of  the  Russian-Greek  church,  which  are  preserved 
in  the  Synodal  Library  at  Moscow. 

ZissANj.     See  Lawrentj. 

ZoNOBj  (Zonobius).     See  Zinowj. 


Dd 


APPENDIX, 

To  exjylahi  the  Meanings  of  several  Words. 

Hieromonach,  a  monk,  who  discharges  almost  the 
same  duties  as  an  ordinary  priest,  but  is  not  per- 
mitted to  officiate  in  the  celebration  of  marriage. 

Igumen,  abbot. 

Koi'mtschaja  Kniga,  the  nomo-canons,  or  rules 
for  the  clergy,  collected  by  the  patriarch  Nikon. 

Ldtopiss,  chronicle. 

Lawra,  monastery ;  so,  for  instance,  are  called 
the  monasteries  of  KieJBf,  Troizka,  and  Alexander 
Newskj. 

Oktoich,  a  church-book,  which  contains  the  songs 
of  John  of  Damascus,  for  eight  voices. 

Otetschnik,  biography  of  the  church  Fathers. 

Possadnik,  the  title  of  the  governors  in  ancient 
Pskow  and  Novogorod. 

Risa,  or  Risii,  the  garment  worn  by  the  priest  in 
the  celebration  of  mass  ;  also  a  piece  of  silver  tin- 
sel, resembhng  that  on  the  priests'  robes,  which  is 
placed  as  an  ornament  round  the  images  of  the 
saints. 

Russkaja  Pt^awda,  the  Russian  Rights. 

Rasskolniks,  dissenters  from  the  Russian-Greek 
church. 

Ssbornik,  a  prayer-book;  a  chaplet  of  flowers. 
This  is  the  name  always  given  to  ancient  Russian 
manuscripts,  in  which  writings  on  different  subjects 
are  mixed  together. 


40i  APPENDIX. 

Sstoglaff,  the  clerical  statute-book,  containing  a 
hundred  chapters. 

Ssudebtiikj  the  statute-book  given  to  the  Rus- 
sians by  the  Czar  I  wan  Wassiljewitsch,  and  called 
the  Ssudebnik,  or  second  Russian  Rights. 

Stnfen-buch,  the  genealogical  table  of  the  old  Rus- 
sian Czars,  from  Rurik  down  to  Feodor  Johanno- 
witsch. 

Trehniky  services  of  the  church. 

Trioden,  the  church  books,  which  contain  the 
canons,  written  in  three  cantos. 

TschassossloweZj  or  Tschassownik,  the  Prayer- 
Book,  which  contains  the  prayers  to  be  used  at  the 
stated  hours — the  first,  the  third,  the  sixth,  and  the 
ninth,  or  the  Horae  ;  and  some  other  prayers. 

Tschetj  Minej,  legends  of  the  saints. 

Uloshenijey  the  statute-book  of  the  Czar  Alexj 
Michailowitsch. 


APPENDIX. 


405 


THE  MANNER  OF  WRITING  THE  RUSSIAN  WORDS 
IN  RUSSIAN  CHARACTERS. 


P.    6. 


P.  12. 


ras 

pa3 

ros 

po3 

'  is 

H3 

wui 

Bbl 

ptiza 

nmiina 

1 

ptak 

iimaKi. 

ptacha 

nraaxa 

shitvetje 

A 

den 

flfiHb 

muilo 

MHAO 

rdd 

pn^-h 

Jcoster 

Kocinepi. 

hotell 

Koine.ii> 

ssdno 

Ct»HO 

hroTbd 

bpOHH 

sseVd' 

ceAb;\b 

gorod 

TOpO^-b 

torgg 

inopri> 

lekar' 

jieKapb 

medd 

Me^i. 

mrak 

MpaKi> 

doll 

^OA-b 

hik 

KpilKl, 

hesmenn 

beSMCHi* 

delif 

^IbAIIIUb 

tolkowaf 

lUOAKOBaUIb 

?no7Je 

Mope 

406 

P.  12.  ss(imm 

chomut 

chldh 

towarr 
P.13.  ^e 

she 

ze 

scha 

schtscha 

jerr 

ui 

je  or  e 

> 

p.  14.  Mitropolit 
Jjerej 
trapesa 

P.  16.  Sbornlk 


APPENDIX. 


CaMTj 
XOMyuITj 

x.it6i. 

luoBapi, 

6 

^ 

m 
^, 

Ta 
W 

H) 

MmuponoAHMij 

lepeH 

mpaneaa 

C6opHHKl> 


P.  20.  Russkaja  Prawda     pycKaa  IIpaB/^a 
P.  24.  den'ga  ^enbra 


altuiii 

kaftan 

wVk 

tWg 

ssVsa 

ssfsd 

wolk 

torg 

sslesa 

sstesd 

g 
k 


aAUIblHTi 

Ka^JiuaHTa 

BAbKl. 

uipbri. 

CAbSa 

cmb3a 

BOAKIj 

mopri» 
cAe3a 
ciuesa 
r 

K 


APPENDIX.                           401 

P.  24.  cli 

X 

je 

e 

jd 

t 

• 

9 

M 

ju 

K) 

i« 

H 

jerf 

f) 

P.  25.  5/i^ 

«i 

/5C^e 

^ 

scha 

UI 

schtscha 

m 

ze 

u 

ui 

hi 

jerr 

■h 

Kuijeff 

KbieBi) 

P.  26.  Kormtschaja  kniga 

^  KopMiaa  KHHra 

P.  27.  segsiza 

3er3Hua 

charalushnuj 

xapa;iy]KHpbin 

schereschirui 

luepeuiHWH 

P.  3 1 .  Prissdsch  ian 

HpHCfl)llHl)Xli 

P.  32.  Sstoglaff 

Cmor^iaBi. 

Ssudehnik 

Cy^e6HHKT3 

P.33.  Tschassosdowez 

^acocAOBe^-b 

Octoick 

Okiuohxi. 

P.  35.  Uloshenije 

y^ioHteHie 

F, 38.  Ostrog 

Ociupori. 

P.  45.  Ras-rad  books 

Pa3pfliiHWXi.  SanHCKaxt 

1^,58.  Fuhrleit 

fpypAGHmij 

P.  59.  Semld 

3 

hhe 

H 

Schtscha 

"^ 

E 

9 

408                           APPENDIX. 

P.  59.  uj 

WH 

ifje 

we 

uja 

bIH 

P.  81.  Greschnik 

rpLlUlIHK-b 

BOOK  II. 

P.129.  Jerr 

■fa 

Ishe 

H 

Schtscha 

m 

VA33.  Zwetnik    - 

JlBbmirHKl. 

P.  136.  Duschinka 

/^ymeubKSL 

P.  150.  Bachariana 

BaxapiaHa 

P.  151.  Rossiad 

PocciH/^a 

P.  152.  Sstolnik 

CmOAHHKl. 

P.  154.  Melomania 

MejiOManiH 

P.  157.  Stufen-bilcher 

CiueneHHbia  KHurw 

P.  159.  Igumen 

yryMeni, 

P.  160.  Toissiokoff 

ToHcio  K  OBI) 

P.  164.  Executor 

9K3eKymopi» 

P.  169.  Tschetj  Mi7iei 

^euiia  Mnnia 

P.  2 10.  Possadnik 

Hoca/^HHKi.. 

THE  END. 


OXFORD  :   PRINTED  BY  D.  A.  TALBOYS. 


0 


dt^ 


» 


n-i* 


RETURN  TO  the  circulation  desl<  of  any 
University  of  California  Library 
or  to  the 
NORTHERN  REGIONAL  LIBRARY  FACILITY 
BIdg,  400,  Richmond  Field  Station 
University  of  California 
Richmond,  CA  94804-4698 

ALL  BOOKS  MAY  BE  RECALLED  AFTER  7  DAYS 

•  2-month  loans  may  be  renewed  by  calling 
(510)642-6753 

•  1  -year  loans  may  be  recharged  by  bringing 
books  to  NRLF 

•  Renewals  and  recharges  may  be  made  4 
days  prior  to  due  date. 


SFP  1  ^%^ 


STAMPED  BELOW 


SEP15J998 


12,000(11/95) 


YU  35144 


THE  UNIVERSITY  OF  CALIFORNIA  UBRARY 


Hn^ilii 


--'*r'^^^:^i',i*%vvww'-- 


zmdmmi 


^!^s^y^&^,:wv»'W. 


1 


^"■v,       .V:.\-i 


