
This is a digital copy of a book that was preserved for generations on library shelves before it was carefully scanned by Google as part of a project 
to make the world's books discoverable online. 

It has survived long enough for the copyright to expire and the book to enter the public domain. A public domain book is one that was never subject 
to copyright or whose legal copyright term has expired. Whether a book is in the public domain may vary country to country. Public domain books 
are our gateways to the past, representing a wealth of history, culture and knowledge that's often difficult to discover. 

Marks, notations and other marginalia present in the original volume will appear in this file - a reminder of this book's long journey from the 
publisher to a library and finally to you. 

Usage guidelines 

Google is proud to partner with libraries to digitize public domain materials and make them widely accessible. Public domain books belong to the 
public and we are merely their custodians. Nevertheless, this work is expensive, so in order to keep providing this resource, we have taken steps to 
prevent abuse by commercial parties, including placing technical restrictions on automated querying. 

We also ask that you: 

+ Make non-commercial use of the files We designed Google Book Search for use by individuals, and we request that you use these files for 
personal, non-commercial purposes. 

+ Refrain from automated querying Do not send automated queries of any sort to Google's system: If you are conducting research on machine 
translation, optical character recognition or other areas where access to a large amount of text is helpful, please contact us. We encourage the 
use of public domain materials for these purposes and may be able to help. 

+ Maintain attribution The Google "watermark" you see on each file is essential for informing people about this project and helping them find 
additional materials through Google Book Search. Please do not remove it. 

+ Keep it legal Whatever your use, remember that you are responsible for ensuring that what you are doing is legal. Do not assume that just 
because we believe a book is in the public domain for users in the United States, that the work is also in the public domain for users in other 
countries. Whether a book is still in copyright varies from country to country, and we can't offer guidance on whether any specific use of 
any specific book is allowed. Please do not assume that a book's appearance in Google Book Search means it can be used in any manner 
anywhere in the world. Copyright infringement liability can be quite severe. 

About Google Book Search 

Google's mission is to organize the world's information and to make it universally accessible and useful. Google Book Search helps readers 
discover the world's books while helping authors and publishers reach new audiences. You can search through the full text of this book on the web 



at |http : //books . google . com/ 



Ja,i^ ^//^a-S"^ 



HARVARD 
COLLEGE 
LIBRARY 




FROM THE 

Subscription Fund 

BEGUN IN 1858 




3 {■^.olicr/o^t.'t'^c.:) ^^T 

IVAN PANIN. /a^ 



\§Lectttre0 



xHUSSIAN LITERATURE 



PUSHKIN, GOGOL, TURGENEF, 
TOLSTOY. 



, 


NEW YORK & LONDON: 


G. 


P. PUTNAM'S SONS, 


i 


Sf|( ftnickniiotittr 9tM«. 
1889. 






>j',! f in,;.) ^; 



^'^'^Gv^uCtU*- OfcUuiT^ 



Copyright^ /SSg, 
By Ivan Panin. 



•5^ 



MIRIAM 



PREFACE. 



nPHE translations given in this vol- 
ume, with the exception of the 
storm-scene from Tolstoy in the First 
Lecture, are my own. 

The reader will please bear in mind 
that these Lectures, printed here exactly 
as delivered, were written with a view to 
addressing the ear as well as the eye, 
otherwise the book would have been 
entirely different from what it now is. 

When delivering the Sixth Lecture, 
I read extracts from Tolstoy's " My Re- 
ligion" gnd "What to Do," illustrating 



via Preface. 

every position of his I there commend ; 
but for reasons it is needless to state, 
I omit them in the book. I can only 
hope that the reader will all the more 
readily go to the books themselves. 

I. P. 
GRAProN, Mass., 

I July, 1889. 



J 



CONTENTS. 



UECTUSB FAGX 

I. Introductory i 

II. Pushkin 44 

III. Gogol 76 

IV. TuRGENEF 115 

V. Tolstoy the Artist 154 

VI. Tolstoy the Preacher ... 190 



LECTURE L 



INTRODUCTORY. 

I. I HAVE chosen the four writers men- 
tioned on the programme not so much be- 
cause they are the four greatest names of 
Russian literature as because they best repre- 
sent the point of view from which these lec- 
tures are to be delivered. For what Nature 
is to God, that is Literature unto the Soul. 
God ever strives to reveal himself in Nature 
through its manifold changes and developing 
forms. And the human soul ever strives to 
reveal itself in literature through its manifold 
changes and developing forms. But while 
to see the goal of the never resting creative- 
ness of God is not yet given unto man, it is 
given unto mortal eyes to behold the prom- 
ised land from Pisgah, toward which the soul 



2 Lectures on Russian Literature. 

ever strives, and which, let us hope, it ever 
is approaching. For the soul ever strives 
onward and upward, and whether the strug- 
gle be called progress of species, looking for 
the ideal, or union with God, the thing is 

V the same. It is of this journey of the soul 
heavenward that literature is the record, and 
the various chases of literary development in 
every nation are only so many mile-posts on 
the road. 

3. In its childhood the human soul only 
exists ; it can hardly yet be said to live ; bat 
soon it becomes conscious of its existence, 
and the first cry it utters is that of joy. 
Youth is ever cheerful, and in its cheer it 
sings. Youth sings to the stars in the sky, 
to the pale moon and to the red moon, to 
the maiden's cheeks and to the maidea's 
fan; youth sings to the flower, to the bee, 
to the bird, and even to the mouse. And 
what is true of the individual is equally true 

X of the race. The earliest voices in the liter- 
ature of any nation are those of song. In 
Greece Homer, like his favorite cicada, 
chirps right gladly, and in England Chaucer 



Lscture /. 5 

and Shakespeare are first of all bards. In 
France and Germany it is even difficult to 
find the separate prominent singers, for there 
the whole nation, whatever hath articulate 
voice in it, takes to singing with its trou- 
badours and minnesingers. In its earliest 
stages then the soul sings, not in plaintive 
regretful strain, but birdlike from an over- 
flowing breast, with rejoicings and with 
mirth. 

3. But the time soon arrives when the 
soul recognizes that life means something 
more than mere existence, something more 
than mere enjoyment, something more even 
than mere happiness ; the time soon arrives 
when the soul recognizes that by the side of 
the Prince of Light there also dwells the 
Prince of Darkness; that not only is there 
in the Universe a great God the Good, but 
also a great Devil the Evil; and with the 
impetuosity and impassionateness of youth 
it gives itself up to lamentation, to indig- 
nation. The heart of the poet, the singer, 
is now filled with woe ; he departs and leaves 
behind him only the lamenter, the reproacher, 



4 Lectures on Russian Literature. 

the rebel Job succeeds Miriam, iEschylus 
succeeds Homer, Racine and Comeille take 
the place of the troubadours, and Byron suc- 
ceeds Shakespeare. This is the stage of fruit- 
less lamentation and protest. 

4. But unlike the bear in winter, the soul 
cannot feed long on its own flesh, and the 
time soon comes when it beholds the waste- 
ful restlessness of mere indignation, of mete 
protest. It sees that to overcome the ill it 
must go forth manfully and do battle, and 
attack the enemy in his most vulnerable 
spots, instead of fruitlessly railing against 
him. Literature then becomes full of pur- 
pose; becomes aggressive, attacks now the 
throne, now the church, now the law, now 
the institution, now the person. Tragedy is 
followed by comedy, sentiment by satire; 
iEschylus is followed by Aristophanes, Hor- 
ace is followed by Juvenal and Martial; 
Racine is followed by Voltaire, and Byron 
by Dickens. This is the stage of war. 

5. But neither is it given unto the soul to 
remain long in hatred, for hatred is the child 
of Darkness; the goal of the soul is Love, 



Lecture I. f 

since Love is the child of lAght And the 
spirit of man soon discovers that the powers 
of darkness are not to be conquered by vio- 
lence, by battle against the men possessed of 
them, but by faith in the final triumph of the 
Good, by submission to Fate, by endurance 
of what can be -borne, by reverence towards 
God, and lastly by mercy towards men. The 
soul thus discovers its true haven ; it lays 
down the sword; its voice calls no longer 
to strife, but to peace ; it now inspires and 
uplifts, and Greek literature ends with Soc- 
rates and Plato, Rome with Marcus Aure- 
lius and Seneca, England with Carlyle and 
Ruskin, America with Emerson, and Ger- 
many with Goethe. Letters indeed go on 
in England, in America, and in Germany, 
but the cycle is completed ; and higher than 
Plato, Marcus Aurelius, Goethe, Emerson, 
Carlyle, and Ruskin, the soul need not seek 
to rise. Whatever comes henceforth can add 
naught new to its life ; the tones may indeed 
vary, but the strain must remain the same. 

6. The eye of the body never indeed be- 
holds the perfect circle ; however accurately 



6 Lectures on Russian Literature. 

the hand draw, the magnifying glass quickly 
reveals zigs and zags in the outline. Only 
unto the eye of the spirit it is given to behold 
things in their perfection, and the soul knows 
that there does exist a perfect circle, magni- 
fying glass or no magnifying glass. So his- 
tory shows indeed many an irregularity in the 
law just laid down for the development of the 
soul, but the law is still there in its perfec- 
tion, and Russian literature furnishes the best 
illustration of this law. Every literature has 
to go through these four stages, but nowhere 
have they been passed with such regularity 
as in Russia. Accordingly we have in due 
order of time Pushkin the singer, Gogol the 
protester, Turgenef the warrior, who on the 
very threshold of his literary career vows the 
oath of a Hannibal not to rest until serfdom 
and autocracy are abolished, and lastly we 
have Tolstoy the preacher, the inspirer. 

7. How this law has operated on Russian 
soil, in Russian hearts, is the purpose of these 
lectures to show. For while the laws of the 
spirit are ever the same in essence, the char- 
acter of their manifestation varies with time 



Lecture L y 

and place, just as in Nature the same force 
appears in the firmament as gravitation when 
it binds star unto star, as attraction when it 
binds in the molecule atom unto atom, and in 
man as love when it binds heart unto heart. 
The phenomena therefore, natural to all liter- 
ature, we shall also find here, but modified 
by the peculiar character of the people. 

8. And the first characteristic of the Rus- 
sian spirit is that it has no originating force. 
In the economy of the Aryan household, of 
which the Slavic race is but a member, each 
member has hitherto had a special office in 
the discharge of which its originating force 
was to be spent. The German has thus done 
the thinking of the race, the American by 
his inventive faculty has done the physical 
comforting of the race, the Frenchman the 
refining of the race, the Englishman the 
trading of the race ; but the Russian has no 
such force peculiar to him. The office of 
the Slavonic race has hitherto been passive, 
and its highest distinction has hitherto been 
solely either to serve as a sieve through which 
the vivifying waters of European thought shall 



8 Lectures on Russian Literature. 

pour upon the sleeping body of Asia, or as a 
dead wall to stem the wild devastating flow of 
Asiatic barbarism upon European civilization. 
The virtue of the Slavonic race is thus first of 
all passivity ; and as the virtue of a pipe is to 
be smooth and hollow, so the virtue of the 
Russian is first of all passive receptivity. 

9. Look not therefore for creative origi- 
nality in Russian literature. There is not a 
single form of literary development that is 
native to the Russian soil, not a single con- 
tribution to philosophy, to art, to letters, the 
form of which can be said to have been bom 
on Russian soil. Its literary forms, like its 
civilization (or that which passes for its civili- 
zation), have been borrowed bodily from the 
west. But as action and reaction are always 
equal, so this very limitation of the Russian 
national character has been the source of 
many virtues of spiritual life, which Europe 
and America might well learn to acquire, all 
the more now when western thought has ma- 
tured to such ripeness as to be nigh decay. 

10. And herein you have the explanation 
of the powerful hold Russian literature has 



Lecture I. g 

suddenly gained upon thoughtful hearts. 
Wiseacres, marvelling at the meaning of the 
, outburst of enthusiasm for Russian literature, 
mutter "fashionable craze," and henceforth 
rest content. But, O my friends, believe it 
not Craze will go as craze has come, but the 
permanent force in Russian literature which 
now stirs the hearts of men is not to be dis- 
posed of by gossip at tea-table. Fashion can 
hug a corpse for a while, and proclaim its 
ghastly pallor to be delicacy of complexion, 
and the icy touch of its hand to be reserved 
culture, but it cannot breathe the breath of 
Life into what is dead. And the present en- 
thusiasm is kept awake, rest assured, not be- 
cause of fashion, but in spite of it Craze 
will surely go, but with it will not go that 
which appeals in Russian literature to all 
earnest souls, because of its permanent ele- 
ments over which fashion has no control. 

II. For the Russians have elements in their 
writings quite notable in themselves at all 
times, but more notable now when letters 
everywhere else seem to run to waste and 
ruin, — elements without which all writing 



lo Lectures on Russian Literature. 

must become in due course of time so 
much blacking of paper, and all speech 
only so much empty sound ; elements with- 
out which all writing is sent off, not weighted 
in one comer, that it may, like unto the toy, 
after never so much swaying to and fro, 
still find its upright equilibrium, but rather 
like unto the sky-rocket, sent up into empty 
space whizzing and crackling, to end in due 
time in total explosion and darkness. 

12. And of these elements the first is In- 
tensity. What the Russian lacks in originality 
he makes up in strength; what he lacks in 
breadth he makes up in depth. The Russian 
is nothing if not intense. When he loves, he 
loves with all his heart ; when he adores, he 
adores with all his soul ; when he submits, he 
submits with all his being ; when he rebels, 
he rebels with all his force. When Peter de 
cides to introduce western civilization into 
his empire, it must be done in a day and 
throughout the country at once ; and if hu- 
man nature does not yield quickly enough to 
the order for change from above, soldiers 
must march about the streets with shears in 



Lecture I. n 

their hands to cut off the forbidden beard 
and long coat When tyrant Paul dies by 
the hands of assassins, a scene of joy at the 
deliverance takes place which is only pos- 
sible on Russian streets : strangers fly into 
each other's arms, embrace, kiss each other, 
amid gratulations for the relief. When the 
foreign invader is to be repelled, no sacrifice 
is too great for the Russia^ ; and he does 
not shrink even fix)m setting fire to his own 
Mecca, the beloved mother Moscow. When 
Alexander II. undertakes to liberate Russia, 
he crowds all reforms upon it at once, — 
emancipation of serfs, trial by jury, local self- 
government, popular education. And when 
an autocratic reaction arrives, it comes with 
the same storm-like rapidity and ubiquity. 
From a free country Russia is changed in 
one night, through the pistol-shot of a Kara- 
kozof, into a despotic country, just as if some 
Herman had waved his magic wand, and with 
his '* presto, change," had conjured up the 
dead autocracy into life again. When finally 
aristocratic youth is fired with the noble de- 
sire to help the ignorant peasant, home, fam- 



12 Lectures on Russian Literature. 

fly, station, fortune, career, all is forsaken, 
and youth goes forth to live with peasant, 
like peasant, that it may the better instruct 
him. This intensity which thus permeates 
all life of Russia is likewise visible in its 
literature; but while in practical life titan- 
esqueness is a drawback, in literature, which 
is the nation's ideal life, it finds its most fruit- 
ful field. Hen^e the Russian writer may oft, 
indeed, be mistaken, fi-equently even totally 
wrong, but he is never uninteresting, because 
always powerful. 

13. In times when feebleness has become 
so feeble as even to invent a theory, making 
thinness of voice, weakness of stamina, and 
general emasculation literary virtues ; when 
intellect can find adequate interest only in the 
chess-puzzles of a Browning, and the sense 
of humor can find adequate sustenance only 
in the table-leaping antics of a Mark Twain, 
and the conscience can be goaded into re- 
morse only by the sight of actual starvation, 
it is well to turn to these Russians and learn 
that one of the secrets of their overwhelming 
power is their intensity. 



Lecture I. i) 

14. Gogol, for instance, never sets you 
laughing explosively. Such laughter is only 
on the surface ; but you can hardly read a 
page of his without feeling a general sense 
of mirth suffused as it were through every 
limb, and the cheek can laugh no more than 
the spinal column. So, too, Turgenef never 
sets you a weeping, but the sadness he feels 
he sends from his pages, circulating through 
your blood, and while the eye will not indeed 
drop a tear, for such grief is likewise mostly 
on the surface, the breast will heave a sigh. 
And Tolstoy never fires you to go forth and 
do a particularly good deed ; he never, like 
Schiller, sends you off to embrace your 
friend, but on laying down his book you 
feel a general disconteilt with yourself, and 
a longing for a nobler life than yours is 
takes possession of the soul. 

15. This is the result of the all-absorbing, 
all-devouring native intensity of the Russian 
spirit. 

16. And this intensity accounts for the sud- 
denness with which the Russian spirit has 
blazed forth on the horizon, so that the succes- 



( 



14 Lectures on Russian Literature. 

sive stages of development are scarcely visible. 
The darkness which overcast the letters of 
Russia before Pushkin disappears not slowly, 
but the sky is lighted up suddenly by innu- 
merable lights. Stars of the first magnitude 
stud it, now here, now there, until the bewil- 
dered observer beholds not twinkling points 
but shining luminaries. In scarcely half a 
century Russia has brought forth Pushkin, 
Lermontof, Gogol, Dostoyefsky, Turgenef, 
Tolstoy; and as the institutions of Western 
Europe became russified by the mere wave 
of an imperial hand, so Russian literature 
became modernized as if by the wave of a 
magic wand. 

17. This national characteristic of intensity 
gives Russian literature a hot-house aspect. 
Its atmosphere is not only fragrant, but op- 
pressively fragrant ; and as in America after 
the civil war generals and colonels were al- 
most too numerous for social comfort, so in 
Russia great authors are in well-nigh painful 
abundance, and the student is embarrassed 
not with the difficulty of selecting from the 
midst of poverty, but with the difficulty of 



Lecture L 75 

selecting from the midst of riches. And not 
only is its aspect that of a hot-house, but its 
very character has been a*ffected. Such is 
the intensity of the national spirit of Russia, 
that it can do well but one thing at a time, 
and all its strength can go into only one lit- 
erary form at a time. From 1800 to 1835 
Russian literature is like a field on a midsum- 
mer evening, full of all manner of musical 
sound, and whatever hath articulate voice 
does nothing but sing. Batushkof sings, Push- 
kin sings, Lerraontof sings, Koltsof sings, Tur- 
genef versifies, and Zhukofsky, like our bwn 
poetasters, balances himself acrobatically 
in metrical stanzas; and where the gift of 
song is wanting, it shrieks and screeches, but 
always, observe, in well-balanced rhymes. 
Then comes the era of the thick periodicals, 
and whatever is gifted in Russia, for a time 
speaks only through them ; lastly comes real- 
ism with an intensity unparalleled elsewhere, 
and everybody writes in prose, and only one 
kind of prose at that, — fiction. Not a drama, 
not a history, not an essay, not a philosophi- 
cal treatise has yet grown on Russian soil ; all 



1 6 Lectures on Russian Literature. 

the energy of Russia has gone into fiction, 
and Russia is not the country to produce, 
when it does produce masters, only one at 
a time. 

1 8. But the great danger of intensity is 
extravagance ; and Napoleon, who knew men 
well, could with justice say that the roots of 
Genius and Insanity are in the same tree, and 
indeed few are the writers of genius who have 
successfully coped with extravagance. It is 
the peculiar fortune however of the Russian 
writers to be comparatively free from it ; and 
their second great virtue is the one which 
formed the cardinal virtue of a nation from 
whom we have still much to learn, the Tem- 
perance of the Greeks. 

19. And of the virtues of which Temper- 
ance, Measuredness, is the parent, there are 
two, of which the first is Moderation and the 
second is Modesty : moderation with reference 
to things outside of the soul ; modesty with 
reference to things inside of the soul. And 
for the highest example of moderation, you 
must read Turgenefs account of Nezhdanof s 
suicide in " Virgin Soil, '* or his account of 



Lecture I. ly 

the drowning of Marya Pavlovna in ** Back 
Woods ; " the first of which I will take the 
liberty to read to you. 

" Nezhdanof sprang up from the sofa ; he went 
twice round tlie room, then stopped short for a 
minute lost in thought ; suddenly he shook him- 
self, took off his " masquerading " dress, kicked 
it into the corner, fetched and put on his former 
clothes. 

"Then he went up to the three-legged small 
table and took from the drawer two sealed en- 
velopes, and a small object which he put into his 
pocket, but the envelopes he left on the table. 

** He then leaned down and opened the door 
of the stove. . . . The stove contained a heap 
of ashes. This was all that was left of Nezh- 
danofs papers and private book of verses. 
... He had burned them all during the night 
But in this same stove, leaning against one of 
the walls, was Marianne's portrait, Markelofs 
gift. Evidently Nezhdanof had not had the 
courage to burn this portrait with the rest ; he 
took it out carefully and put it on the table by 
the side of the sealed papers. 

" Then with a determined movement of the 
hand he seized his cap and started for the door 
. . . but he stopped, came back, and went into 
Marianne's chamber. 

" After standing motionless for a moment, he 



i8 Lectures on Russian Literature. 

cast a look about him, and approaching the 
young girPs narrow small bed — he bent down 
and with one suppressed sob he placed his lips, 
not on the pillow, but on the foot of the bed. 
. . . Then he stood up straight, drew his cap 
over his forehead, and flung himself from the 
room. 

" Without meeting any one either in the entry, 
or on the staircase, or down below, he slipped 
out into the little enclosure. The day was 
cloudy, the sky lowering ; a little damp breeze 
bent the tops of the grass-blades and gently 
waved the leaves on the trees. The mill rattled 
and buzzed less than usual at this hour ; an 
odor of charcoal, of tar, and of soot came from 
the yard. 

*' Nezhdanof cast around him a scrutinizing, 
distrustful glance, then he walked up to the old 
apple-tree which had attracted his attention on 
the day of his arrival, when he first looked out 
of his chamber window. The trunk of this 
apple-tree was covered with dry moss, its bare 
and knotty branches, with but a itvr little green 
and brown leaves, stuck out here and there, 
raised themselves crookedly towards the heav- 
ens, like the suppliant arms of an old man, 
with bent elbows. Nezhdanof stood firmly on 
the dark earth which surrounded the foot of the 
apple-tree, and drew from his pocket the small 
object which he had previously taken from the 



Lecture I. ig 

table drawer. — Then he looked attentively at 
the windows of the little wing. 

*' * If some one should see me at this moment,' 
he thought, * perhaps I should put off — ' 

^ But nowhere was a single human face to 
be seen. . . . Everything seemed dead, every- 
thing turned itself away from him, drawing itself 
away from him forever, leaving him alone to 
the mercy of fate. Only the factory was send- 
ing forth its rank odor, its dull uproar, and a 
cold rain began to fall in fine drops, pricking 
like needles. 

"Then Nezhdanof looked up, through the 
twisted branches of the tree beneath which he 
was standing, at the gray, heavy, wet, indifferent, 
blind sky; he gaped, shrugged his shoulders, 
and said to himself, ^ After all there is nothing 
else I can do. I cannot return to Petersburg, 
to prison.' He threw down his cap, and with 
the premature feeling of a kind of agonizing, 
not wholly unpleasant yet powerful tension of 
the nerves, he put the mouth of the revolver 
against his breast and pulled the trigger. . . . 

" Something gave him a sudden blow not even 
a very hard one . . . but already he lay on his 
back, trying to make out what had happened 
and how it came that he had just seen Tatyana. 
... He wished to call to her and say, * Oh, 
there is something not right ; ' but already he is 
speechless, and over his face into his eyes, over 



20 Lectures on Russian Literature. 

his forehead into his brain, there rushes a whirl- 
wind of green smoke, and a flat something 
oppressively heavy crushed him forever to the 
ground. 

" Nezhdanof was not mistaken in supposing 
he saw Tatyana ; just as he pulled the trigger, 
she came to one of the windows of the little 
wing and descried him beneath the apple-tree. 
She had scarcely time to ask herself, 'What 
is he doing under the apple-tree bareheaded in 
such weather as this ? ' when he fell backward 
like a sheaf of wheat ; but she felt at once that 
something tragic had happened ; and she rushed 
downstairs, out into the enclosure. . . . She ran 
up to Nezhdanof. . . . 'Alexis Dimitritsh, what 
is the matter ? ' But darkness had already come 
over him. Tatyana stooped over him, and saw 
blood. . . . 

*' ' Paul ! ' she shouted in a strange voice, 
* Paul ! ' 

** In a few moments Marianne, Solomin, Paul, 
and two factory workmen were already in the 
enclosure ; Nezhdanof was at once raised, car- 
ried into his chamber, and placed on a sofa 
where he had spent his last night. 
* " He lay on his back, his half-closed eyes re- 
mained fixed, his face was lead-colored ; he 
breathed slowly and laboriously, catching each 
breath as if choking. Life had not yet left 
him. 



Lecture I. 2j 

'^ Marianne and Solomin stood on each side 
of the couch, almost as pale as Nezhdanof him- 
self. Both were stunned, startled, crushed, es- 
pecially Marianne, but they were not surprised. 
* Why did not we foresee this ? ' each thought ; 
and yet at the same time it seemed to them that 
they . . . yes, they had foreseen it. When he 
said to Marianne, * Whatever I do, I warn you 
of it beforehand, you will not be surprised,' and 
again, when he had spoken of the two men that 
existed in him, who can yet not live together, 
did not something like a presentiment stir in 
her ? Why then did she not stop at that mo- 
ment and reflect upon these words and this pre- 
sentiment ? Why does not she dare now to look 
at Solomin, as if he were her accomplice . . . 
as if he too were suffering remorse ? Why was 
the feeling of infinite pity, of desperate regret 
with which Nezhdanof inspired her mingled 
with a kind of terror, with shame, with re- 
morse ? Might she perhaps have saved him ? 
Why does neither of them dare to utter a word ? 
They hardly dare to breathe ; they wait ; what 
are they waiting for. Great God ? 

" Solomin sent for a surgeon, although there 
was of course no hope ; upon the small black 
bloodless wound Tatyana had put a sponge with 
cold water, and moistened his hair also with 
cold water and vinegar ; suddenly Nezhdanof 
ceased choking and made a slight movement. 



22 Lectures on Russian Literature. 

"*He is coming to himself,* muttered Sol- 
omin. 

" Marianne knelt beside the sofa. . . . Nezh- 
danof looked at her ... up to this moment 
his eyes had been fixed, like those of every 
dying person. 

" * Ah ! I am still . . . alive,' he said with a 
hardly audible voice. * Unsuccessful as ever. 
... I am detaining you.' 

" * Aliosha,* Marianne contrived to groan out. 

" * Yes . . . soon. . . . You remember, Mari- 
anne, in my . . . poem ..." Surround me with 
flowers." . . . Where then are the flowers? 
. . . But you are here instead . . . there, in 
my letter. . . . ' Suddenly he began to shiver 
from head to foot. 

" * Ah, here she is. . . . Give . . . each other 
. . . your hands — in my presence. . . . Quick 
. . . give — ' 

** Solomin raised Marianne's hand, her head 
lay on the sofa, face down, close to the very 
wound. As for Solomin, he stood straight and 
rigid, black as night. 

" * So, that is right . . . so/ 

" Nezhdanof began to gasp again, but this 
time in an entirely strange way ; his chest rose 
and his sides contracted ... he made evident 
efforts to place his hand on their clasped hands, 
but his were already dead. 

*' * He is going,' murmured Tatyana, who was 



Lecture I. 25 

standing near the door ; and she began to cross 
herself. The sobbing breaths became rarer, 
shorter ; he was still seeking Marianne with his 
look, but a kind of threatening milky whiteness 
already veiled his eyes from within. 

" * Good I . . . ' this was his last word. 

** He now was no longer, but the hands of 
Solomin and Marianne were still joined across 
his breast." 

20. From this pure melancholy and meas- 
ured sadness, go to Dickens and read his ac- 
count of the death of littie Nell, or to George 
Eliot and read her account of Maggie Tul- 
liver's death. I venture to think you will need 
no comment of mine to perceive the differ- 
ence ; and the difference, I regret to say, is 
not in favor of the English masters. 

21. But not only in the field of pathos is 
this moderation of the Russian striking; in 
the field of description of nature, of which 
both the English and the Russian are so fond 
in their literature, the two literatures offer 
abundant material for comparison, and I will 
permit myself to quote to you a passage from 
Dickens for the purpose of illustrating how the 
Russians go to work with a similar subject : 



24 Lectures on Russian Literature. 

"It was small tyranny for a respectable wind 
to go wreaking its vengeance on such poor crea- 
tures as the fallen leaves; but this wind hap- 
pening to come up with a great heap of them 
just after venting its humor on the insulted 
Dragon, did so disperse and scatter them that 
they fled away, pell-mell, some here, some 
there, rolling over each other, whirling round 
and round upon their thin edges, taking frantic 
flights into the air, and playing all manner of 
gambols in the extremity of their distresses. 
Nor was this enough for its malicious fury, for 
not content with driving them abroad, it charged 
small parties of them and hunted them into the 
wheelwright's saw-pit and below the planks 
and timbers in the yard, and scattering the 
sawdust in the air, it looked for them under- 
neath, and when it did meet with any, whew! 
how it drove them on and followed at their 
heels ! 

** The scared leaves only flew the faster for 
all this, and a giddy chase it was ; for they got 
into unfrequented places, where there was no 
outlet, and where their pursuer kept them eddy- 
ing round at his pleasure, and they crept under 
the eaves of the houses, and clung tightly to the 
sides of hay- ricks, like bats, and tore in at open 
chamber windows, and cowered close to hedges, 
and, in short, went everywhere for safety." — 
Martin Chuzzlewit, ii. 



Lecture I. 25 

22. Of which passage the principal vice is 
that it does not describe to you the wind, the 
thing Dickens really saw, but only what Dick- 
ens thought he saw. He gives you not the 
original but a translation, and a translation, 
as you will presently see, far from faithful ; 
he gives you not the scene, but the effect 
of the scene on his mind ; and as Dickens 
started out to produce not a faithful picture, 
but a startling emotion, his scene is accord- 
ingly gaudy, theatrical, false. For observe, 
the wind is a respectable wind, and yet af- 
flicted with pettiness of tyranny, and it wreaks 
vengeance ; and this vengeance-wreaking wind 
does not come up flying, as you would expect 
of a wind, but it happens to come up leis- 
urely, evidently taking an after-dinner stroU, 
as is becoming a respectable wind, which 
finds it not inconsistent with respectability 
to be vengeance-wreaking. And this respec- 
table wind, without any motive, suddenly 
transforms himself into a malicious wind. 
Observe, he is no longer revengeful, for re- 
venge implies something wicked done to the 
wind, which rouses him, while malice has no 



26 Lectures on Russian Literature. 

such excuse, for malice acts without cause, 
except from native depravity, while revenge 
acts always with cause. And this upright, 
leisurely strolling wind, now vengeance-wreak- 
ing, now malicious, again without sufficient 
cause changes his erect posture and kneels 
down, bends his head under the timbers, and 
the wind becomes a — peeper ! 

23. A conception like this may be very 
fine, it may be very poetic, and even very 
dramatic, but it is not true, for Dickens 
never saw the wind thus, else his metaphors 
would have been less mixed. What we see 
truly with our imagination we see clearly, and 
the metaphors born of clear sight are ever 
pure. Hence such description is extravagant 
because untrue ; hence such description is de- 
moralizing because extravagant, immoderate. 

And now read Tolstoy's description of a 
storm during a coach-ride : — 

" It was still ten versts to the nearest station ; 
but the great, dark, purple cloud which had col- 
lected, God knows whence, without the smallest 
breeze, was movj^^wiftly upon us. The sun, 
which is not yet ^^Hi by the clouds, brightly il- 



:>vj^^wil 
:t^Bi1 



Lecture I. 27 

lumines its dark form, and the gray streaks which 
extend from it to tlie very horizon. From time 
to time, the lightning flashes in the distance ; and 
a faint, dull roar is audible, which gradually in- 
creases in volume, approaches, and changes into 
broken peals which embrace the whole heavens. 
Vasili stands upon the box, and raises the cover 
of the britchka. The coachmen put on their 
armyaks, and, at every clap of thunder, remove 
their hats and cross themselves. The horses 
prick up their ears, pufiE out their nostrils as if 
smelling the fresh air which is wafted from the 
approaching thunder-cloud, and the britchka 
rolls faster along the dusty road. I feel op- 
pressed, and am conscious that the blood 
courses more rapidly through my veins.- But 
the advance guard of the clouds already begins 
to conceal the sun ; now it has peeped forth for 
the last time, has illumined the terribly dark 
portion of the horizon, and vanished. The en- 
tire landscape suddenly undergoes a change, and 
assumes a gloomy character. The ash woods 
quiver ; the leaves take on a kind of dull whit- 
ish hue, and stand out against the purple back- 
ground of cloud, and rustle and flutter ; the 
crowns of the great birches begin to rock, and 
tufts of dry grass fly across the road. The 
water and white-breasted swallows circle about 
the britchka, and fly beneath the horses, as 
though with the intention of stopping us ; daws 



28 Lectures on Russian Literature. 

with ruffled wings fly sideways to the wind : the 
edges of the leather apron, which we have but- 
toned up, begin to rise, and admit bursts of 
moist wind, and flap and beat against the body 
of the carriage. The lightning seems to flash 
in the britchka itself, dazzles the vision, and for 
a moment lights up the gray cloth, the border 
gimp, and Volodya's figure cowering in a comer. 
At the same moment, directly above our heads, 
a majestic roar resounds, which seems to rise 
ever higher and higher, and to spread ever wider 
and wider, in a vast spiral, gradually gaining 
force, until it passes into a deafening crash, 
which causes one to tremble and hold one's 
breath involuntarily. The wrath of God ! how 
much poetry there is in this conception of the 
common people 1 

"The wheels whirl faster and faster. From 
the backs of Vasili and Philip, who is flourish- 
ing his reins, I perceive that they are afraid. 
The britchka rolls swiftly down the hill, and 
thunders over the bridge of planks. I am 
afraid to move, and momentarily await our 
universal destruction. 

"Tpru! the trace is broken, and in spite of 
the unceasing, deafening claps of thunder, we 
are forced to halt upon the bridge. 

*'I lean my head against the side of the 
britchka, and, catching my breath with a sink- 
ing of the heart, I listen despairingly to the 



Lecture I. 2g 

movements of Philip's fat black fingers, as he 
slowly ties a knot, and straightens out the 
traces, and strikes the side horse with palm 
and whip-handle. 

"The uneasy feelings of sadness and terror 
increase within me with the force of the storm ; 
but when the grand moment of silence arrives, 
which generally precedes the thunder-clap, these 
feelings had reached such a point, that, if this 
state of things had lasted a quarter of an hour, 
I am convinced that I should have died of ex- 
citement. At the same moment, there appears 
from beneath the bridge a human form, clothed 
in a dirty, ragged shirt, with a bloated senseless 
face, a shaven, wagging, totally uncovered head, 
crooked, nerveless legs, and a shining red stump 
in place of a hand, which he thrusts out directly 
at the britchka. 

** ' Ba-a-schka ! ^ Help-a-cripple-for-Christ's- 
sake I ' says the beggar, beginning to repeat his 
petition by rote, in a weak voice, as he crosses 
himself at every word, and bows to his very 
belt. 

" I cannot describe the feeling of chill terror 
which took possession of my soul at that mo- 
ment. A shudder ran through my hair, and my 
eyes were riveted on the beggar, in a stupor of 
fright. 

" Vasili, who bestows the alms on the jour- 

1 Imperfect pronunciation of batiusckkaf *' little father." 



^o Lectures on Russian Literature. 

ney, is giving Philip directions how to strengthen 
the trace ; and it is only when all is ready, and 
Philip, gathering up the reins, climbs upon the 
box, that he begins to draw something from his 
side pocket. But we have no sooner started 
than a dazzling flash of lightning, which fills the 
whole ravine for a moment with its fiery glare, 
brings the horses to a stand, and is accom- 
panied, without the slightest interval, by such 
a deafening ^lap of thunder that it seems as 
though the whole vault of heaven were fall- 
ing in ruins upon us. The wind increases ; 
the manes and tails of the horses, Vasili*s 
cloak, and the edges of the apron, take one 
direction, and flutter wildly in the bursts of the 
raging gale. A great drop of rain fell heavily 
upon the leather hood of the britchka, then a 
second, a third, a fourth ; and all at once it beat 
upon us like a drum, and the whole landscape 
resounded with the regular murmur of falling 
rain. I perceive, from the movement of Vasili*s 
elbow, that he is untying his purse ; the beggar, 
still crossing himself and bowing, runs close to 
the wheel, so that it seems as if he would be 
crushed. * Give-for-Christ*s-sake ! * At last a 
copper groschen flies past us, and the wretched 
creature halts with surprise in the middle of the 
road ; his smock, wet through and through, and 
clinging to his lean limbs, flutters in the gale, 
and he disappears from our sight. 



Lecture 1, ?/ 

" The slanting rain, driving before a strong 
wind, poured down as from a bucket; streams 
trickled from Vasili's frieze back into the puddle 
of dirty water which had collected on the apron. 
The dust, which at first had been beaten into 
pellets, was converted into liquid mud, through 
which the wheels splashed ; the jolts became 
fewer, and turbid brooks flowed in the ruts. 
The lightning-flashes grew broader and paler; 
' the thunder-claps were no longer so startling 
after the uniform sound of the rain. 

" Now the rain grows less violent; the thun- 
der-cloud begins to disperse; light appears in 
the place where the sun should be, and a scrap 
of clear azure is almost visible through the 
grayish- white edges of the cloud. A moment 
more, and a timid ray of sunlight gleams in 
the pools along the road, upon the sheets of fine, 
perpendicular rain which fall as if through a 
sieve, and upon the shining, newly washed ver- 
dure of the wayside grass. 

" The black thunder-cloud overspreads the op- 
posite portion of the sky in equally threatening 
fashion, but I no longer fear it. I experience 
an inexpressibly joyous feeling of hope in life, 
which has quickly taken the place of my oppres- 
sive sensation of fear. My soul smiles, like 
Nature, refreshed and enlivened." 

24. And for modesty, too, the literatures of 
I England and Russia furnish instructive com- 



}2 Lectures on Russian Literature. 

parisons. Russia has no autobiographies of 
note. Men there were too busy with their art 
to have much time left to think of themselves. 
Turgenef writes Reminiscences, but only of 
others, and not of himself; and when he 
speaks of his own past, it is only incidentally, 
and with the delicacy of a maiden. Tolstoy 
gives, indeed^ an autobiography as sincere as 
Rousseau's and as earnest as Mill's, but only 
because he believes that an account of the 
spiritual struggles Ae went through would be 
helpful to other stragglers with the terrible 
problems of life. But of their personal his- 
tory there is seldom more than a trace found. 
Compare with this the autobiographies of Gib- 
bon, Leigh Hunt, Mill, or even the Reminis- 
cences of Carlyle, and the widely-branching 
outpourings of Ruskin in his autobiographi- 
cal sketches. Not that the English over-esti- 
mate their own worth and importance, but the 
Russians seem to have the instinctive sense 
of measure in personal matters. 

25. Much of this purity of taste is due to 
a singular circumstance in its literary history. 
Unlike other countries, in Russia, for a long 



Lecture /. )) 

time, literature has been the favorite solely 
of the educated and wealthy classes. Almost 
all the great names of Russian literature, Push- 
kin, Lermontof, Hertzen, Turgenef, Zhukof- 
sky, Griboyedof, Karamzin, Tolstoy, were aris- 
tocrats, if not always by birth, at least by sur- 
roundings. The men of letters sprung from 
the people, nourished by the people, living 
among the people, the Bumses, the B^rangers, 
the Heines are unknown in Russia. I have 
already stated that originality must not be 
looked for on Russian soil; that Russian 
literature is essentially an imitative literature 
in its forms, hence imitative force must have 
time to look about, examine, copy, and for 
this leisure, wealth is necessary. 

26. This absence of originality has thus 
proved a source of blessing to Russian litera- 
ture which well-nigh makes up the loss. For 
literature thus being in the hands of men of 
leisure, free from the struggle for bread, was 
never governed in Russia by the law of sup- 
ply and demand, and the dollar never became, 
as with us, the potent, even though the tempo- 
rary arbiter of its destinies. Hence the singular 
3 



)4 Lectures on Russian Literature. 

purity of Russian literature in point of style. 
Dickens needs the dollars, and he therefore 
spins out his satires to a length of distance to 
be traversed only by seven-league boots, and 
in verbosity is equalled only by Thackeray. 
Gogol, however, not only compresses his 
chapters, but even bums the whole second 
part of his masterpiece, "Dead Souls," as 
unworthy of his best art. George Eliot, writ- 
ing for a standard which requires three vol- 
umes for each novel, must fill her story with 
all manner of description which does not de- 
scribe, and reflection which does not reflect ; 
but Turgenef files and files until he is re- 
proached more for omitting too much than 
for adding too much. And America's great- 
est living writer (I say greatest, because he 
is purest in spirit, gentlest in heart, and freest 
in mind) can still go on from year to year 
producing one novel annually with the regu- 
larity of a baker's muffin at breakfast. Com- 
pare with this his own master, Tolstoy, who 
for months forsakes his masterpiece, "Anna 
Karenina,*' because of a fastidious taste ! 
Hence the question why Mrs. Astor never 



Lecture I. 55 

invites to her table literary men, which agi- 
tated them recently, could not have even been 
asked in Russia. Such a question is only 
possible in a country where the first question 
a publisher puts of a book is not whether 
it is good, but whether it is likely to pay. 

27. Faithfulness of labor and finish of form 
are therefore characteristic of whatever has 
any reputation in Russia ; and as works of art, 
there are few works of the Russian masters 
that are not veritable masterpieces. I say 
this with confidence of Turgenef, Tolstoy, 
Gogol, and Pushkin ; but I think this remark 
would hold even of the lesser lights of Rus- 
sian literature. A sincerity, a truthfulness, a 
realness, is thus found in Russian literature, 
which makes it be a thing of beauty instead 
of doing some deeds of beauty. On reading 
"Uncle Tom's Cabin," you involuntarily ask, 
"What effect has this book had on slavery 
in America?" On reading Turgenef 's Me- 
moirs of a Sportsman, though it accomplished 
as much for the serf, you no longer ask, "What 
has the book done for the serf? " You do 
not think of the serf any more now that he 



)6 Lectures on Russian Literature. 

has ceased to be. But you do think of the 
innumerable things of beauty that roll out 
from his pages before you as if from a kalei- 
doscope. And if to be is greater than to 
do, then Russian literature is truly original, 
even though its forms be borrowed; since 
instead of seeming it w, and whatever truly is, 
is original. 

28. From this sincerity of Russian writers 
comes the third great virtue of Russian lit- 
erature, a virtue possessed as yet by other 
' y literatures in but a small degree. The Rus- 

sian writer is first of all in earnest, and he 
has no time to give to mere entertainment, 
mere amusement The Goldsmiths with their 
Bees and their Citizens of the World, the Ad- 
disons with their Spectators, nobly writ though 
these be, yet written mostly with no higher 
purpose than to make the breakfast-roll glide 
down the throat more softly, — these exist not 
in Russia. Things of beauty, things of enter- 
tainment, like Addison's Essays, are indeed 
found in Russia ; but not for entertainment 
alone were these writ, hence not in the 
strain of mirth. Rather are they writ with j 



Lecture A 57 

the blood of the heart ; for to the Russian, 
" life is real, life is earnest," not a mere pas- 
time, and it was given to a Russian painter 
to make the all-known but singularly-forgotten \ 
observation that Christ never — laughed ! J 
29. But while the native endowment of 
the soul, its spiritual capital, is the chief guide 
of the fate of literature, other forces also af- 
fect its course, the chief among which is the 
political government of the people. In most 
countries the influence of government upon 
literature has been slight. Shakespeare's plays, 
Milton's Paradise, were not affected by the 
political struggles of England. The sole 
writing of Milton which was affected by Eng- 
lish politics, his prose, belongs to literature 
only in so far as it throws light on the author 
of Paradise Lost. Dante's Divine Comedy, 
charged though it be with the political elec- 
tricity of his times, was but little affected by 
the state of government In other countries 
the government of the people was as much 
itself an effect of the native endowment of 
the soul as its literature ; and government and 
literature flowed therefore side by side, in two 



^8 Lectures on Russian Literature. 

parallel streams, seldom interfering with each 
other's course. In Russia, however, govern- 
ment has extended a powerful influence on 
literature, and the most marked effect of its 
influence is the short-livedness of most Rus- 
sian authors. The calm, peaceful existence 
of the literary man has akeady been sung by 
Carlyle as a life-lengthener. In Russia, how- 
ever, the same fatality which has pursued its 
political rulers has also pursued its spiritual 
rulers ; and as most conquerors have died an 
unnatural death, so most writers have died an 
unnatural death, or only after an unnatural life. 
The witticism of Mark Twain, that the bed 
must be a most fatal place, since most peo- 
ple die in bed, is not applicable to Russian 
emperors and Russian writers. Few of them 
can be said to have died in their beds. Gri- 
boyedof is assassinated ; Pushkin and Lermon- 
tof are murdered ; Gogol is found dead from 
bodily starvation, and Byelinsky is found dead 
from spiritual starvation ; Batushkof dies in- 
sane ; Dostoyefsky and Chemishefsky are in 
prison the best years of their lives ; Turgenef 
can find the length of his days only in exile, 



Lecture I. 59 

and Tolstoy the length of his in ploughing 
fields. For such a strange disharmony in the 
lives of Russian men of letters, the govern- 
ment is largely responsible. An autocracy 
which feels itself called to wrap literature 
tightly in swaddling-clothes, and establishes a 
censorship which does not shrink even from 
making verbal changes in the works of the art- 
ist to improve his style, can accomplish little 
more than the shortening of literary lives. 
For literature is a flower which can only wither 
at the touch of unhallowed hands, and the 
rude hands of the censor are far from being 
hallowed. 

30. Hence Russian literature not only is 
2L mere fragment, a mere brick of the vast 
edifice which it is capable of becoming; it 
is even bound to remain a mere fiagment for 
a long time to come. For as Socrates lived 
in Plato, Plato in Aristotle, and Aristotle in 
the Schoolmen, as Lessing lived in Goethe, 
Goethe in Heine, and Heine in young Ger- 
many, so great literary fathers reappear in the 
progeny of the next generation ; the repro- 
duction is indeed oft puny enough, still the 



40 Lectures on Russian Literature. 

reproduction is there. But in Russia, while 
Pushkin lived in Gogol, and Gogol in Tur- 
genef, the generation which was to inherit 
the kingdom left by Turgenef and Tolstoy is 
now buried in fortresses and dungeons. And 
as in America mammon has so eaten away 
literary aspiration as to leave Emerson and 
Hawthorne, Prescott and Motley, intellectu- 
ally childless, so in Russia, autocracy has so 
eaten away the literary material as to leave 
the great masters childless. 

31. Fortunately, though deprived by despot- 
ism of all power of propagation on Russian 
soil, the noble spirit of Russian literature has 
by a force I cannot but call divine been allowed 
to be propagated on foreign soil ; and if the 
literature of the west, which is now stagnating 
in the pools of doubt, irreverence, mammon, 
and cold intellectualism, misnamed culture, 
is to be purified, the purification must come 
from the breath of Life which blows from Rus- 
sia. This is the true meaning of the present 
craze for Russian authors. There is a force 
in them which the mass instinctively recog- 
nizes as divine ; it feels for it, gropes for it, 



Lecture I. 41 

and the Devil, as usual, is the first to seize for 
his purposes whatever noble impulse comes 
over men, and this search for the divine of the 
mass becomes a sham, a fashionable craze. 
Hence the rage, the boom. This is the inevi- 
table stage of falsehood through which every 
noble aspiration must pass. By and by the 
stage of truth must come, and come it shall, 
in due time. Russian authors will then be 
read not because it is the fashion and the 
craze, but because they have a message from 
the very heavens to deliver unto him that hath 
eyes to see and ears to hear : the message of 
sincerity, the message of earnestness, the mes- 
sage of love. Then will have been reached 
the stage of truth. 

32. Out of this crampedness of Russian 
literature by government developed that vir- 
tue of its masters, which with their sincerity 
and simplicity, or moderation, forms a most 
beautiful trinity of graces ; I mean their free- 
dom. You will indeed hear full many a yard- 
stick critic as he goes about with his load of 
pigeon-holed boxes to take measure of each 
author, and label him, and duly relegate him 



42 Lectures on Russian Literature. 

to convenient pigeon-hole, — such critic y(5u 
will hear discourse much about classicism, 
and romanticism, and realism, and of their 
prevalence at different times in Russian liter- 
ature. Believe it not ! The Russian author 
who is at all worth classifying is slave of no 
school ; he is free, for he is a worshipper of the 
truth which alone maketh men free, he is a 
school unto himself. Is Gogol a realist? He 
gives you indeed the reality, but he breathes 
into it a beauty only visible to idealizing eyes. 
Is Turgenef a realist? When thriUed with the 
unspeakable beauty of the sky, he depicts it 
so as to realize for you the ideal. And when 
Tolstoy is thrilled with a moral emotion, he 
depicts it so as to idealize the real for you. 
The Russians thus refuse to be classified. 
And they belong to only one class, — the 
class of those that cannot be classified. 

33. Thus has it come to pass that the west, 
K) which Russian literature owes its nourish- 
ment, is now in its old age to be nourished 
by its foster child. The child is to become 
the father of the man ; and Russian literature 
is henceforth to be the source of the regene- 



Lecture I. 4) 

ration of the western spirit. As the future 
fighters for fieedom will have to look to the 
Perofskayas, to the Bardines, and the Zassul- 
itshes, and to the unnamed countless victims 
of the Siberian snow-fields for models of hero- 
ism, so methinks henceforth writers must look 
to the Russians for models in their art: to 
Gogol for pure humor, to Turgenef for the 
worship of natural beauty, to Tolstoy for the 
worship of moral beauty. 



LECTURE II. 



PUSHKIN. 

I. I HAVE Stated in the first lecture that I 
should treat of Pushkin as the singer. Push- 
kin has indeed done much besides singing. 
He has written not only lyrics and ballads 
but also tales: tales in prose and tales in 
verse ; he has written novels, a drama, and 
even a history. He has thus roamed far and 
wide, still he is only a singer. And even a 
cursory glance at his works is enough to show 
the place which belongs to him. I say be- 
longs, because the place he holds has a promi- 
nence out of proportion to the merits of the 
writer. Among the blind the one-eyed is 
king, and the one-eyed Pushkin — for the 
moral eye is totally lacking in this man — 
came when there as yet was no genuine song 



Lecture II. 4^ 

in Russia, but mere noise, reverberation of 
sounding brass; and Pushkin was hailed as 
the voice of voices, because amidst the univer- 
sal din his was at least clear. Of his most 
ambitious works, " Boris Godunof " is not a 
drama, with a central idea struggling in the 
breast of the poet for embodiment in art, but 
merely a series of well-painted pictures, and 
painted not for the soul, but only for the eye. 
His " Eugene Onyegin " contains many fine 
verses, much wit, much biting satire, much 
bitter scorn, but no indignation burning out 
of the righteous heart. His satire makes you 
smile, but fails to rouse you to indignation. 
In his " Onyegin," Pushkin often pleases you, 
but he never stirs you. Pushkin is in litera- 
ture what the polished club-man is in society. 
In society the man who can repeat the most 
bon-mots, tell the most amusing anecdotes, 
and talk most fluently, holds the ear more 
closely than he that speaks from the heart. 
So Pushkin holds his place in literature be- 
cause he is brilliant, because his verse is pol- 
ished, his language chosen, his wit pointed, 
his prick stinging. But he has no aspiration, 



46 Lectures on Russian Literature. 

no hope ; he has none of the elements which 
make the writings of the truly great helpful. 
Pushkin, in short, has nothing to give. Since 
to be able to give one must have, and Push- 
kin was a spiritual pauper. 

2. And what is true of his more sustained 
works, is equally true of his lesser works. 
They all bear the mark of having come from 
the surface, and not from the depths. His 
" Prisoner of the Caucasus," his " Fountain of 
Bachtshisarai," his "Gypsies," are moreover 
weighted down with the additional load of 
having been written directly under the influ- 
ence of Byron. And as health is sufficient 
unto itself and it is only disease which is 
contagious, Byron, who was sick at heart him- 
self, could only impart disease and not health. 
Byron moreover had besides his gift of song 
the element of moral indignation against cor- 
rupt surroundings. Pushkin had not even this 
redeeming feature. 

3. Pushkin therefore is not a poet, but only 
a singer; for he is not a maker, a creator. 
There is not a single idea any of his works 
can be said to stand for. His is merely a 



Lecture II. 47 

skill No idea circulates in his blood giving 
him no rest until embodied in artistic form. 
His is merely a skill struggling for utterance 
because there is more of it than he can hold. 
Pushkin has thus nothing to give you to carry 
away. All he gives is pleasure, and the pleas- 
ure he gives is not that got by the hungry 
from a draught *of nourishing milk, but that 
got by the satiated from a draught of intoxi- 
cating wine. He is the exponent of beauty 
solely, without reference to an ultimate end. 
Gogol uses his sense of beauty and creative 
impulse to protest against corruption, to give 
vent to his moral indignation \ Turgenef uses 
his sense of beauty as a weapon with which 
to fight his mortal enemy, mankind's deadly 
foe ; and Tolstoy uses his sense of j beauty to 
preach the ever-needed gospel of iove. . But 
Pushkin uses his sense of ,beauty merely to 
give it expression. He sings indeed like a 
siren, but he sings without purpose. Hence, 
though he is the greatest versifier of Russia, 
— not poet, observe 1 — he is among the least 
of its writers. 
4. Towards the end of his early extinguished 



48 Lectures on Russian Literature. 

life he showed, indeed, signs of better things. 
In his "Captain's Daughter" he depicts a 
heroic simplicity, the sight of which is truly 
refreshing, and here Pushkin becomes truly 
noble. As a thing of purity, as a thing of 
calmness, as a thing of beauty, in short, the 
" Captain's Daughter " stands unsurpassed^ 
either in Russia or out of Russia. Only 
Goldsmith's "Vicar of Wakefield," Gogol's 
"Taras Bulba," and the Swiss clergyman's 
" Broom Merchant," can be worthily placed 
by its side. But this nobility is of the lowly, 
humble kind, to be indeed thankful for as 
all nobility must be, whether it be that of the 
honest farmer who tills the soil in silence, or 
that of the gentle Longfellow who cultivates 
his modest muse in equal quietness. But 
there is the nobility of the nightingale and 
the nobility of the eagle ; there is the nobility 
of the lamb and the nobility of the lion ; and 
beside the titanesqueness of Gogol, and Tur- 
genef, and Tolstoy, the nobility of Puslikin, 
though high enough on its own plane, is 
relatively low. 

5- Mere singer then that Pushkin is, he is 



Lecture II. 4g 

accordingly at his best only in his lyrics. But 
the essence of a lyric is music, and the es- 
sence of music is harmony, and the essence 
of harmony is form ; hence in beauty of form 
Pushkin is unsurpassed, and among singers 
he is peerless. His soul is a veritable ^olian 
harp. No sooner does the wind begin to 
blow than his soul is filled with music. His 
grace is only equalled by that of Heine, his 
ease by that of Goethe, and his melody by 
that of Tennyson. I have abready said that 
Pushkin is not an eagle soaring in the 
heavens, but he is a nightingale perched 
singmg on the tree. But this very perfec- 
tion of form makes his lyrics well-nigh un- 
translatable, and their highest beauty can only 
be felt by those who can read them in the 
original. 

6. In endeavoring therefore to present Push- 
kin to you, I shall present to you not the 
nine tenths of his works which were written 
only by his hands, — his dramas, his tales, his 
romances, whether in prose or verse, — but 
the one tithe of his works which was writ from 
his heart. For Pushkin was essentially a lyric 
4 



^o Lectures on Russian Literature. 

singer, and whatever comes from this side of 
his being is truly original ; all else, engrafted 
upon him as it is from without, either from 
ambition or from imitation, cannot be called 
his writing, that which he alone and none 
others had to deliver himself of. What 
message Pushkin had to deliver at all to 
his fellow-men is therefore fQund in his 
lyrics. 

7. Before proceeding,, however, to-l6ok dt 
this singer Pushkin, it is necessary to establish 
a standard by which his attainment is to be 
judged. And that we may ascertain how 
closely Pushkin approaches the highest, I 
venture to read to you the following poem, 
as the highest flight which the human soul 
is capable of taking heavenward on the wings 
of song. 

HYMN TO FORCE. 

BY WM. R. THAYER. 

I AM eternal ! 

I throb through the ages ; 

I am the Master 

Of each of Life's stages. 



Lecture IL 5/ 

I quicken the blood 
Of the mate-craving lover ; 
The age-frozen heart 
With daisies I cover. 

Down through the ether 
I hurl constellations ; 
Up from their earth-bed 
I wake the carnations. 

I laugh in the flame 
As I kindle and fan it ; 
I crawl in the Worm ; 
I leap in the planet. 

Forth from its cradle 

I pilot the river ; 

In lightning and earthquake 

I flash and I quiver. 

My breath is the wind ; 
My bosom the ocean ; 
My form 's undefined ; 
My essence is motion. 

The braggarts of science 
Would weigh and divide me ; 
Their wisdom evading, 
I vanish and hide me. 



52 Lectures on Russian Literature. 

My glances are rays 
From stars emanating ; 
My voice through the spheres 
Is sound » undulating. 

I am the monarch 
Uniting all matter: 
The atoms I gather ; 
The atoms I scatter. 

I pulse with the tides — 
Now hither, now thither; 
I grant the tree sap ; 
I bid the bud wither. 

I always am present, 
Yet nothing can bind me ; 
Like thought evanescent, 
They lose me who find me. 1^ 

8. I consider a poem of this kind (and I 
regret that there are very few such in any lan- 
guage) to stand at the very summit of poetic 
aspiration. For not only is it perfect in form, 
and is thus a thing of beauty made by the 
hands of man, but its subject is of the very 
highest, since it is a hymn, a praise of God, 
even though the name of the Most High be 
not there. For what is heaven ? Heaven is 



Lecture IL 5^ 

a state where the fellowship of man with man 
is such as to leave no room for want to the 
one while there is abundance to the other. 
Heaven is a state where the wants of the indi- 
vidual are so cared for that he needs the help 
of none. But if there be no longer any need 
of toiling, neither for neighbor nor for self, 
what is there left for the soul to do but to 
praise God and glorify creation? A hymn 
like the above, then, is the outflow of a spirit 
which hath a heavenly peace. And this is 
precisely the occupation with which the im- 
agination endows the angels; the highest 
flight of the soul is therefore that in which 
it is so divested of the interests of the earth 
as to be filled only with reverence and wor- 
ship. And this hymn to Force seems to me 
to have come from a spirit which, at the time 
of its writing at least, attained such freedom 
from the earthly. 

9. Such a poem being then at one end of 
the scale, the highest because it gratifies the 
souPs highest need, on the opposite end, on 
the lowest, is found that which gratifies the 
soul's lowest need, its need for novelty, its 



54 Lectures on Russian Literature. 

curiosity. And this is done by purely nar- 
rative writing, of which the following is a 
good example : — 



THE BLACK SHAWL. 

I GAZE demented on the black shawl, 
And my cold soul is torn by grief. 

When young I was and full of trust 
I passionately loved a young Greek girl. 

The charming maid, she fondled me, 
But soon I lived the black day to see. 

Once as were gathered my jolly guests, 
A detested Jew knocked at my door. 

Thou art feasting, he whispered, with friends, 
But betrayed thou art by thy Greek maid. 

Moneys I gave him and curses. 
And called my servant, the faithful. 

We went ; I flew on the wings of my steed. 
And tender mercy was silent in me. 

Her threshold no sooner I espied. 

Dark grew my eyes, and my strength departed. 



Lecture 11. ^^ 

The distant chamber I enter alone — 

An Armenian embraces my faithless maid. 

Darkness around me: flashed the dagger; 
To interrupt his kiss the wretch had no time. 

And long I trampled the headless corpse, — 
And silent and pale at the maid I stared. 

I remember her prayers, her flowing blood, 
But perished the girl, and with her my love. 

The shawl I took from the head now dead, 
And wiped in silence the bleeding steel. 

When came the darkness of eve, my serf 
Threw their bodies into the billows of the 
Danube. 

Since then I kiss no charming eyes. 
Since then I know no cheerful days. 

I gaze demented on the black shawl, 
And my cold soul is torn by grief. 

ID. The purpose of the author here was 
only to tell a story ; and as success is to be 
measured by the ability of a writer to adapt 
his means to his ends, it must be acknowl- 
edged that Pushkin is here eminently suc- 
cessful. Fot the story is here well told; 



56 Lectures on Russian Literature. 

well told because simply told ; the narrative 
moves, uninterrupted by excursions into side- 
fields. In its class therefore this poem must 
stand high, but it is of the lowest class. 

II. For well told though this story be, it is 
after all only a story, with no higher purpose 
than merely to gratify curiosity, than merely 
to amuse. Its art has no higher purpose than 
to copy faithfully the event, than to be a 
faithful photograph; and moreover it is the 
story not of an emotion, but of a passion, and 
an ignoble passion at that; the passion is 
jealousy, — in itself an ugly thing, and the 
fruit of this ugly thing is a still uglier thing, 
— a murder. The subject therefore is not a 
thing of beauty, and metliinks that the sole 
business of art is first of all to deal with 
things of beauty. Mediocrity, meanness, 
ugliness, are fit subjects for art only when 
they can be made to serve a higher pur- 
pose, just as the sole reason for tasting 
wormwood is the improvement of health. 
But this higher purpose is here wanting. 
Hence I place such a poem on the lowest 
plane of art 



Lecture II. ^7 

THE OUTCAST. 

On a rainy autumn evening 
Into desert places went a maid ; 
And the secret fruit of unhappy love 
In her trembling hands she held. 
All was still : the woods and the hills 
Asleep in the darkness of the night ; 
And her searching glances 
In terror about she cast. 

And on this babe, the innocent, 

Her glance she paused with a sigh: 

** Asleep thou art, my child, my grief, 

Thou knowest not my sadness. 

Thine eyes will ope, and though with longing, 

To my breast shalt no more cling. 

No kiss for thee to-morrow 

From thine unhappy mother. 

Beckon in vain for her thou wilt, 

My everlasting shame, my guilt ! 

Me forget thou shalt for aye, 

But thee forget shall not I ; 

Shelter thou shalt receive from strangers ; 

Who 'U say : Thou art none of ours ! 

Thou wilt ask : Where are my parents ? 

But for thee no kin is found. 

Hapless one 1 with heart filled with sorrow. 
Lonely amid thy mates, 



5* Lectures on Russian Literature. ^ 

Thy spirit sullen to the end 

Thou shalt behold the fondling mothers. 

A lonely wanderer everywhere, 

Cursing thy fate at all times, 

Thou the bitter reproach shalt hear . . . 

Forgive me, oh, forgive me then ! 

^\ 
Asleep ! let me then, O hapless one, i 

To my bosom press thee once for all ; 

A law unjust and terrible 

Thee and me to sorrow dooms. • 

While the years have not yet chased 

The guiltless joy of thy days. 

Sleep, my darling ; let no bitter griefs 

Mar thy childhood's quiet life I " 

But lo, behind the woods, near by, ^ 

The moon brings a hut to light. 

Forlorn, pale, trembling ( 

To the doors she came nigh ; 

She stooped, and gently laid down *" 

The babe on the strange threshold. 

In terror away she turned her eyes 

And disappeared in the darkness of the night. 

12. This also is a narrative poem; but it . 

tells something more than a story. A new 
element is here added. For it not only grati- 
fies our curiosity about the mother and the m 
babe^ but it also moves us. And it moves not 



Lecture II. $9 

our low passion, but it stirs our high emotion. 
Not our anger is here roused, as against the 
owner of the black shawl, but our pity is 
stirred for the innocent babe ; and even the 
mother, though guilty enough, stirs our hearts. 
Here, too, as in the " Black Shawl," the art of 
the narrator is perfect. The few touches of 
description are given only in so far as they 
vivify the scene and furnish a fit background 
for the mother and child. But the theme is 
akeady of a higher order, and in rank I there- 
fore place the "Outcast" one plane above 
the " Black Shawl." ^'"" '^" * '' "^ 

13. The two poems I have just read you 
are essentially ballads ; they deal indeed with 
emotion, but only incidentally. Their chief 
purpose is the telling of the story. I shall 
now read you some specimens of a higher 
order of poetry, — of that which reflects the 
pure emotion which the soul feels when be- 
holding beauty in Nature. I consider such 
poetry as on a higher plane, because this emo- 
tion is at bottom a reverence before the pow- 
ers of Nature, hence a worship of God. It 
is at bottom a confession of the soul of its 



6o Lectures on Russian Literature. 

humility before its Creator. It is the constant 
presence of this emotion which gives perma- 
nent value to the otherwise tame and com- 
monplace writings of Wordsworth. Words- 
worth seldom climbs the height he attains in 
those nine lines, the first of which are : — 

" My heart leaps up when I behold 
A rainbow in the sky." 

But here Pushkin is always on the heights. 
And the first I will read you shall be one 
in which the mere sense of Nature's beauty 
finds vent in expression without any con- 
scious ethical purpose. It is an address to 
the last cloud. 

THE CLOUD. 

O LAST cloud of the scattered storm, 
Alone thou sailest along the azure dear ; 
Alone thou bringest the darkness of shadow ; 
Alone thou marrest the joy of the day. 

Thou but recently hadst encircled the sky, 
When sternly the lightning was winding about 

thee. 
Thou gavest forth mysterious thunder, 
Thou hast watered with rain the parched earth. 



Lecture II. 6i 

Enough ; hie thyself. Thy time hath passed. 
The earth is refreshed, and the storm hath fled, 
And the. breeze, fondling the leaves of the trees, 
Forth chases thee from the quieted heavens. 

14. Observe, here the poet has no ultimate 
end but that of giving expression to the over- 
flowing sense of beauty which comes over the 
soul as he beholds the last remnant of a thun- 
der-storm floating ofl" into airy nothingness. 
But it is a beauty which ever since the days 
of Noah and his rainbow has filled the hu- 
man soul with marvelling and fearing adora- 
tion. Beautiful, then, in a most noble sense 
this poem indeed is. Still, I cannot but con- 
sider the following few lines to the Birdlet, 
belonging as the poem does to the same class 
with "The Cloud," as still superior. 

THE BIRDLET. 
GoD*s birdlet knows 
Nor care nor toil ; 
Nor weaves it painfully 
An everlasting nest ; 

Through the long night on the twig it slumbers ; 
When rises the red sun. 
To the voice of God listens birdie, 
And it starts and it sings. 






62 Lectures on Russian Literature. 

When spring, nature's beauty, 

And the burning summer have passed, 

And the fog and the rain 

By the late fall are brought, 

Men are wearied, men are grieved ; 

But birdie flies into distant lands. 

Into warm climes, beyond the blue sea, — 

Flies away until the spring. 

15. For a poem of this class this is a veri- 
table gem ; for not only is its theme a thing of 
beauty, but it is a thing of tender beauty. 
Who is there among my hearers that can con- 
template this birdlet, this wee child of God, 
as the poet hath contemplated it, and not feel 
a gentleness, a tenderness, a meltedness creep 
into every nook and comer of his being? But 
the lyric beauty of the form, and the tender 
emotion roused in our hearts by this poem, 
form by no means its greatest merit. To me 
the well-nigh inexpressible beauty of these 
lines lies in the spirit which shineth from 
them, — the spirit of unreserved trust in the 
fatherhood of God. "When fog and rain 
by the late fall are brought, men are wearied, 
men are grieved, but birdie — " My friends. 



Lecture II. 6) 

the poet has written here a commentary on 
the heavenly words of Christ, which may well 
be read with immeasurable profit by our wise- 
acres of supply-and-demand economy, and 
the consequence-fearing Associated or Dis- 
sociated Charity. For if I mistake not, it 
was Christ that uttered the strangely un- 
heeded words, " Be not anxious for the mor- 
row. . . . Behold the birds of the heaven, that 
they sow not, neither do they reap, nor gather 
into bams, and your heavenly Father feedeth 
them." Fine words these, to be read rever- 
ently from the pulpit on Sunday, but to be 
laughed at in the counting-room and in the 
charity-office on Monday. But the singer 
was stirred by this trustfulness of birdie, all 
the more beautiful because unconscious, and 
accordingly celebrates it in lines of well-nigh 
unapproachable tenderness and grace 1 

1 6. There is, however, one realm of crea- 
tion yet grander and nobler than that visi- 
ble to the eye of the body. Higher than 
the visible stands the invisible ; and when the 
soul turns from the contemplation of the out- 
ward universe to the contemplation of the in- 



64 Lectures on Russian Literature. 

ward universe, to the contemplation of affec- 
tion and aspiration, its flight must of necessity 
be higher. Hence the high rank of those 
strains of song which the soul gives forth 
when stirred by affection, by love to the 
children of God, whether they be addressed 
by Wordsworth to a butterfly, by Bums to 
a mouse, or by Byron to a friend. You 
have in English eight brief lines which for 
this kind of song are a model from their 
simplicity, tenderness, and depth. 

LINES IN AN ALBUM. 

As over the cold, sepulchral stone 
Some name arrests the passer-by, 
Thus when thou viewest this page alone 
May mine attract thy pensive eye. 

And when these lines by thee are read 
Perchance in some succeeding year, 
Reflect on me as on the dead, 
And think my heart is buried here ! 

1 7. It is this song of love for one's kind 
which makes Bums, Heine, and Goethe pre- 
eminently the singers of the human heart 
when it finds itself linked to one other heart. 



Lecture II. 65 

And it is this strain which gives everlasting life 
to the following breath of Pushkin's muse : 



TO A FLOWER. 

A FLOWERET, withered, odorless. 
In a book forgot I find ; 
And already strange reflection 
Cometh into my mind. 

Bloomed where? When? In what spring? 
And how long ago ? And plucked by whom ? 
Was it by a strange hand, was it by a dear hand ? 
And wherefore left thus here ? 

Was it in memory of a tender meeting ? 
Was it in memory of a fated parting ? 
Was it in memory of a lonely walk 
In the peaceful fields, or in the shady woods ? 

Lives he still ? lives she still ? 

And where is their nook this very day ? 

Or are they too withered, 

Like unto this unknown floweret ? 

18. But from the love of the individual the 
growmg soul comes in time to the love of the 
race; or rather, we only love an individual 
.because he is to us the incorporation of some 

5 



66 Lectures on Russian Literature. 

Ideal. And let the virtue for which we love 
him once be gone, he may indeed keep our 
good will, but our love for him is clean gone 
out. This is because the soul in its ever- 
upward, heavenward flight alights with its 
love upon individuals solely in the hope of 
finding here its ideal, its heaven realized. 
But it is not given unto one person to fill the 
whole of a heaven-searching soul. Only the 
ideal, God alone, can wholly fill it. Hence the 
next strain to that of love for the individual 
is this longing for the ideal, a longing for 
what is so vague to most of us, a long- 
ing to which therefore not wholly inappro- 
priately the name has been given of a longing 
for the Infinite. 

19. And of this longing, Heine has given in 
eight lines immeasurably pathetic expression : 

" Ein Fichtenbaum steht einsam 
Im Norden auf kahler Hoh' 
Ihn schlafert ; mit weisser Decke 
Umhiillen ihn Eis und Schnee. 
Er traumt von einer Palme, 
Die, fern im Morgenland, 
Einsam und schweigend trauert 
Auf brennender Felsenwand." 



Lecture II. 6j 

Heine has taken the evergreen pine in the 
cold clime, as the emblem of this longing, 
and a most noble emblem it is. But I cannot 
help feeling that in choosing a fallen angel, as 
Pushkin has on the same subject, he was en- 
abled to give it a zenith-like loftiness and a 
nadir like depth not to be found in Heine. 

THE ANGEL. 

At the gates of Eden a tender Angel 
With drooping head was shining ; 
A demon gloomy and rebellious 
Over the abyss of hell was flying. 

The spirit of Denial, the spirit of Doubt, 
The spirit of purity espied; 
And unwittingly the warmth of tenderness 
He for the first time learned to know. 

Adieu, he spake. Thee I saw ; 
Not in vain hast thou shone before me. 
Not all in the world have I hated, 
Not all in the world have I scorned. 



20. Hitherto we have followed Pushkin only 
through his unconscious song ; only through 



68 Lectures on Russian Literature. 

that song of which his soul was so full as to 
find an outlet, as it were, without any deliber- 
ate effort on his part. But not even unto the 
bard is it given to remain in this childlike 
health. For Nature ever works in circles. 
Starting from health, the soul indeed in the 
end arrives at health, but only through the 
road of disease. And a good portion of 
the conscious period in the life of the soul 
is taken up by doubt, by despair, by dis- 
ease. Hence when the singer begins to re- 
flect, to philosophize, his song is no longer 
that of health. This is the reason why Byron 
^ and Shelley have borne so little fruit. Their 
' wail is the cry not of a mood, but of their 
; whole being ; it is not the cry of health tem- 
porarily deranged, but the cry of disease. 
With the healthy Bums, on the other hand, 
his poem, "Man was made to Mourn," re- 
flects only a stage which all growing souls 
must pass. So Pushkin, too, in his growth, at 
last arrives at a period when he writes the 
following lines, not the less beautiful for be- 
ing the offspring of disease, as all lamentation 
must needs be : — 



Lecture 11. 69 

" Whether I roam along the noisy streets, 
Whether i enter the peopled temple, 
Or whether I sit by thoughtless youth, 
My thoughts haunt me everywhere. 

" I say, swiftly go the years by : 
However great our number now, 
Must all descend the eternal vaults, — 
Already struck has some one^s hour. 

*< And if I gaze upon the lonely oak, 
I think : The patriarch of the woods 

* Will survive my passing age 
As he survived my father's age. 

" And if a tender babe I fondle. 
Already I mutter, Fare thee well ! 
I yield my place to thee ; 
For me 'tis time to decay, to bloom for thee. 

" Thus every day, every year, 
With death I join my thought 
Of coming death the day, 
Seeking among them to divine 

" Where will Fortune send me death, — 
In battle, in my wanderings, or on the waves ? 
Or shall the neighboring valley 
Receive my chilled dust ? 



JO Lectures on Russian Literature. 

** But though the unfeeling body 
Can equally moulder everywhere, 
I, still, mybirthland nigh, 
Would have my body lie. 

** Let near the entrance to my grave 
Cheerful youth be engaged in play, 
And let indifferent creation 
Shine there with beauty eternally." 

21. Once passed through its mumps and 
measles, the soul of the poet now becomes 
conscious of its heavenly gift, and begins to 
have a conscious purpose. The poet be- 
comes moralized, and the song becomes 
ethical This is the beginning of the final 
stage, which the soul, if its growth continue 
healthy, must reach; and Pushkin, when sing- 
ing, does retain his health. Accordingly in his 
address to the Steed, the purpose is already 
clearly visible. 

THE HORSE. 

Why dost thou neigh, O spirited steed ; 
Why thy neck so low, 
Why thy mane unshaken, 
Why thy bit not gnawed ? 



Lecture II. 7/ 

Do I then not fondle thee ; 
Thy grain to eat art thou not free ; 
Is not thy harness ornamented, 
Is not thy rein of silk. 
Is not thy shoe of silver, 
Thy stirrup not of gold ? 
The steed, in sorrow, answer gives : 
Hence am I still. 
Because the distant tramp I hear, 
The trumpet's blow, and the arrow's whiz ; 
And hence I neigh, since in the field 
• No longer shall I feed. 

Nor in beauty live, and fondling, 
Nor shine with the harness bright. 
For soon the stern enemy 
My harness whole shall take, 
And the shoes of silver 
From my light feet shall tear. 
Hence it is that grieves my spirit ; 
That in place of my chaprak 
With thy skin shall cover he 
My perspiring sides. 

22. It is thus that the singer lifts up his voice 
against the terrors of war. It is thus that he 
protests against the struggle between brother 
and brother; and the effect of the protest 
is all the more potent that it is put into 
the mouth, not as Nekrassof puts it, of the 



y2 Lectures on Russian Literature. 

singer, but into that of a dumb, unreasoning 
beast. 

^ 23. We have now reached the last stage of 
the development of Pushkin's singing soul. 
For once conscious of a moral purpose, he 
cannot remain long on the plane of mere 
protest; this is mere negation. What is to 
him the truth must likewise be sung, and he 
utters the note of affirmation; this in his 
greatest poem, — 

THE PROPHET. 

Tormented by the thirst for the Spirit, 

I was dragging myself in a sombre desert, 

And a six-winged seraph appeared 

Unto me on the parting of the roads. 

With fingers as light as a dream 

He touched mine eyes ; 

And mine eyes opened wise, 

Like unto the eyes of a frightened eagle. 

He touched mine ears, 

And they filled with din and ringing. 

And I heard the trembling of the heavens, 

And the flight of the angels' wings, 

And the creeping of the polyps in the sea, 

And the growth of the vine in the valley. 



Lecture 11. y) 

And he took hold of my lips, 

And out he tore my sinful tongue, 

With its empty and false speech. 

And the fang of the wise serpent 

Between my terrified lips he placed 

With bloody hand. 

And ope he cut my breast with a sword, 

And out he took my trembling heart, 

And a coal blazing with flame 

He shoved into the open breast. 

Like a corpse I lay in the desert ; 

And the voice of the Lord called unto me : 

" Arise ! O prophet and guide, and listen, — 

Be thou filled with my will, 

And going over land and sea, 

Burn with the Word the hearts of men ! " 

24. This is the highest flight of Pushkin. 
He knew that the poet comes to deliver the 
message. But what the message was, was 
not given unto him to utter. For God only 
speaks through those that speak for him, and 
Pushkin's was not yet a God-filled soul 
Hence the last height lefl him yet to climb, 
the height from which the " Hymn of Force " 
is sung, Pushkin did not climb. Pushkin's 
song, in short, was so far only an utterance 
of a gift, it had not become as yet a part 



74 Lectures on Russian Literature. 

of his life. And the highest is only attain- 
able not when our lives are guided by our 
gifts, but when our gifts are guided by our 
lives. How this thus falling short of a na- 
tively richly endowed soul became possible, 
can be told only from a study of his life. To 
Pushkin his poetic ideal bore the same re- 
lation to his practical life that the Sunday 
religion of the business-man bears to his 
Monday life. To the ordinary business man, 
Christ's words are a seeing guide to be fol- 
lowed in church, but a blind enough guide, 
not to be followed on the street. Hence 
Pushkin's life is barren as a source of inspi- 
ration towards what life ought to be ; but it 
is richly fruitful as a terrifying warning against 
what life ought not to be. 

25. Pushkin died at the age of thirty-eight, at 
a time when he may be said to have just be- 
gun to live. Once more then we have before 
us a mere fragment, a mere possibility, a mere 
promise of what the great soul was capable of 
becoming, of what the great soul was perhaps 
destined to become. Pushkin is thus a typi- 
cal example of the fate of the Slavonic soul 



Lecture II. y^ 

And the same phases we had occasion to ob- 
serve as gone through by the race, we now 
find here likewise gone through by the indi- 
vidual. It is this which naakes Pushkin emi- 
nently a national singer, a Russian singer. The 
satire of Gogol, the synthesis of Turgenef, the 
analysis of Tolstoy, might have indeed flour- 
ished on any other soil. Nay, Turgenef and 
Tolstoy are men before they are Russians; 
but the strength of Pushkin as a force in 
Russian literature comes from this his very 
weakness. Pushkin is a Russian before he is 
a man, his song is a Russian song; hence 
though many have been the singers in Russia 
since his day, none has yet succeeded in fill- 
ing his place. For many are indeed called, 
but few are chosen ; and the chosen Russian 
bard was — Alexander Pushkin. 



LECTURE III. 



GOGOL. 



I. With the departure of the eighteenth 
century there also disappeared from Russia 
that dazzling glitter which for well-nigh half 
a century had blinded the eyes of Europe. 
Catherine was now dead, Potyomkin was 
dead, Suvorof was living an exile in a village, 
and Panin was idle on his estates. And now 
stripped of its coat of whitewash, autocracy 
stood bare in all its blackness. Instead of 
mother-Catherine, Paul was now ruling, and 
right fatherly he ruled 1 Such terror was in- 
spired by this emperor, that at the sight of 
their father-Tsar his subjects at last began to 
scamper in all directions like a troop of mice 
at the sight of a cat. For half a decade 
Russia was thus held in terror, until the rule 
of the maniac could no longer be endured. 



Lecture HI. yj 

At last Panin originates, Pahlen organizes, and 
Benigsen executes a plan, the accomplish- 
ment of which finds Paul on the morrow l}'ing 
in state with a purple face, and the marks of the 
shawl which strangled him carefully hid by a 
high collar. " His Majesty died of apoplexy," 
the populace is told. Alexander the Benign? 
comes upon the throne, greeted, indeed, by I 
his subjects, in the ecstasy of the delivery, 
like an angel, but cursed by them as a demon 
ere the five-and-twenty years of his rule have 
passed. The Holy Alliance, Shishkof and 
Arakcheyef, were more than even Russians 
could endure, and formidable protest is at last 
made by the armed force of the Decembrists. 
The protest fails ; five bodies swinging from 
the gallows, and a hundred exiles buried in 
Siberia alive, leave a monument of such fail- 
ure terrible in its ghastliness even for Russian 
history. The iron hand of Nicholas now 
rests on the country, and for thirty years the 
autocrat can proudly say that now order 
reigns in Russia. Order? Yes ; but it is thef 
order and quiet of the graveyard, the peace | 
of death. 



y8 Lectures on Russian Literature. 

2. But not all is quiet Defeated on the^ 
field of arms, the spirit of protest seeks and 
at last finds a batde-field where neither the 
trampling hoofs of horses nor the shot of 
cannon can avail. The spirit of man in- 
trenches itself behind ideas, behind letters, 
and here it proves impregnable even against 
the autocracy of a Nicholas. Defeated on 
the field of war, the spirit of man protests in 
literature. The times call for the voice, and 
the voice is soon heard. This voice is the 
voice of Nicolai GogoL 

3. Gogol is the protester, the merciless 
y^critic of the weakness of autocracy. I have 

j)laced Pushkin, the greatest of Russia's sing- 
ers, as among the least of its writers, because 
he hath no purpose. I place Gogol far above 
Pushkin, because Gogol is the first master of 
Russian literature in whom purpose is not 
only visible, but is also shown. Gogol's art 
protests not unconsciously; but the man 
Gogol uses the artist Gogol as a means for 
giving voice to the protest against what his 
noble soul rebels. 

4. For, O my friends, I cannot emphasize 



«--— . V ^ ' 



Lecture III. 79 

it too strongly that our gifts — whether they 
consist in wealth, or in the ability to sing, 
to paint, to build, or to count — are not given 
unto us to be used for our pleasure merely, 
or as means of our advancement, whether 
social or intellectual. But they are given 
unto us that we may use them for helping 
those who need help. Talk not therefore of 
art for its own sake ; that art needs no purpose, 
but is an end unto itself. Such talk is only a 
convenient way of evading the Heaven-im- 
posed responsibility of using for others those 
gifts with which a merciful power hath en- 
dowed their undeserving possessors. Art, 
therefore, to be truly worthy, must have a 
purpose, and, execution being equal, that art is 
highest, which hath the highest purpose ; that 
art lowest, which hath the lowest purpose. 

5. But it was not given to Gogol to an- 
nounce the loftiest message, the message of 
peace, of love, of submission, the message of 
Tolstoy; the times of Gogol were not ripe 
for this ; the times of Gogol called for indig- "> 
nation, for protest, and Gogol is the indignant ] 
protester. 



8o Lectures on Russian Literature. 

6. Hitherto, whatever force has been ex- 
erted towards protesting against the misrule 
of Russia by autocracy has come from the 
South. Stenka Rasin, Pugatchef, came not 
from the North but from the South. And 
the most formidable division of the Decem- 
brist conspirators of 1825 was that of Pestel 
and Muraviof, with their headquarters in the 
South. And even the policy of terrorizing 
the autocracy by assassination^ which was 
adopted in our own day by the most formi- 
dable opponents of the government, by the 
revolutionists miscalled Nihilists, also origi- 
nated in the South, — with Ossinsky and his 
comrades in Kief. Gogol, the protester in 
literature, was likewise a Southerner. And 
it will be worth while to cast a glance at this 
country and see what therein is to make it 
thus a hot-bed of protest. 

7. Beyond the waterfalls pf the Dnieper 
there extends a to the eye boundless land of 
prairie which for ages has been the rendez- 
vous of all manner of wild, lawless, but sturdy 
folk. Of this land Gogol himself has given 
a description glowingly beautiful as only the 



/ 



Lecture III. 8i 

love of a Little Russian for the Steppe could 
give. Taras Bulba had just started out 
with his two sons to join the camp of the 
Cossaks. 

" Meanwhile the steppe had already received 
them all into its green embrace, and the high 
grass surrounding them hid them, and the black 
Cossaks' caps alone now gleamed between its 
stalks. 

*' * Aye, aye, fellows, what is the matter ; 
why so quiet?' said at last Bulba, waking up 
from his re very. * One would think you were a 
crowd of Tartars. Well, well, to the Evil One 
with your thoughts ! Just take your pipes be- 
tween your teeth, and let us have a smoke, and 
give our horses the spurs. Then we will fly 
that even a bird could not catch us ! ' 

" And the Cossaks, leaning over their horses, 
were lost in the grass. Now even their black 
cajjis. could no longer be seen ; only a track of 
ti^inikedHdown grass traced their swift flight. 

"The sun had long been looking forth on 
the cleared heavens, and poured over the whole 
steppe its refreshing warmth-breathing light. 
Whatever was dim and sleepy in the Cossaks' 
souls suddenly fled; their hearts began to beat 
faster, like birds'. 

"The farther they went, the more beautiful 
the steppe grew. In those days the vast ex- 
6 



82 Lectures on Russian Literature. 

panse which now forms New Russia, to the very 
shores of the Black Sea, was green, virgin desert. 
The plough had never passed along the immea- 
surable waves of the wild plants. Horses alone, 
whom they hid, were trampling them down. 
Nothing in Nature could be more beautiful. 
The whole surface of the land presented a 
greenish-golden ocean, on which were spark- 
ling millions of all manner of flowers. Through 
the thin high stalks of the grass were reaching 
forth the light-blue, dark-blue, and lilac-colored 
flowers ; the yellow broom-plant jumped out 
above, with its pyramid-like top. The white 
clover, with its parasol-shaped little caps, shone 
gayly on the surface. A halm of wheat, brought 
hither God knows whence, was playing the 
lonely dandy. By the thin roots of the grasses 
were gliding the prairie-chicks, stretching out 
their necks. The air was filled with a thou- 
sand difiFerent whistles of birds. In the sky 
floated immovably hawks, their wings spread 
wide, their eyes steadily fixed on the grass. 
The cry of a cloud of wild geese moving on 
the side was heard on a lake, Heaven knows 
how far off. With measured beating of its 
wings there rose from the grass a gull, and 
bathed luxuriously in the blue waves of the at- 
mosphere. Now she is lost in the height, now 
she gleams as a dark point ; there, she has 
turned on her wings, and has sparkled in the 



Lecture III. 83 

sun ! . . . The Devil take ye, ye steppes, how 
beautiful you are!" 

8. If the height of the mount, swelling as it 
does the breast of the mountaineer, makes his 
spirit free by filling his lungs to their very 
roots, how much more must the steppe liber- 
ate the spirit of man by giving the eye an ever- 
fleeing circle to behold whithersoever it turn ! 
How much more free than the mountaineer 
must the son of the steppe feel, for whom 
distance hath no terror, since go he never so 
far, he beholds the same sky, the same hori- 
zon, the same grass, and his cheek is fanned 
by the same breeze ! To jump upon his faith- 
ful steed, to prick her sides with the spur, to 
be off in the twiukling of an eye with the 
swiftness of the wind, at the least discontent, 
is therefore as natural to the Russian of the 
South as it is for the Russian of the North to 
endure patiendy in his place of birth what- 
ever Fortune hath in store for him. The 
Cossak has therefore for ages been on land 
what the sailor is on sea, — light-hearted, jolly 
when with comrades, melancholy when alone ; 
but whether with his mates or alone, of a spirit 



84 Lectures on Russian Literature: 

indomitably free. And Gogol was a Cossak. 
Southern Russia had not as yet produced a 
single great voice, because Southern Russia, 
New Russia, had as yet no aristocracy. Gogol 
is thus the only great Russian writer who 
sprang not from an autocracy whitewashed 
with Western culture, but from the genuine 
Russian people. It is . this which makes 
Gogol the most characteristic of Russian 
writers. 

9. Gogol was bom in the province of Pol- 
tava, in 18 10. His grandfather was an hon- 
ored member of the government of the Cossak 
Republic, which at that time formed almost 
a state within the state. It was he that en- 
tertained his grandson with the stories of the 
life of the Cossaks, their adventures, their 

/^' wars, as well as with the tales of devils, of 
/ apparitions, of which that country is full, and 
( which form the principal amusement of the 

^^ people during their long winter evenings. 

10. We shall see later that the essential 
characteristic of Gogol's art was his wonderful 
power as a teller of a story. This came to 
him directly from the grandfather through the 



Lecture III. ^j 

father. But the father was aheady a man of a 
certain degree of culture. He was fond of 
reading, subscribed to the magazines, loved 
to entertain, and more than once had even 
private theatricals at his house. 

II. The boy grew up at home till he was 
twelve years old. But al that age he was sent 
away to school at Nyezhin, with results ques- 
tionable enough. The only signs of promise he 
showed were a strong memory and an honest 
but intense dislike of those studies which are 
only useful when forgotten. The problem 
as to the necessity of making children famil- 
iar with Timbuctoo, Popocatepetl, parallelo- 
pipeds, and relative dative and absolute 
ablative, the boy settled for himself in clear- 
headed boyish fashion. He hated mathe- 
matics, he hated the ancient languages. Ac- 
cordingly, though he stayed three years under 
the professor of La!tin, all he could learn was 
the first paragraph of a Latin Reader which 
begins with the instructive sentence: Uni- 
versus mundus in duas distribuitur partes; 
from which circumstance poor Gogol was 
ever after known among his mates under 



86 Lectures on Russian Literature. 

the name of Universus Mundus. Teachers 
and scholars therefore scorned poor Uni- 
versus Mundus; but the boy faithfully kept 
a book under his desk during recitations, 
and read most diligently, leaving Universus 
Mundus to run its own course. 

12. But if the boy did not lead his fellow- 
pupils in familiarity with Popocatepetl and 
parallelopiped, he did lead them in intel- 
lectual energy and practical life ; a voracious 
reader, a passionate student of Zhukofsky 
and Pushkin, he founded not only a college 
review, which he filled mostly with his own 
contributions, but also a college theatre, which 
furnished entertainment not only to the boys 
themselves, but even to the citizens of the 
town. Nor did the boy rest until he saw 
his efforts towards founding a college library 
crowned with success. 

13. This public spirit, which became in time 
all-absorbing to him, thus showed itself even 
in his boyhood. It was not long before the 
purpose of his life which hitherto manifested 
itself unconsciously now became the con- 
scious part of his existence; and when in* 



Lecture IIL 87 

1828 the boy left the Nyezhin Gymnasium, 
he was already filled with conscious desire to 
serve God with all his soul and man with all 
his heart. But as the body on its entrance 
into life must go through a baptism of water^ 
so the soul on its entrance into life must go 
through a baptism of fire, and the fire to 
poor Gogol was scorching enough. Deeply 
religious towards God, nobly enthusiastic to- 
wards - men, the boy in his simplicity, inno- 
cence, and trustfulness found himself repelled 
by an unsympathetic and hampered by a mis- 
understanding world, which instead of en- 
couraging the sympathy-hungry youth, was 
only too ready to laugh to scorn with its su- 
perior wisdom the dreams of the visionary. 
The home, the province, now becomes too 
narrow for the rapidly unfolding soul. To 
St. Petersburg he must go, the capital of 
talent, of aspiration, of hope, where are 
published the magazines so eagerly devoured 
in the days gone by, — to the capital, where 
dwell Zhukofsky and Pushkin. There his 
talents shall be recognized, and an appre- 
ciating world shall receive the new-comer 



88 Lectures on Russian Literature. 

with open arms. The arms of the world do 
indeed open on his arrival at St. Petersburg, 
but it is the cold embrace of want, of friend- 
lessness. In St Petersburg begins for him a 
struggle for existence which well-nigh ruins 
him forever. Bread is not easily earned. Con- 
genial society does not readily seek him out, 
and the sjrmpathetic appreciation his starving 
soul craves is still as far as ever. Inevitable 
disappointment of hero-worship also quickly 
comes. When he calls at the door of the 
idolized Pushkin late in the morrow, he is 
told by the valet that the great man is deign- 
ing to be asleep at this late hour. " Ah, your 
master has been composing some heavenly 
song all night ! " " Not at all ; he has been 
playing cards till seven in the morning ! " 
And to complete his doom, his tender sus- 
ceptible heart begins to flutter with right 
serious adg at the sight of a dame of high 
social position who hardly deigns to cast even 
a glance at the moneyless, ill-clad, clumsy, rus- 
tic lad, — sorrows enough for a soul far bet- 
ter equipped for battle with Fortune than this 
poor Cossak lad. Total ruin is now danger- 



Lecture III. 89 

ously nigh. And here Gogol becomes high- 
handed. He must be off, away from this 
suffocation of disappointment and despair. 
He must seek new fields ; if Fortune is not 
to be found in St Petersburg, then it shall 
be sought beyond St Petersburg ; and if not 
in Russia, then out of Russia. Not him shall 
sportive Fortune flee ; not him, the youth of 
merit, the youth of promise. In the days of 
yore he had charmed the good folk of Nye- 
zhin by his acting from the stage the part of 
an old woman. Wherefore not conquer For- 
tune as an old woman, if she favor not the 
young man? In a foreign land he might yet 
find his goal as an actor, and he decides to 
exile himself. Of moneys there are indeed 
none. Fortunately his mother, now already 
a widow, sends him some moneys wherewith 
to pay off their pledged estate. But the duti- 
ful son keeps the moneys, advises lys mother 
to take in return his share of his father's es- 
tate, and departs for the promised land. He 
goes to Germany, to Lubeck, to conquer For- 
tune as an actor. 

14. Conquer Fortune he indeed did. For 



go Lectures on Russian Literature. 

in less than a month he found himself back 
in St. Petersburg, now a sober, a wiser man. 
The period of stress, of storm, was at an end, 
and henceforth letters were chosen as his life- 
long occupation. Bread, indeed, has to be 
earned by all manner of makeshifts, — now by 
serving as a scribe in some dreary govern- 
ment hall, now by reading off mechanically 
to university students what officially passes 
as lectures ; but the life of his soul, whatever 
his body might busy itself with, was hence- 
forth given unto letters. 

15. Henceforth, in order to make his life 
most fruitful unto men, which is his constant 
purpose, he is to write. But write what? 
Gogol gazes into his heart, and there finds 
the memories of the steppe, of the valiant 
Cossaks, their prowess and their freedom. 
His soul is filled at the sight of these with 
a tenderness and beauty which give him 
no rest until he pours them out over the 
pages of his book, and "Taras Bulba" is 
covered with a glory well-nigh unattained in 
a^langua^ since the days of Homer. For 
" Taras Bultia," though only one of several 



Lecture III. gi 

stories in " Evenings on a Farm," is among 
them what the star Sinus is in the akeady 
glorious heavens of a November midnight. 
As a thing of beauty, of simple grandeur, of 
wild strength, of heroic nobility, as a song, 
in short, I do not hesitate to affirm that it 
finds its like only in the Iliad. Jt is an epic 
song, and a song not of an individual soul 
But of a wEole nation. Written down it 
was indccd H3y^e"tends of Gogol, but com- 
posed it was by the whole of Little Russia. 
As the whole of heroic Greece sings in the 
wrath of Achilles, so the whole of Cossak- 
dom, which in its robust truth and manly 
simplicity is not unlike heroic Greece, sings 
in "Taras Bulba." 

1 6. The poem is introduced as follows : — 

** * Just turn round, sonny ! Well, I declare 
if you are not ridiculous ! What kind of a rig 
have you on? Why, you look like priests ! Are 
they all dressed thus in the academy ? ' 

" With these words old Bulba met his two sons 
who came home from the Kief seminary to their 
father. His sons had just got down from their 
horses. They were two sturdy follows, still 
looking out from under their brows just like 



g2 Lectures on Russian Literature. 

fresh seminary graduates. Their strong, healthy 
faces were covered with the first down, as yet 
untouched by a razor. They were much embar- 
rassed at such reception by their father, and they 
stood motionless, with eyes fixed on the ground. 

'* * Stand still, stand still; just let me get a 
good look at you/ he continued, as he turned 
them about. ' What long jackets you have on ! 
What a jacket ! Who ever heard of such jack- 
ets before ! Just let one of you take a run, and 
see whether he would not tumble over, entan- 
gled in his coat-tails.' 

" * Don't laugh, father, don't laugh,' said at 
last the eldest. 

** * See how touchy he is ! And why, pray, 
shall not I laugh ? ' 

" * Because ! For even if you are my father, 
but if you laugh, by God, I will thrash you ! ' 

" • Well, well, well, did you ever! Is this the 
kind of a son you are ? How ? Your father ? ' 
said Taras Bulba, stepping back in surprise. 

" * Yes, even if you are my father. An insult 
I will stand from none.' 

" * How then do you wish to fight me ? Box- 
ing?' 

" * I don't care ; any way.' 

" * Well then, let us box,' said Bulba, rolling 
up his sleeves. * I would like to see what sort 
of a boxer you are.' 

'* And father and son, instead of greetin^^ 



Lecture III. 93 

each other after the long separation, began to 
give each other blows, now in the sides, now in 
the ribs, now in the breast, now stepping back 
and looking about, now coming forward again. 

" * Just see, good people, the old fool has be- 
come crazy,' said the pale, thin, good mother, 
who was standing on the threshold and had not 
been able to embrace her darling boys. * The 
children come home after an absence of over a 
year, and he gets it into his head, Grod knows 
what, to box with them.' 

" ' Yes, he fights finely,' said Bulba, stopping. 
* Good, by God I ' he continued, catching a little 
breath. * So, yes, he will make a fine Cossak, 
even without preliminary trial. * Well, wel- 
come, sonny ; come kiss me.' And father and 
son began to kiss each other. * Good, my son. 
Thrash everybody as you have given it to me. 
Don't let him go 1 But I must insist, yours is 
a ridiculous rig. What rope is this, dangling 
down there ! '" 

1 7. Bulba is so pleased with his boys that 
he decides to take them the very next day to 
the syetch, the republic of the Cossaks, and 
there initiate them in the wild, glorious ser- 
vice. The mother's grief at the unexpected 
loss of her bo)rs, as well as the parting itself, 
is thus described by Gogol : — 



94 Lectures on Russian Literature. 

" Night had just enclosed the sky in its em- 
brace ; but Bulba always retired early. He 
spread himself out on the mat and covered him- 
self with the sheep-skin ; for the night air was 
quite fresh, and Bulba, moreover, was fonder 
of warmth when at home. He soon began to 
snore, and it was not long before the entire 
household did the like. Whatever lay in the 
various corners of the court began to snore 
and to whiz. Before everybody else fell asleep 
the watchman ; for in honor of the return oF the 
young Cossaks he had drunk more than the 
rest. 

"The poor mother alone was awake. She 
nestled herself close to the heads of her dear 
boys, who were lying side by side. She combed 
their young, carelessly bunched-up locks, and 
moistened them with her tears. She gazed 
upon them with all her eyes, with all her feel- 
ings ; she was transformed into nothing but 
sight, and yet she could not look enough at 
them. She had fed them from her own breast. 
She had raised them, had fondled them, and 
now she sees them again only for a moment ! 
* My boys, my darling boys, what is to become 
of ye, what is in store for ye ? ' she spake, and 
the tears halted on her wrinkles, which had 
changed her once handsome face. In truth, 
she was to be pitied, as every woman of that 
rough age was to be pitied. Only a moment had 



Lecture IIL 95 

she lived in love, only in the first fever of pas- 
sion, in the first fever of youth, and already her 
rough charmer had forsaken her for the sword, 
for his companions, for the wild excitement of 
war. During the year she saw her husband 
perhaps two — three times, and then again for 
some years there was not even a trace of him. 
And when they did come together, when they 
did live together, what sort of life was hers! 
She suffered insult, even blows. She received 
her fondlings as a kind of alms; she felt herself 
a strange creature in this assemblage of wifeless 
knights, to whom the loose life of the Cossaks 
had given a coloring sombre enough. Youth 
flashed by her joylessly, and her beautiful fresh 
cheeks and fingers had withered away with- 
out kisses, and were covered with premature 
wrinkles. All her love, all her tenderness, 
whatever was soft and passionate in woman, 
was merged in her into the one feeling of a 
mother. With heat, with passion, with tears, 
like a gull of the steppe, she was circimg aooui 
her babes. Her boys, her darling boys, are to 
be taken from her, — taken from her never to be 
seen again. Who knows, perhaps at the very 
first battle the Tartar shall cut off their heads, 
and she shall not know where their castaway 
bodies are lying to be pecked in pieces by the 
bird of prey, while for every drop of their blood 
she would have given up her whole life. Groan- 



96 Lectures on Russian Literature. 

ing, she looked into their eyes, when almighty 
sleep began to close them, and she thought to 
herself, * Perhaps Bulba will change his mind 
when he wakes, and put off the departure for a 
day or two ; perhaps he has decided to go off so 
soon because he had taken a little too much.' 

" The moon had for some time been shining 
from the high heavens upon the whole court, 
its sleeping folk, the thick clump of willows and 
the high wild oats in which was drowned the 
fence surrounding the court. Still she was sit- 
ting at the head-side of her darling boys, not 
taking her eyes off them for a moment, and not 
even thinking of sleep. The horses, already 
feeling the morrow, had all lain down in the 
grass, and ceased feeding. The upper leaves 
of the willows began to whisper, and little by 
little a whispering wave descended along them 
to the very bottom. But she was still sitting 
up till daybreak, not at all tired, but inwardly 
wishing that the night might last only longer. 
From the steppe came up the loud neighing of 
a colt; red bars gleamed brightly along the 
sky. . . . 

" When the mother saw that at last her sons 
also were now seated on their horses, she rushed 
to the youngest, in whose features there seemed 
to be more of a certain tenderness, seized his 
spur, clung to his saddle, and with despair in her 
eyes, she held fast to him. Two robust Cos- 



Lecture III. 97 

saks took gentiy hold of her and carried her 
into the house. But when they rode out be- 
yond the gates, with the lightness of a wild 
stag, incompatible with her years, she ran out 
beyond the gates, and with incomprehensible 
strength she stopped the horse and embraced 
one of her sons with a kind of crazy, feelingless 
feverishness. Again she was carried off. 

** The young Cossaks rode in silence, and held 
back their tears in fear of their father, who, 
however, was for his part not wholly at ease, 
though he tried not to betray himself. The sky 
was gray ; the green was sparkling with a glare ; 
the birds were singing as if in discord. The 
Cossaks, after riding some distance, looked back. 
Their farm-house seemed to have gone down 
into the ground. Above ground were seen only 
the two chimneys of their modest house, and 
the tops of the trees, along whose branches 
they had been leaping like squirrels [in their 
childhood.] There still was stretched before 
them that prairie which held for them the 
whole history of their life, from the years 
when they made somersaults on its thick grass, 
to the years when they would await there the 
black-browed Cossak dame as slje was tripping 
swiftly along with her fresh light step. Now 
they see only the pole over the well, and the 
cart-wheel, tied to its top, alone sticks out on 
the sky. And now the plain they had just passed 



g8 Lectures on Russian Literature. 

seems a distant mount, hiding everjthiDg be- 
hind it. . . . Farewell, childhood, and play, and 

all, and all ! ... " 

i8. I had hoped at first to be able to give 
you a few passages from this noblest of epic 
poems which might give you some idea of 
its wild, thrilling beauty : the jolly life at the 
syetch; the sudden transformation of the 
frolicking, dancing, gambling crowd into a 
well-disciplined army of fierce warriors, which 
strikes terrors into the hearts of the Poles. 
I hoped to be able to give you Gogol's own 
account of the slaying of Andrei, his young- 
est son, by Bulba himself, because, bewitched 
by a pair of fair eyes, he became traitor to 
the Cossaks. I wished to quote to you the 
stoic death, under the very eyes of his father, 
of Ostap, the oldest son, torn as he is alive to 
pieces, not a sound escaping his lips^ but at 
the very last moment, disheartened at the sea 
of hostile faces about him, crying only, " Fa- 
ther, seest thou all this?" I wished to quote 
to you Bulba's own terrible death, nailed 
alive to a tree, which is set on fire under him ; 
the old hero, still intent on the salvation of 



1 



Lecture IIL gg 

his little band, while the smoke envelops him, 
cries, as he beholds the movement of the 
enemy, " To the shore, comrades, to the 
shore I Take the path to the left ! " But I 
found I should have to quote to you the en- 
tire book j for there is not a single page of 
this poem from which beauty does not shine 
forth with dazzling radiance. Homer often 
nods in the Iliad, but m " Taras Bulba *' Go- 
gol never nods. And as the painter of old on 
being asked to remove the curtain that the 
picture might be seen replied, " The curtain 
is the picture," so can I only say to you, 
" Read ' Taras Bulba,' and it shall be its 
own commentary unto you I " 

19. With "Taras Bulba," Gogol had 
reached the height as a singer. On this 
road there was no longer any progress for 
his soul, and to remain a cheerful, right-glad 
singer in the midst of the sorrowing, overbur- 
dened country was impossible to a man of 
Gogol's earnestness. For his first and last 
end was to serve his country. T is well, if 
he could serve it by letters, equally well, if 
he could serve it by his simple life. Gogol, 



100 Lectures on Russian Literature. 

therefore, now decided to devote the rest of 
his days to the unveiling of the ills to which 
the Russian Colossus was subject, in the hope 
that the sight of the ugly cancer would help 
its removal. Thus he became the conscious 
protester, the critic of autocracy ; and he be- 
came such because his gifts were best fitted 
for such labor. For coupled with his unsur- 
passed gift of story-telling was another dis- 
tinct trait of the Cossak in him, — the ability 
of seeing good-humoredly the frailties of 
man ; and his humor, undefiled by the scorn 
of the cynic, proved a most powerful weapon 
in his hands. Ridicule has ever proved a 
terror to corruption. But in the hands of 
Gogol this ridicule became a weapon all the 
more powerful because it took the shape of 
impersonal humor where the indignation of 
the author was kept out of sight, so that even 
stern Nicolas himself, the indirect source of 
the very corruption satirized in " The Revi- 
sor," could laugh, while a listener to the play, 
until the tears ran down his cheeks and his 
sides ached. The corruption of provincial 
officials, which is the natural sore following 



Ucture HI. loi 

idl autocratic blood-poisoning, found merci- 
less treatment at the hands of Gogol in his 
comedy "The Revisor." Its plot is briefly 
as follows : — 

20. The mayor of a small city receives 
suddenly the news that a revisor, a secret 
examiner, is on the way from the capital to 
investigate his administration. Quickly he 
assembles all the worthies of the town, the 
director of schools, of prisons, of hospitals, 
all of whom have but too guilty consciences, 
and they all decide on measures of escape 
from his wrath. They march in file to the 
hotel where the supposed Revisor lodges. 
There for some days had been dwelling a 
young penniless good-for-nothing whom the 
officials mistake for the dreaded Revisor. 
The young man is surprised, but soon ac- 
cepts the situation, and plays his part admi- 
rably. Presents and bribes are sent him 
from all sides ; he borrows money right and 
left, makes love to the mayor's wife as well 
as to his daughter, and finally engages to 
marry the — daughter. The mayor is happy 
and honored as never before, and relying 



102 Lectures on Russian Literature. 

upon the protection of the Revisor outrages 
the community now more than ever. At last 
the pseudo-revisor departs with all the gifts 
and loans, and in a few days the real Revisor 
actually arrives, to the astonishment and dis- 
may of the officials, who till now had felt 
secure in their misdeeds. 

21. "The Revisor " is indeed a great com- 
edy, the equal of Griboyedofs " Misfortune 
from Brains.'* As a comedy it is therefore 
the inferior of none, — neither of Terence, 
nor of Moli^re. But as a work of art it can- 
not rank as high as '' Taras Bulba," because 
no comedy can ever be as great a thing of 
beauty as an epic poem. What rouses laugh- 
ter cannot rank as high as what rouses tender 
emotion. Moreover, with the passing away of 
the generation familiar with the corruption 
it satirizes, the comedy often becomes unin- 
teUigible save to scholars. Hence the utter 
valuelessness to us of to-day of the comedies 
of Aristophanes as works of wit Their only 
value to-day is as fragmentary records of 
Greek manners. The comedy is thus writ 
not for all times, but only for a time ; while 



Lecture III. lO) 

"Taras Bulba," though generations come 
and generations go, will ever appeal unto 
men as a thing of imperishable beauty. But 
while " The Revisor " is below " Taras Bulba" 
as a work of art, it is far above it as a work 
of purpose, and has accordingly accomplished 
a greater result. For "Taras Bulba" can 
only give pleasure, though it be read for 
thousands of years after ** The Revisor " has 
been forgotten. It will indeed give a noble 
pleasure, at which the soul need not blush, 
still it is only a pleasure. But " The Re- 
visor " has helped to abolish corruption, has 
fought the Evil One, has therefore done 
work which, transient though it be, must be 
done to bring about the one result which 
alone is permanent, — the kingdom of heaven 
upon earth ; the kingdom of truth, the king- 
dom of love, the kingdom of worship. And 
whatever helps towards the establishment of 
that on earth must be of a higher rank than 
what only gives pleasure unto the soul. 

22. The success of " The Revisor *' spurred 
the young Gk>gol on to further effort, and he 
now resolved to give utterance to protest 



I04 Lectures on Russian Literature. 

against another crying wrong of Russian life, 
which in its consequences was far more disas- 
trous to the country than official corruption. 
Gogol now undertook to lay bare the ills 
of serfdom. His soul had long since been 
searching for its activity a field as wide as life 
itself. With Gogol, as with all lofty souls be- 
fore they find their truest self, aspiration ever 
soared above execution. Now, however, the 
time had arrived when his gifts could exe- 
cute whatever his soul conceived; and his 
mighty spirit at last found fitting expression 
in " Dead Souls." Accordingly " Dead Souls " 
is not so much a story, a story of an event 
or of a passion, as a panorama of the whole 
country. In his search for Dead Souls, 
Tchichikof has to travel through the length 
and breadth of the land; through villa.ge 
and through town, through sunshine and 
through storm, by day and by night, through 
the paved imperial post-road as well as 
through the forsaken cross-lane. This en- 
ables Gogol to place before the reader not 
only the governor of the province, the judge, 
and the rich landowner, the possessor of hun- 



Lecture III. io% 

dreds of souls, but also the poverty-stricken, 
well-nigh ruined landowner; not only the 
splendor of the city, but also the squalor of 
the hamlet ; not only the luxury of an invited 
guest, but also the niggardliness of the hotel- 
boarder. " Dead Souls " is thus a painting 
in literature, — what Kaulbach's " Era of the 
Reformation '' is in history. And the original- 
ity of the execution lies in the arrangement 
which presents Russia in a view unseen as yet 
even by Pushkin, who knew his country but 
too well. Gogol may be said to have dis- 
covered Russia for the Russian, as Haxt- 
hausen discovered it for the West, and as De 
Tocqueville discovered America for the Amer- 
icans. " Great God ! " exclaimed Pushkin, 
on reading " Dead Souls," " I had no idea 
Russia was such a dark country ! '' And this 
is the characteristic of this among the great- 
est of paintings of Russian life, — the faith- 
ful gloom which overhangs the horizon. In 
spite of its humor, the impression left on the 
mind by " Dead Souls " is that of the sky dur- 
ing an equinoctial storm ; and on closing the 
book, in spite of your laughter, you feel as 
if you had just returned from a funeral. The 



!06 Lectures on Russian Literature. 

work is conceived in humor, designed to 
rouse laughter, but it is laughter which shines 
through tears. It is the laughter of a soul 
which can no longer weep outwardly, but 
inwardly. It is the same laughter which Less- 
ing indulged in when his wife and child were 
snatched from him both at once. For six 
long weary years he had battled with poverty, 
disappointment, and despair, to reach at last 
in joy the goal of his life ; he weds at last 
his beloved dame, and lo, the close of the 
first year of his paradise finds mother and 
babe lying side by side — lifeless. Lessing 
laughs. He writes to a firiend: "The poor 
little fellow hath early discovered the sorrows 
of this earth, so he quickly hied himself hence, 
and lest he be lonely, took his mother along." 
There is laughter here, indeed, but the soul 
here laughs with a bleeding, torn, agonized 
heart. It is the same laughter which was 
roused among the disciples of Christ when 
they heard their Master utter the grim joke, 
'* Verily, it is easier for a camel to go through 
the eye of the needle, than for a rich man to 
enter the kingdom of heaven." Such laughter 
is Gogol's in " Dead Souls." Gogol had now 



Lecture III. wj 

learned to comprehend the words of his 
friend Ivanof, — " Christ never laughed." 

23. T dwell on this phase of Gogol's laugh- 
ter, because Gogol in his " Dead Souls " un- 
consciously recognized that behind everything 
laughable there is at bottom not a comedy 
but a tragedy; that at bottom it is the cold 
head only which laughs, and not the warm 
heart. Think, and thou shalt laugh; feel, 
and thou shalt weep. Judgment laughs, sym- 
pathy weeps. Sin, wickedness, O my friends, 
is not a thing to laugh at, but a thing to weep 
at ; and your English humorists have not yet 
learned, when they must laugh at vice and 
sin, to laugh at it with a heart full of woe. 
Swift is steeped in vinegar; Fielding's hu- 
mor is oiled and sugar-coated; Dickens can 
never laugh unless with convulsive explosion ; 
Thackeray sneers, and George Eliot is almost 
malicious with her humor ; and the only man 
in English literature who is sick at heart while 
he laughs is not even counted among the hu- 
morists, — Carlyle. In English literature the 
laughter of Cervantes in Don Quixote is un- 
known ; but the humor of Cervantes is near- 
est that of Gogol. GogoFs laughter is the 



/ 




^hi-i!. 



108 Lectures on Russian Literature. 

laughter of a man who so loves his fellow- 
men that their weakness is his pain ; and the 
warmest corner in all Russia for the very men 
Gogol satirizes would doubtless have been 
found in his own heart. It is this spirit in 
which " Dead Souls " is writ which makes 
"Dead Souls" a model for all humorous 
writing. 

24. I can give you, however, no nobler ex- 
ample of this laughter through tears by Gogol 
t^an the following closing passage from his 

Memoirs of a Maniac." You remember that 






>v during his stay at St. Petersburg, Gogol fell \ 
o.'of in love with a woman far above his social . 
rank. In this piece of only twenty pages 
Gogol paints the mental condition of an 
humble office-scribe, who, falling in hopeless 
love with the daughter of his chief, loses his 
poor mind. After various adventures he at 
last imagines himself King Ferdinand of 
Spain, is locked up in an asylum, and is 
beaten whenever he speaks of himself as the 
king. And this is the last entry in the poor 
maniac's diary : — 

" No, I no longer can endure it. God, what 
are they doing to me I They pour cold water 



Lecture III, 109 

on my head 1 They neither mind me, nor do 
they see me, nor do they hear me. What have 
I done to them ? What do they wish of poor 
me ? What can I give them ? I have noth- 
ing. I have no more strength. I no longer 
can endure all their torment ; my head is afire, 
and all around me is in a whirl. Save me ! 
Take me ! Give me a span of horses swift 
as the wind I Get up, driver ; ring, little bell ; 
o£E ye horses, and carry me off from this 
world ! Away, away, that I see nothing more, 
— nothing. Ha ! there is the sky vaulting be- 
fore me; a star sparkles in the distance ; there 
rushes the forest with its dark trees, and the 
moon. A gray fog spreads under my feet ; a 
string resounds in the fog ; on one side is the 
sea, on the other Italy ; now Russian huts are 
already in sight. Is this my home which rises 
blue in the distance ? Is it my mother sitting at 
the window ? Dear mother, save your poor boy ; 
drop a tearlet on his sick head. See how they 
torment him ; press your poor orphan to your 
breast ! There is no place for him on this wide 
earth ! He is chased ! Dear mother, have pity 
on your sick babe ! ... By the way, do you 
know, the Emperor of Algeria has a wart under 
his very nose ! " 

25. With the completion of the first part of 
" Dead Souls," Gogol had reached the height 



iio Lectures on Russian Literature. 

as a protester. He had now exhausted this 
side of his life, — the side which was the 
essence of his being, the side which made 
him the individual person as distinct from the 
rest of men. After the first part of " Dead 
Souls " his message unto men was a thing of 
the past. Henceforth, whatever he could do, 
could only be a repetition of his former burn- 
ing words, and hence only a weaker utter- ^ 
ance. This is precisely what happens to most 
men of letters when they persist in speech 
after naught is left them to say. You need 
only be reminded of Bryant in this coun- 
try, who had exhausted all the music of his 
soul in his younger days, and of Tennyson 
in England, who as shadowy Lord Tenny- 
son can only ignobly borrow of marrowy 
Alfred Tennyson. But Gogol was too con- 
scientious an artist to allow himself to be- 
come prey of such literary sin. If produce 
he must, it shall be no repetition of his for- 
mer self, but in a still higher field than mere 
protest. Accordingly, he attempted in his 
second part of " Dead Souls " to paint an 
ideal Russia, just as in the first part he had 



Lecture III. /// 

painted the real Russia. Here, however, he 
undertook what was above his genius: the 
skylark is indeed a noble bird, but is unfit 
for the flight of the eagle. Who was by na- 
ture only a protester could not by sheer force 
of will be transformed into the idealizing con- 
structor. And of this, Gogol himself soon 
became aware. To the very end he was dis- 
contented with his second part, and finally, 
before his death, gave it over to the flames. 

26. The heavenly spark which gleamed 
within him could not, however, be put out. 
Letters proper he at last indeed forsook, but 
he now became profoundly religious; he 
gave up all his possessions to the poor, and 
when he needed moneys wherewith to make .^ 
a pilgrimage to what was to him a veritably I ^yif^Ap^ 
Holy Land, he had to publish some of his \ f^ 
intimate correspondence. 

27. This work proved the bitterness of the 
rest of his days. It roused a clamor against 
the poor author altogether out of proportion 
to the slight merit of the work. Gogol was 
denounced on all sides as a renegade; the 
relentless accuser of autocracy in " The Re- 



ij^^ 



J 12 Lectures on Russian Literature. 

visor " could not be forgiven for the spirit of 
Christian humility and resignation to the will 
of God which breathed from these letters. It 
was in the forties. Those were the days when 
a Hegelian wave went over Russian minds. 
God had been philosophized away to make 
place for the Absolute, and even school-boys 
came home to announce the astounding news 
that there was no longer any God. Who was 
not a doubter, a disbeliever, was unhesitat- 
ingly declared an imbecile ; and Gogol's cor- 
respondence, breathing as it does the spirit of 
the deepest godfulness, came upon his friends 
like a note of discord at a concert His 
friends declared him insane, and all manner 
of advice offered, which could not fail to 
make him truly insane* The already melan- 
choly Gogol now became lonely, dejected, 
and sought consolation now more than ever 
in fasting and prayer. Poor Gogol had not 
yet learned that complete salvation is found 
not in praying, but in doing. While his ills 
therefore increased his devotion, his devotion 
likewise in turn increased his ills; his body 
became emaciated, his mind was wrecked^ 



Lecture III. ii) 

and early in 1852 he vras found one morning 
starved to death, prostrated before the holy 
images, in front of which he had spent his 
last days. 

28. Next to Tolstoy, Gogol is perhaps the 
most lovable figure in Russian literature. I 
say lovable, because he was at bottom a hap- 
less man, — a man who had fed on his own 
mighty heart. There is a Carlylesqueness 
about his woe that makes his life immeas- 
urably pitiful Pushkin's sorrow one finds it 
difficult to lament deeply, since it was mosdy 
of his own making ; but Gogol's was the sor- 
rowful lot of all heaven-aspiring souls who 
have not yet attained the last, safest haven 
of rest in God, — that haven from which the 
soul no longer cries in agony of spirit, " My 
God, my God, why hast thou forsaken me ! " 
but rather, " Father, thou knowest wherefore 
all this is ; thy will be done ! " His soul in 
its loneliness and restlessness knew nor sym- 
pathy nor appreciation of what was to him 
his deepest life; and this the loving soul 
ever craves most hungeringly. When the 
great soul had departed, gone irrevocably, 

8 



ii4 Lectures on Russian Literature. 

men readily enough recognized that the light 
of Israel had gone out ; but the recognition 
came too late, the love came when it could 
no longer heal his wounded spirit. 

29. My friends, " Taras Bulba " will thrill 
your soul with inexpressible beauty. Gogol's 
" Revisor " will amuse you. His " Dead 
Souls " will instruct you ; but his life, if you 
study it faithfully, should prove his greatest 
work unto you, for it should stir you, — stir 
you to tenderness, stir you to sympathy, stir 
you to compassion for those sufiferers, the like 
of Gogol, who are never wanting, in what- 
ever age, in whatever clime, in whatever 
walk of life. Would to God, ray friends, you 
could carry away from Gogol's life with you 
this lesson : In your very midst, perhaps this 
very day, there doubtless walks among you 
some mighty spirit, some hungry soul. Seek 
him out, find him out, that not of ye at least 
shall be said those immeasurably sorrowful 
words which could be said of the countless 
friends of Gogol, — they came with their 
sympathy — too late ! 



LECTURE IV, 



TURGENEF. 

I. In the history of Russian letters, IvaiTl 
Turgenef ^s the most complex figure. Nay, ; 
with the exception of Shakespeare he is per- ; 
haps the most complex figure in all literatures- 
He is iiniy^ygalj he is provmsi^; he is pa- 
thetic, he is sneering; he is tender, he is 
merciless; he is sentimental, he is frigid. 
He can be as compact as Tacitus, and as 
prolix as Thackeray. He can be as senti- 
mental as Werther, and as heartless as Na- 
poleon. He can cry with the bird, grow with 
the grass, and hum with the bee ; he can float 
with the spirits, and dream with the fevered. 
He is everywhere at home : in the novel, in v 
the story, in the sketch, in the diary, in the I 
epistle. Whatever form of composition he 



ji6 Lectures on Russian Literature. 

touches, let once his genius be mature, and it 
turns to gold under his hands. On reading 
through his ten volumes you leave him with 
the feeling that you have just emerged from 
the virgin forests of South America; your 
head is full of monkeys frolicking about, with 
an occasional cocoanut shot at you; your 
head is full of the birds with their variegated 
plumage, of the fragrance of the flowers, of 
the dusk about you, and of the primeval still- 
ness of the forest. And the collective impres- 
sion of the writer, the man, left upon you is 
that of some invisible but consummate artist 
who had been passing before you all manner 
of photographs made lurid by the glare of the 
stereopticon: photograph now of sunset cloud, 
now of lover's scene in the lane, now of a 
dyspeptic, long-haired, wrinkled old man. The 
writer Turgenef has thus been for years an 
enigma, Katkof, the pillar of Russian au^ 
tocracy, claims him as his, and the revolu- 
tionists claim him as theirs ; the realists point 
to him as one of the apostles of their new 
gospel, and the idealists point to him as the 
apostle of theirs. Now he defies public opin- 



Lecture IV. iiy 

ion by befriending an obnoxious exile, now 
he shrinks before it by disclaiming almost hi^l 
acquaintance. Between the contending par- 
ties, poor Turgenef shared the fate of the 
child of the women who did not come to 
King Solomon for advice in their dispute 
about its mother. The poor child was pulled 
by each until disfigured for life. So Turgenefl 
between the different parties, each claiming 
him as its own, remained homeless, almost 
friendless, to the end of his days, belonging 
to none ; and though surrounded by all man-/ 
ner of society and companionship which fameJ 
wealth, and position could give, he was yet ai 
bottom solitary, for he went through the worla 
a man who was misunderstood. y^ 

2. His position in letters is therefore anom- 
alous. Russians blame him, but read him H 
and Americans praise him, and read him not. \ 
Englishmen quote him. Frenchmen write es- 
says on him, and Germans write books about 
him ; but all agree in wondering at him, all 
agree in not comprehending him. And yet -^ 
Turgenef s life and the purpose of his books 
is plain enough to him that comes to view 



ii8 Lectures on Russian Literature. 

him with eyes as yet uncovered by partisan 
, glasses. Turgenef the realist, Turgenef the 
I idealist, is enigmatic enough ; but once under- 
/ stood that Turgenef was the literary warrior 
against what was to him a mortal enemy, and 
his whole life and all his important works at 
V once become explicable, consistent 
1^ 3. For man is something more than the 
I mere sum of his abilities. Behind all the 
i forces of the man, whether of body or of 
mind, there stands the soul, which uses them 
for purposes of its own, be they for better or 
for worse. And of these there is always one 
which in time becomes the absorbent of all 
its life, the essence of all its being ; and such 
purpose is soon found in the life of every 
man who lives, and not merely exists ; such 
purpose is soon found in the mightiest as 
well as in the frailest, in the loftiest as well 
as in the lowest. And till such purpose is un- 
derstood, the life of the man is to beholders 
what the flower is to the eye when looked at 
through a microscope, — an expanse of mere 
tissue, rough, formless, confusing; but such 
purpose once understood, the soul is trans- 



Lecture IF. 119 

formed to the beholder as if made of glass, / 
transparent, uniform, simple. 

4. Such purpose runs like a woof through 
the whole being of Turgenef, He is a hunt- "I 
er, he is a clubman, he is a philanthropist, he ) 
is an artist ; but he is first of all a warrior, / 
because he is first of all a lover of his coun - I 
t ry, and a.ha ter.Q f what oppresses it . He 
does indeed much else besides fighting for 
the emancipation of the land of his birth ; 
but he does it in the same spirit in which sen- 
sible folk go to dinners not for the sake of 
eating, to receptions not for the sake of being 
received, and wear kid gloves in summer not 
for the sake of keeping the hands warm ; 
these things, meaningless in themselves, are 
only incidentals in the life of the spirit, which 
alone can be said to have any meaning. 

5. Turgenef, then, is the fighter. This ac- 
counts for what is otherwise a strange phe- 
nomenon in Turgenefs art. In his " Memoirs 
of a Sportsman," in which he first aimed his 
blows consciously against serfdom, his muse 
busies itself not with life normal, but with 
life abnormal ; not with every-day characters, 



J20 Lectures on Russian Literature. 

but with such as are seen rarely ; not with fre- 
quented places, but with unfrequented places. 
The " Memoirs of a Sportsman " is a collec- 
tion of sketches which form a sort of variety 
museum of all manner of bizarre and even 
grotesque figures. Critics naturally marvelled 
at this ; and as in the days of old, men ex- 
plained the effects of morphine by saying 
that it contained the soporific principle, and 
the action of the pump by nature's abhorring 
a vacuum, so critics explained this fact, so 
strange in the healthy, clear-eyed, measure- 
loving Turgenef, by saying that he had a natu- 
ral fondness for the fantastic and the strange. 
In truth, however, the choice of his subjects 
was part of his very art as a warrior. He 
wished to strike, to rouse ; and here the ex- 
traordinary is ever more effective than the or- 
dinary. It was the same design which made 
the othenvise generous, tender Wendell Phil- 
lips adopt a personal mode of warfare in his 
struggle against slavery with a bitterness al- 
most Mephistophelian. And the same pur- 
pose made Turgenef, against the dictates of 
his muse, choose strange characters for his 






Lecture IV. 121 

sketches. Both Phillips and Turgenef here 
sacrificed their feelings to their cause: the 
one sacrificed to his purpose even his love 
for his fellow-men ; the other, even his love 
for his art 

6. One other strange fact in the art of Tur- 
genef is explained by this fighting essence of 
his being. There is no growth, development, 
visible in Turgenef. He lived to what is for 
Russian men of letters an advanced age : he 
died when over sixty years old ; yet, beginning 
with his first great work of art, " Rudin," and 
ending with his last great work of art, " Vir- 
gin Soil," through all his masterpieces, he 
remains the same. His sbc great novels, 
"Rudin," "A Nest of Noblemen," " On the 
Eve," " Fathers and Sons," " Smoke," and 
"Virgin Soil," form indeed an ascending 
scale, but not as works of art ; as such, they 
are all on the same highest plane. And it 
would be difficult to find any canon of art 
according to which one could be placed 
above the other. Only when viewed as dif- 
ferent modes of warfare, do they represent 
the different stages of his soul's life ; but this 



122 Lectures on Russian Literature. 

only in so far as they reflect at the same time 
the state of the enemy's forces, against whom 
he found it necessary to re-equip himself 
from time to time. As an artist, then, Tur- i 
genef is not progressive ; when his art comes ] 
to him, it comes like Minerva from Jupiter's \ 
head, — fully made, fully armed; and had it 
even come undeveloped, it would have had, in 
his case, to remain thus. For growth, devel- 
opment, needs time, needs leisure, needs re- 
flection, needs rest ; and of all this, on the 
field of battle, there is none to be had. On- 
ward or backward, conquer or perish, but 
stand still on the field of batde thou must not. 
And while it was not given to Turgenef 
to conquer, neither was it given to the enemy 
to conquer him. Turgenef, therefore, as he 
lived a fighter, so he died a fighter. >,^ 

7. Turgenef, then, had a life-long enemy ;j 
this enemy was Russian autocracy. ^^ 

8. Born in 1818, in the same year with the 
autocrat of Russia, who afterwards dreaded 
him as his bite noir, he already in his child- 
hood had the opportunity to learn the weight 
of the iron hand of Nicolas. Scarcely was 



Lecture /K. 123 

he seven years old when the news came to 
his father's household that the family name 
so dear to them, and hitherto a synonym of 
honor both in and out of Russia, had been dis- ' 
graced; that Nicolai Turgenef, one of the 
most faithful servants of the country under 
Alexander I., the younger of the two cele- 
brated brothers, and a near relative of Ivan, 
had been sentenced to Siberian hard labor for 
life, — sentenced under circumstances which 
could not but shock the sense of justice not 
only of the trustful boy, but also of those 
whom maturer age had accustomed to the 
methods of the government. Nicolai Turge- \ 
nef was condemned as one of the Decem- 
brists, and the days of the youth of Ivan were 
the days when the Decembrists were looked 
up to as the first martyrs of Russian liberty. 
Pushkin, the friend of the leaders of the in^ 
surrection, and the singer of the " Ode to Lib- 
erty," was then worshipped by the youth of 
Russia as poet was worshipped never before ; 
to be related to the Decembrists was there- 
fore a privilege, and to oppose autocracy in 
thought at least thus became a kind of family \ 



124 Lectures on Russian Literature. 

pride. Moreover, contrary to most Russian I 
aristocrats, Sergei Turgenef conducted the/ 
early education of his gifted son himself; and! 
the son of the conscientious father, when tak- j 
en out into the world, could not but feel the ( 
discord between the peaceful life, rigid con- . 
duct, and high ideals of his home on the one \ 
hand, and the gloomy struggle for existence, 
lax morals of the officials, and the low stand- 
ards of the world about him on the other. 
When Turgenef therefore was introduced into^ 
society, he was already saturated with revo- 
lutionary ideas, and it was not long before he 
found the atmosphere of his native land sti- 
fling ; and already, at the age of nineteen, he 
had to face the question whether to stay and 
endure, or — to flee. The boy of nineteen 
cannot endure; go then from Russia he' 
must, but go — whither? Fortunately, just 
beyond the western border there lay a coun- 
try which had already proved the promised 
land of others equally defiant with Turgenef. 
Germany already harbored Stankevitch, Gra- 1 
nofsky, Katkof, and Bakunin. The youth of 
Russia of those days had metaphorically 



Lecture /K. 725 

cried to the Germans what a thousand years 
before them the Slavs had cried literally to 
the Varangians : " Our land is wide, and over- 
flowing with abundance ; but of order in it 
there is none. Come ye, therefore, and rule 
over us, and restore order among us ! " Ger- 
many thus became the land of milk and 
honey for the Russians hungry in spirit 
Whatever had any ambition looked to a 
visit to Germany with the same longing 
with which a Mohammedan looks to the 
shrines of Mecca. 

9. Berlin was the first halting-station of j 
the pilgrims; Bock was lecturing there on 
Greek literature, Zumpt on Roman antiqui- / 
ties, and Werder was expounding the philoso- 
phy of the man who boasted or complained 
of being understood by only one man, and 
that one misunderstood him. To these mas- 
ters in the education of hair-splitting flocked 
almost all who became celebrated afterwards 
in Russia's public life, and even the govern- 
ment was sending students to Berlin at public 
expense. To these masters Turgenef also 
went, hearing Greek literature and Roman an- 



126 Lectures on Russian Literature. 

tiquities by day, and committing to memory 
the elements of Greek and Latin grammar 
by night. For in the Russian university, 
where Turgenef had hitherto spent two years, 
the professors were appointed not because of 
their knowledge of Latin and Greek, but be- 
cause of their knowledge of military tactics. 

lo. When after two years Turgenef re-^ 
turned to his native land, he brought back/ 
with him, indeed, a high knowledge of Lati 
grammar, but a total ignorance of the highe 
aims of life. He brought back with him a 
religious scepticism, and a metaphysical pes- 1 
simism, which colored henceforth his whole 
life, and therefore his artistic works. For 
those were the days when men yet believed 
that the great problems of the soul in its re- 
lation to the gods and to men could be solved 
not so much by living and by doing, as by 
disputing and by talking; those were the 
days when the philosopher's stone, turning all 
things into gold, was sought not in a rule for 
the conduct of life, such as " Love thy neigh- 
bor," or " Do unto others,^ but rather in the 
barren, egg-dancing, acrobatically -balanced 



Lecture IV. iiy 

formula, "What is, is right." Those were 
^ the days when Hegel was supreme in philoso- 
phy because of his obscurity, as Browning 
is now supreme in poetry because of his; 
the shrivelled, evaporated, dead grain of 
wheat was prized all the more because it 
had been searched out with painful toil from 
the heap of chaff. "By their fruits ye shall 
know them." The fruit of the deep study of 
Browning is an intimate knowledge of the 
use of English particles; and the fruit of 
the devoted study of Hegel was an intimate 
knowledge of metaphysical verbiage : being, 
substance, essence, and absolute. But of life- 
giving nourishment there was none to be had. 
The barrenness of all this, Turgenef indeed 
soon did perceive, but when the disenchant- 
ment came, his blood was already poisoned ; 
his very being was eaten into by doubt, and 
almost to the very end of his days Turgenef i 
remained a fatalistic sceptic, a godless pessi- 
mist; not till his old age did he espy the] 
promised land. It was only when he wit- 
nessed with his own eyes the boundless self- 
sacrifice of the revolutionists, when the old 



128 Lectures on Russian Literature. 

man was moved by the heroism of the young j 
Sophie Bardine even to the kissing of the 
very sheet upon which the girl's burning \ 
words to her judges were printed, — then, 
indeed, he regained his faith. He now hoped 
for his country, and stood even ready to be- 
come the head of the revolutionary move- 
ment in Russia; but for his artistic career 
all this came too late. In fact, his faith in 
God he never regained, though his hope for 
man did come back at last in his old age 
with the glow of his younger days. 

II. This fundamental philosophic scepti- 
cism which had poisoned Turgenef s mind 
throughout the best years of his life accounts 
for a striking change which in time took place 
in the method of his art. Hitherto his art had 
been photographic of individuals. His " Me* 
moirs of a Sportsman " is a gallery, not of 
ideals, not of types, but of actual men, — a gal- 
lery put on exhibition for the same end for 
which the rogues* gallery is exposed at the 
police headquarters. It is a means towards 
the welfare of the country. But after that 
book, when the scepticism had become part 



Lecture ly. 129 

of his beings his method changes. For he 
now becomes convinced that the misrule of 
Russia is not so much due to the government 
as to the people themselves; that existence 
is in itself evil ; that salvation, therefore, if it 
can come at all, must come not from without, 
but from within ; that reform, therefore, was 
needed not so much for the institution, as for 
the men themselves. And to him men are 
diseased. He no longer therefore paints in-'j 
dividual men, but henceforth he paints types ; / 
just as the physician first studies the disease^/ 
not as affecting this patient or that, but as 
likely to affect all men, every man. 

12. For much of this scepticism before life" 
and irreverence before God Turgenef had to 
thank the paternal government of his father- 
land. There are indeed those to whom sor- 
row comes like a messenger from the skies 
above, and lifts them heavenward on its wings. 
Turgenef alas ! was not one of these. His 
was one of those souls whom sorrow deprives 
not only of the joys of the present, but also 
of the hopes of the future ; and the govern- 
ment saw to it that of sorrows poor Turge-/ 
9 



1)0 Lectures on Russian Literature. 

nef have enough. Homelessness is an afflic- 
tion to all sons of Adam, but to none is the 
sorrow of exile so intense as to the Russian. 
And to exile Turgenef was soon driven.^ 
Hid under glowing pictures of nature and' 
fascinating figures of men, the real meaning 
of the "Memoirs of a Sportsman," while 
they appeared in detached sketches, eluded j 
readily enough the Argus-eyed censor. But 
when these sketches were gathered into a liv- 
ing book, then whatever had eye could behold, 
and whatever had ear could hear, their heav- 
enly message. The book therefore creates 
a sensation, the censor is astir, hurried con- 
sultation takes place, his Majesty himself 
is roused; but all this too late; the living 
book can no longer be strangled. The govern- 
ment saw that the monster was hydra-headed, 
and resolved to let it alone rather than by 
cutting one of its heads to rouse twenty in its 
stead. The book then was spared, but the 
writer was henceforth doomed ; and the oc- 
casion for the final blow is soon enough at 
hand. The great (jogol had at last departed. 
The enthusiastic Turgenef writes a letter about 



Lecture IV. 



/i/ 



the dead master, and calls him a great man. 
" In my land only he is great with whom I 
speak, and only while I am speaking with 
him," had said Paul the father ; and Nicolas 
proved a worthy son. " In Russia there shall 
be no great men," saith the Tsar ; and Turge- 
nef is arrested. High-stationed dame indeed 
intercedes for the gifted culprit. "But re- 
member, madame," she is told, " he called 
Gogol a great man." "Ah," high-stationed 
protectress replies, " I knew not that he com- 
mitted that crime ! " Which crime, accord- 
ingly, Turgenef expiates with one month's 
imprisonment in the dungeon, and two years' 
banishment to his estates. Only when the 
heir to the throne himself appeased his en- 
raged sire was Turgenef allowed to go in 
peace. Once master over himself again, Tur-^ 
genef hesitated no longer. He loved, indeed, 
his country much, but he loved freedom more ; 
and like a bird fresh from the cage away flew 
Turgenef beyond the sea. The migrating bird 
returns, indeed, in the spring ; but for Turgenef 
there was no longer any spring on Russian soil, 
and once abroad, he became an exile for life. 



ip Lectures on Russian Literature. 

13. I have said that t he heroes of his six 
great ppyds are not photographsphiit types' I 
venture to say that neither Turgenef himself 
nor any other Russian ever knew a Bazarof, a 
Paul Kirsanofy a Rudin, a Nezhdanof. But 
as in the generic image of Francis Galton the 
traits of all the individuals are found whose 
faces entered into the production of the im- 
age, so in the traits of Turgenefs types 
every one can recognize some one of his ac- 
quaintance. And such is the life which the 
master breathes into his creations, that they 
become not only possible to the reader, but 
they actually gain flesh and blood in his very 
presence. 

14. And of these types, Turgenef, in har- 
mony with the advance of his own warfare, 
has furnished a progressive series. Accord- 
ingly the earliest depicted under the impres- 
sion of profound despair is the type of the 
superfluous man, — the man, who not only 
does nothing, but can do nothing, struggle he 
never so hard. And the superfluous man not 
only is impotent, but he knows his impotence, 
so that he is dead in soul as well as in body. 



Lecture IV. 133 

This brief sketch of a living corpse, written 
as early as j 3$o, forms thus the prologue, as 
it were, to all his future tragedies. From this 
depth of nothingness Turgenef, however, soon 
rises to at least the semblance of strength ; 
and while Rudin is at bottom as impotent as 
Tchulkaturin, he at least pretends to strength. 
Rudin, then, is the hero of phrases, the 
boaster ; he promises marvels, he charms, he 
captivates ; but it all ends in words, and Ru- 
din perishes as needlessly as he lived need- ( 
lessly. Ijl" Fathers an d Sons," however, Baza- 
rof is no longer a talker ; he already rises to 
indignation and rebellion ; he /t vds out his 

spirit, and ■stubbsmbr^resists.sacifity, religinn, 

iaatibUions. From Bazarof Turgenef ascends 
still higher to Nezhdanof in "Virgin Soil," 
whose aggressive attitude is already unmistaka- 
ble. Nezhdanof no longer indulges in tirades 
against government, but he glumly organizes 
tlie revolutionary forces for actual battle. 
Lastly, Turgenef arrives at the highest type 
of the warrior, at Sophia Perofskya ; and this 
his last type he paints in brief epilogue, just 
as his first type he had painted in brief pro- 



IJ4 Lectures on Russian Literature. 

logue. What this his last type meant to Tur- 
genef is best seen from the short prose-poem 
itself. 



THE THRESHOLD. 

I SEE a huge building ; in its front wall 
a narrow door opens wide ; behind the door 
gloomy darkness. At the high threshold stands 
a girl, a Russian girl. 

Frost waves from that impenetrable darkness, 
and with the icy breeze comes forth from the 
depth of the building a slow, hollow voice. 

" O thou, eager to step across this threshold, 
knowest thou what awaits thee ? " 

" I know," answers the girl. 

" Cold, hunger, hatred, ridicule, scorn, inso- 
lence, prison, illness, death itself 1 " 

** I know it." 

** Complete isolation, loneliness." 

'* I know it. . . . But I am ready. I shall 
endure all the sorrows, all the blows." 

** Not only at the hands of your enemies, but 
also at the hands of your family and friends." 

" Yes, even at the hands of these." 

**'Tis well. . . . Are you ready for the 
sacrifice ? " 

" Yes." 

*' For nameless sacrifice ? Thou shalt perish ; 



Lecture IV. /j?5 

and not one, not one even shall know whose 
memory to honor.'* 

"I need no gratitude nor pity; I need no 
name." 

" And art thou ready even for — crime ? " 

The girl dropped her head. 

** Yes, even for crime am I ready." 

The voice renewed not its questionings forth- 
with. 

" Knowest thou," spake the voice for the last 
time, ^^ that thou mayest be disenchanted in thy 
ideals, that thou yet mayest come to see that 
thou wert misguided, and that thy young life 
has been wasted in vain ? " 

**This also I know, and yet I am ready to 
enter." 

" Enter, then." 

The girl stepped over the threshold, and the 
heavy curtain dropped behind her. " Fool ! " 
some one muttered behind her. '* Saint ! " came 
from somewhere in reply. 

15. These, then, were the two leading traits! 
of this man Turgpnfif. GLeJtgdJtbfi .Sghtiogl 
t^jnpeiameot-Of ,Jths. warrior in Jxis hearty .aijd 
th fcjjoul pting temperament of the j)hilosopher/ 
in his head : to the first he owed the choice 
of his road; to the second^ the manner of] 
traversing it His six great works of art are 



1^ Lectures on Russian Literature. 

all tragedies . Rudin dies a needless death 
on a barricade; Insarof dies before he 
even reaches the land he is to liberate; 
T^r^TJirnf dies fcom accidental blood-poison- 
ing and Nezhdanof dies by his own hand. 
Here again critics are at hand with an ex- 
planation which does not explain. Tur- 
genef, the artist, the poet, the creator, does 
not know, they say, how to dispose of his 
heroes at the end of his stories, and he there- 
fore kills them off. The truth, however, is that 
the sceptic, pessimistic Turgenef could not 
as an artist faithful to his belief do aught 
else with his heroes than to let them perish, 
rbt^ta. him. cmeL.fet)e> merciless d^JSLtiny^^was 
not mere figure of speech, but reality of 
realities. To. Turgenef, life.wa§[ aLhQttQm.,a 
tra gedy ; and whatever the auspices under 
which he sent forth his heroes, he felt that 
sooner or later they must become victims of 
blind fate, brute force, of the relentiessly 
grinding, crushing mill of the gods. 

1 6. I have thus attempted to give you an 
interpretation of Turgenef which perhaps ex- 
plains not only his life but also the peculiar 



Lecture IV. 



^37 



direction of his wwks ; not only the vices of 
his intellect, but also the virtues of his art. 
17. For th e first great virtue, of Turgenefs 

art is his matchlcss , sgnsc Qtfoxm as gf a 
builder^jL^ onstructorj an architect. ASLSEQiks 
of architectu re, of designj,^with pjocch. and 
balcQSLuJiAd-^^^Q^^l body,.jmd roof, all in 
harmonious proportion, liis six novels are un- 
approachable. There is a pgrfectipn of Jqrm 
in them which puts to shame the hopelessly 
groping attempts at beauty of harmonious 
form of even the greatest of English men 
of letters. As a work of architecture, for 
instance, " Virgin Soil " bears the same re- 
lation to the " Mill on the Floss " that the 
Capitol at Washington bears to the Capitol 
at Albany. The one is a rounded-out thing 
of beauty, the other an angular monstrosity. 
Walter Scott in England, and Mr. Howells 
in America, are the only English writers of 
fiction who possess that sense of form which 
makes Turgenefs art consummate ; unfortu- 
nately, Walter Scott has long since been dis- 
carded as a literary model, and Mr. Howells 
is not yet even accepted. 



1)8 Lectures on Russian Literature. 

1 8. And the second great virtii fi. of Tur- 
genef s art is the skill wi»i^ mhi^h u<* /^Qy^ijiv^ 
to ..tell, t*^ *^^^^ ""'^V' ♦v^'* lf*n«if niiTT^^" ^ 
wprds, tiie.. skill iritb, which hfi^iOntrives to 
produce the greatest effect with the least ex- 
penditure of force. There is a compactness 
in his stories which I can only describe as 
E mersoni an. Of his six great novels, only 
one has as many as three hundred pages ; of 
the other five, not one has over two hundred. 
Turgenef s art is thus in striking contrast with 
that required by the English standard of three 
volumes for every novel. For what is to Eng- 
lish and American society the greatest of so- 
cial virtues was to Turgenef the greatest of 
artistic vices. As an artist, Turgenef detested 
above all cleverness, — that accomplishment 
which possesses to perfection the art of smug- 
gling in a whole cartload of chaflf under the 
blinding glare of a single phosphorescent 
thoughtlet; that cleverness which like all 
phosphorescent glows can only change into 
a sickly paleness at the slightest approach of 
God's true sunlight, of the souPs true force. 
Of this virtue of compactness his works offer 



Lecture IV. i)g 

examples on almost every page ; but nowhere 
are its flowers strewn in such abundance as in 
his " Diary of a Superfluous Man." 

19. This work, though only covering some 
sixty pages, written as it was at the age of 
thirty-two, when Turgenef stood as yet at the 
threshold of his artistic career, is in fact, as it 
were, an epitome of all Turgenefs forces as 
an artist. While in power of impression it 
is the peer of Tolstoy's " Ivan Ilyitsh," with 
which it has a striking family resemblance, it 
surpasses Tolstoy's sketch in the wealth of 
delicately shaded gems of workmanship, which 
glow throughout the worklet. (i) In the 
small provincial town, for instance, the lion 
from St. Petersburg, Prince N., captures the 
hearts of all. A ball is given in his honor, 
and the prince, says Turgenef, " was encircled 
by the host, yes, encircled as England is 
encircled by the sea." My ball-giving, my 
lion-hunting friend, tAou knowest the singular 
felicity of that one word here, — encircled ! 
(2) The superfluous man's beloved is at last 
seduced by the lionized prince, and she be- 
comes the talk of the town. A good-natured 



140 Lectures on Russian Literature. 

lieutenant, now first introduced by Turgenef, 
calls on the wretched man to console him, 
and the unhappy lover writes in his Diary: 
" I feared lest he should mention Liza. But 
my good lieutenant was not a gossip, and, 
moreover, he despised all women, calling 
them, God knows why, salad." This is all 
the description Turgenef devotes to this lieu- 
tenant ; but this making him despise women 
under the appellation of half-sour, half-sweet 
conglomerate of egg-and-vegetable salad, de- 
scribes the lieutenant in two lines more faith- 
fully than pages of scientific, realistic photog- 
raphy. (3) Before the ruin of poor Liza 
becomes known, and while the prince, her 
seducer, is still on the height of lionization, 
he is challenged to a duel by Liza's faithful 
lover. The superfluous man wounds the 
prince's cheek; the prince, who deems his 
rival unworthy of even a shot, retaliates by 
firing into the air. Superfluous man ia of 
course crushed, annihilated, and he describes 
his feelings thus : ** Evidently this man was 
bound to crush me ; with this magnanimity of 
his he slammed me in, just as the lid of the 



Uciure IV. 141 

coffin is slammed down over the corpse." 
(4) You think, then, that the sufferings of the 
despairing lover as he sees his beloved going 
to ruin, into the arms of the seducer, are inde- 
scribable? But not to Turgenef. Says again 
the superfluous man in his Diary: "When 
our sorrows reach a phase in which they 
force our whole inside to quake and to 
squeak like an overloaded cart, then they 
cease to be ridiculous." Verily, only those 
who have been shaken to the very depths 
of their being can understand the marvellous 
fidelity of this image, the soul quaking and 
squeaking like an overloaded cart, — all the 
more faithful because of its very homeli- 
ness. Do not wonder, therefore, when the 
last, intensest grief, the consciousness of be- 
ing crushed by his rival, finds in his Diary the 
following expression : (5) " And so I suf- 
fered," says the superfluous man, " like a dog 
whose hind parts had been crushed in by the 
cart-wheel as it passed over him." A more 
powerful description of agony, methinks, is 
not found even in Gogol's laughter through 
tears. 



142 Lectures on Russian Literature. 

20. And the third great virtue of Turgeners 1 
art is his love of Naturej and here I know \ 
not where to look for the like of him, unless to f 
another great master of Russian letters, — to 
Tolstoy. For Gogol is indeed also a painter, 
but only a landscai^&paiater, .while .Tiu^enef 
makes. you fed even the> hrf.fi7;fi Df .a .summer 
ejffi. 

21. So thrilled is his being with the love of 
Nature, that all her moods find a ready re- 
sponse in his sensitive soul. The joy of the 
sunshine, the melancholy of the sky shvit down 
by huge cloud, the grandeur of the thunder, 
the quiver of the lightning, the glow of the 
dawn, the babble of the brook, and even the 
waving of the grass-blade, — all these he re- 
produces with the fidelity of one who reveres 
Nature. Turgenef has thus at least one ele- 
ment of the highest religiousness, — reverence 
towards the powers of Nature sup^erior to 
man; a reverence the possession of which 
he himself would perhaps have been the first 
to deny, since consciously he was an irreve- 
rent agnostic. But his soul was wiser than his 
logic ; and however dead his head might de- 



Lecture /K. 14) 

clare the universe to be, his hand painted it 
as if alive. This, for instance, is how he de- 
scribes a storm : — 

^ Meanwhile, along with the evening was ap- 
proaching a thunder-storm. Already ever since 
noon the air had been close, and from the dis- 
tance there was coming a low grumbling. But 
now the broad cloud that had long been resting 
like a layer of lead on the very edgt of the hori- 
zon began to grow, and to be visible from be- 
hind the trees : the stifling atmosphere began 
to tremble more visibly, shaken stronger and 
stronger by the approaching thunder ; the wind 
rose, howled abruptly through the trees, be- 
came still, howled again protractedly, and now 
it whistled. A sombre darkness ran over the 
ground, chasing swiftly away the last glimmer 
of the dawn ; the thick clouds breaking to 
pieces suddenly began to float, and drove 
through the sky ; now, a slight shower began 
to sprinkle, the lightning flared up with a red 
flame, and the thunder growled angrily and 
heavily." 

22. Observe here the felicity of the meta- 
phor: the cloud rests, the air trembles and 
is soon shaken, the darkness runs over the 
ground, and the thunder growls in anger. 



144 Lectures on Russian Literature. 

Only the eye which sees at bottom life in 
Nature's forces could see them in such vivi- 
fying images. 

23- Lastl y, the fourth gr^at virtue of Tur^ 
genef s art is his intense p ower of svmpathv . J 

24. In the universality of his sympathies he'S^ 
is equalled again only by Tolstoy. Like him 
he ran dflpict the fg.gljffgs Qf a dQg> of a hitd> 
T^alJLA .sf lf-attestiag.Jidelity.t^^ i^Jiis^nature 
were at one with. theirs; and the one child 
of creation which man has repeatedly been 
declared unable to paint truthfully, namely, 
woman, Turgenef has painted with a grace 
and faithfulness unapproached even by George 
Eliot or by George Sand. For Turgenef 
loved woman as no woman could love her, 
and his faith in her was unbounded. Hence, 
when in his " On the Eve " he wishes to give 
expression to his despair over the mm of 
Russia, so that he has to seek the ideal of a 
patriot not in a Russian, but in a Bulgarian, 
he still rests the hope of the country on its 
women ; and Helen, Turgenef s noblest con- 
ception among women, as Insarof is among 
men, is not like him a foreigner, but a Rus- 



Lecture /K, /^5 

sian. And this is how Turgenef paints the 
noblest moment in the life of the noblest of 
his women. 

25. The poor, prospectless foreigner In- 
sarof discovers that he loves the rich, high- 
stationed Helen. He does not know that he 
is loved in return, and he decides to depart 
without taking even leave of her. They meet, 
however, unexpectedly. 

" * You come from our house, don't you ? ' 
Helen asked. 

" * No, . . . not from your house.* 

"*No?* repeated Helen, and tried to smile. 
* And is it thus you keep your promise ? I have 
been expecting you all the morning.' 

"'Helen Nikolayevna, I promised nothing 
yesterday.' 

" Helen tried to smile again, and passed her 
hand across her face. Both face and hand were 
very pale. * You intended, then, to depart with- 
out taking leave of us ?' 

** ' Yes/ he muttered, almost fiercely. « 

«* * How, after our acquaintance, after our 
talks, after all . . . So, if I had not then met 
you here accidentally (her voice began to ring, 
and she stopped for a moment) . . . you would 
have gone ofiE, and would not have even shaken 
my hand in parting ; gone off without regret ? * 



!46 Lectures on Russian Literature. 

^* Insarof turned away. ' Helen Nikolayevna, 
please don't speak thus. I am, as it is, already 
not cheerful. Believe me, my decision has cost 
me great effort. If you knew . . .* 

" * I don't wish to know why you depart,' Helen 
interrupted him, frightened. * This is evidently 
necessary. We must evidently part. You would 
not grieve your friends without cause. But do 
friends part thus ? We are of course friends, 
are not we ? * 

"*No,' said Insarof. 

" * How ? * muttered Helen, and her cheeks 
colored slightly. 

** * Why, that is exactly why I go away, be- 
cause we are not friends. Don't oblige me to 
say what I do not wish to tell, what I shall not 
telL' 

** ' Formerly you used to be frank with me,' 
Helen spoke up with a slight reproach. ' Do 
you remember ? ' 

" * Then I could be frank ; then I had nothing 
to hide. But now — ' 

** * But now ?' asked Helen. 

" * But now . . . But now I must go. Good- 
byl' 

** Had Insarof at this moment raised his eyes 
to Helen, he would have seen that her whole face 
shone, — shone the more, the more his face 
grew gloomy and dark ; but his eyes were stub- 
bornly typed on the floor. 



Lecture IV, 14J 

" * Well, good-by, Dimitry Nikanorovitch,' she 
began. * But since we have met, give me now at 
least your hand.' 

" Insarof started to give her his hand. * No, 
I cannot even do that,' he said, and again turned 
away. 

"* You cannot?' 

" * I cannot. Good-by ! * And he started to 
%o out. 

" * Just wait a moment,* she said. * It seems 
you are afraid of me. Now, I am braver than 
you,' she added, with a sudden slight tremor 
along her whole frame. * I can tell you . . . 
do you wish me to tell . . . why you found me 
here? Do you know where I was going ? ' 

^ Insarof looked in surprise at Helen. 

" * I was going to your house.' 

«*To my house?' 

" Helen covered her face. • You wished to 
compel me to say that I love you,' she whis- 
pered — * there, I have said it.' 

** * Helen ! ' exclaimed Insarof. 

** She took his hands, looked at him, and fell 
upon his breast. 

'^ He embraced her firmly, and remained silent. 
There was no need of telling her that he loved 
her. From his one exclamation, from this in- 
stantaneous transformation of the whole man, 
from the manner in which rose and fell that 
breast to which she clung so trustfully j^^om the 



148 Lectures on Russian Literature. 

manner in which the tips of his fingers touched 
her hair, Helen could see that she was loved. 
He was silent, but she needed no words. 'He 
is here, he loves ; what more is there needed ? ' 
The calm of blessedness, the quiet of the undis- 
turbed haven, of the attained goal, that heavenly 
calm which lends a meaning and a beauty to 
death itself, filled her whole being with a godly 
wave. She wished nothing, because she pos- 
sessed everything. * O my brother, my friend, 
my darling ! ' her lips whispered ; and she herself 
knew not whose heart it was, his or hers, which 
was so sweetly beating and melting away in her 
breast. 

"But he stood motionless, enclosing in his 
firm embrace the young life which had just 
given itself entire unto him ; he felt on his 
breast this new, priceless burden ; a feeling of 
tenderness, a feeling of gratitude inexpressible, 
shivered into dust his hard soul, and tears, 
hitherto unknown to him, came to his eyes. 

"• But she wept not ; she only kept repeating : 
' O my friend ! O my brother ! ' 

" * Then you will go with me everywhere,' 
he said to her, some fifteen minutes later, as 
before enclosing and supporting her in his 
embrace. 

" * Everywhere, to the end of the earth ; where- 
ever you are, there shall I be.* 

** * And you are sure you do not deceive your- 



Lecture IW. 94g 

self ? You know your parents will never consent 
to our marriage ? * 

" *I am not deceiving myself; I know it/ 

•* « You know I am poor, almost a beggar ?' 

" « I know it.' 

'' ' That I am not a Russian, that I am fated 
to live beyond Russia, that you will have to 
break all your ties with your country and your 
family ? ' 

"*I know it, I know it.' 

" * You know also that I have devoted my life 
to a difficult, thankless task ; that I . . . that 
we shall have to expose ourselves not only to 
dangers, but to deprivation, and to degradation 
perhaps ? ' 

" I know, I know it all . . . but I love you.' 

"*That you will have to give up all your 
habits ; that there alone, among strangers, you 
will perhaps have to toil ? * 

" She put her hands on his lips. * I love you, 
darling.' 

*• He began to kiss warmly her narrow, rosy 
hand. ' Helen did not take her hand from his 
lips, and with a kind of childish joy, with laugh- 
ing curiosity, she watched him covering with 
kisses now her hand, now her fingers. 

** Suddenly she blushed, and hid her face on 
his breast. 

"He gently raised up her head and looked 
firmly into her eyes. 



i^o Lectures on Russian Literature. 

" ' So God be with you,' be said ; * be thou my 
wife both before men and before God.' " 

26. These, then, were the numerous great 
virtues of Turgenef; and they have made 
him the most enjoyable of artists. But his 
one great vice, the vice of doubt, the vice of 
hopelessness, has made him, as a nourisher 
of the spirit, among the least profitable as a 
writer. 

27. For, O my friends, it cannot be stated 
too often that whatever puts new strength 
into the spirit is from the great God, the 
Good j and whatever takes strength from the 
spirit is from the great Devily the Evil. And 
the things that have ever proved the inex- 
haustible sources of strength to the soul have 
been not doubt and despair, but faith and 
hope, — faith that the destinies of men are 
guided by love even though guided through 
the agony of sorrow; faith that behind this 
appearance of discord and blind fate and 
brute force there is after all to be found the 
substance of harmony, of wise forethought, 
of tender love ; hope, that however terrible 
the present, the future will yet be one of joy, 



Lecture ly. i^i 

one of peace. If reason with its logic can 
strengthen this faith, this hope, then welcome 
reason, blessed be reason ; but if reason with 
its logic can only make me doubt the pres- 
ence of wisdom, the presence of love, then 
begone reason, cursed be reason. Verily, by 
their fruits ye shall know them ! 

28. Turgenef therefore was incapable of 
creating a Levin, because he had not the faith 
which makes the Levins of Tolstoy possible.) 
He was filled with the pessimistic woe of the '. 
the world, and believed at bottom that mani 
bom in sorrow, must also live in sorrow. With' 
the sublimity of a prophet, Turgenef cries : 
"From the inmost depths of the virgin for- 
est, from the eternal depth of the waters, 
resounds the same cry of Nature to man: 
' I have naught to do with thee. I rule, but 
thou — look to thy life, O worm I ' " While! 
personally he indeed contributed what lay in 1 
his power to alleviate the present ills of men, , 
he could do naught towards alleviating the J 
futture ills of men ; for he could not inspire/ 
men with hope, since he had none himself. I 
For hope comes fi-om faith, and Turgenef 



1^2 Lectures on Russian Literature. 

was devoid of faith. Turgenef, like another 
great master of fiction, George £liot, was a 
veritable child of the immature age, not of 
science, of knowledge, but of nescience, of 
ignorance, of agnosticism ; for it is only igno- 
rance that doubts, and it is true science that 
believes. 

29. I cannot therefore ask you to take 
leave with me of Turgenef without at least 
urging you to profit by this one fact in his 
life. Turgenef failed to reach the highest, the 
height of Tolstoy, because he failed to free 
himself from that alone which must forever 
trammel the soul. He failed to free himself 
from that fundamental distrust of God which 
is at bottom of all despair. You, too, my 
friends, have that distrust O ye in society 
who dread the consequences of having one 
kind word to say, or even one glance of re- 
cognition to cast at a brother because for- 
sooth he has not been properly introduced to 
you, are not ye doubting your own God in 
your breasts, which acts not in fear of your 
fellow-men, but in trust of them ? And, O ye 
who refuse to help a begging brother for fear 



Lecture IV. 75^ 

lest he prove an impostor, are not ye likewise 
at bottom doubting the God within you which 
acts through pity to a brother, even though 
he do deceive? Turgenef fell short of the 
highest because he did not cast off the scep- 
ticism of his intellect Are not ye, my friends, 
likewise in danger of falling short of the high- 
est because you too do not cast off the scep- 
ticism of the heart? 



LECTURE V. 



TOLSTOY THE ARTIST. 

I. I HAVE Stated in the first lecture that 
the soul of man ever strives onward and up- 
ward ; that its goal is the establishment of the 
kingdom of heaven, which consists in rever- 
ence before God above, and in love towards 
man here below. I have stated that of this 
journey of the soul heavenward, literature is 
the record ; that the various phases of literary 
development are only so many mile-posts on 
the road ; that after the voices of the singer, 
of the protester, of the warrior, are hushed, 
there must be heard what must remain for- 
ever the loftiest voice in letters, — the voice 
of the preacher, the prophet, the inspirer. 
And I have stated that just as Pushkin is the 
singer, Gogol the protester, and Turgenef the 



Lecture V. 755 

fighter, so is Tolstoy in Russian literature 
the preacher, the inspirer. 

2. But just because he is the prophet, the 
uplifter, the proclaimer, Tolstoy is no longer 
the merely Russian writer. Pushkin is the 
Russian singer, Gogol is the Russian pro- 
tester, and Turgenef is the Russian fighter ; 
but Tolstoy is not the inspirer of Russia 
alone, but of all mankind. Tolstoy has the 
least of the Russian in him, because he has 
the most of the man in him ; he has the least 
of the son of the Slav in him, because he has 
the most of the Son of God in him. The 
voice of Leo Tolstoy is not the voice of the 
nineteenth century, but of all centuries ; the 
voice of Leo Tolstoy is not the voice of one 
land, but of all lands ; for the voice of Leo 
Tolstoy, in short, is the voice of God speaking 
through man. 

3. For, O my friends, there is a God in 
heaven, even though the voices of pessim- 
ism and agnosticism be raised never so high 
against him. There is a God who ruleth over 
the heavens and over the earth; and he is 
boundless with space, and everlasting with 



!^6 Lectures on Russian Literature. 

time ; and he is sublime with the sky, and he 
twinkleth with the star ; and he smileth with 
the sun, and he beameth with the moon ; and 
he floateth with the cloud, and he saileth 
with the wind ; he flasheth with the lightning, 
and resoundeth with the thunder ; he heaveth 
with the sea, and he dasheth with the surf; 
he floweth with the river, and he rusheth 
with the torrent ; he babbleth with the brook, 
and he sparkleth with the dew-drop; he 
reposeth with the landscape, and he laugheth 
with the meadow ; he waveth with the tree, 
and he quivereth with the leaf; he singeth 
with the bird, and he buzzeth with the bee ; 
he roareth with the lion, and he pranceth with 
the steed ; he crawleth with the worm, and 
he soareth with the eagle ; he darteth with 
the porpoise, and he diveth with the fish ; 
he dwelleth with the loving, and he pleadeth 
with the hating ; he shineth with the merci- 
ful, and he aspireth with the prayerful. He 
is ever nigh unto men, — he, the Prince of 
Light ! 

4, And I say unto ye that the Lord God 
hath not hid himself from the hearts of men ; 



Lecture V. 757 

he that spake unto Moses and the prophets, 
and through them, — he is still nigh. He 
that spake unto Jesus and the Apostles, and 
through them, — he is still nigh. He that 
spake to Mohammed and Luther, and through 
them, — he is still nigh. He recently spake 
through Carlyle and through Emerson, and 
their voices are not yet hushed. And he 
still speaketh, my friends, through Ruskin 
in England and through Tolstoy in Russia, 
as he ever shall speak through all earnest 
souls who love him with all their heart be- 
cause they know him, who seek him with all 
their heart because they know him not 
Think not therefore the Lord God hath 
ceased to speak unto men through men; 
verily, if men but see to it that there be 
enough inspired, God will see to it that there 
be enough inspirers. 

5. And of these Heaven-sent inspirers, 
Tolstoy is the latest. But do not believe that 
in saying that he is Heaven-sent I attempt to 
explain aught The highest is ever inexpli- 
cable, and it is the bane of modem science 
that it is ever ready to explain what cannot 



1^8 Lectures on Russian Literature. 

be explained. Before the highest we can 
only stand dumb ; and this has been the feel- 
ing of the greatest, because of the humblest, 
of spirits. The Greek painter, therefore, 
when about to depict the highest grief of a 
father, gives up in despair, and veils the fa- 
ther's face ; and Meyer von Bremen's grand- 
mother, when confronted with the question 
from the children whence came that sweet 
babe in her arms, can only reply, "The storks 
brought it ; " and so I can say to you only, 
Tolstoy is sent unto men from Heaven. 

6. 1 say he is Heaven-sent, because he came 
to proclaim not what is ephemeral and perish- 
ing, but what is permanent and everlasting. 
He came to proclaim not the latest theory of 
gravitation, of molecular vibration, of modes of 
heat and manners of cold, nor of struggle for 
existence, nor of supply and demand, nay, not 
even of scientific charity. He came to pro- 
claim that which was as true in the days of 
Jesus as it is true in the days of Darwin, — 
that the life of man can have no meaning 
unless when guided by obedience, to God 
and love to man. Gravitation, struggle for 



Lecture V. 759 

existence ! The earth has been spinning 
round its parent for ages before man's brain- 
kin made the marvellous discovery that God's 
mysterious impulse which set the earth whirl- 
ing through the abysses of space is explained 
in right scientific fashion by labelling it gravi- 
tation. This green earth has rolled on^ this 
green earth will roll on, label or no label; 
and the mystery of God men knew not be- 
fore gravitation, nor do they know it now 
with gravitation. Men have for ages been 
multiplying under the blessing of God, and 
loving one another, long before that mar- 
vellous discovery was made that man, sprung 
from a monkey, and bred in struggle for exist- 
ence, is destined at last, under fine progress 
of species, to become brutalized with Malthu- 
sian law as a cannibal living on the flesh of 
his brother, with self-respect and scientific 
charity in most abundant supply and demand. 
Tolstoy came to proclaim not the new gospel 
of death, but the old gospel of life ; not the 
new gospel of struggle for existence, but the 
old gospel of helpfulness for existence ; not 
the new gospel of competition, but the old 



i6o Lectures on Russian Literature. 

gospel of brotherhood. Tolstoy came to pro- 
claim the gospel of God, the gospel of man, 
the gospel of Christ, the gospel of Socrates, 
the gospel of Epictetus, of Aurelius, of Car- 
lyle, of Emerson, — the gospel of reverence 
before God and love to man, which is indeed 
ever old, but which, alas I the sons of Darkness 
see to it that it remain forever new. 

7* These, then, are the men among whom 
Tolstoy belongs : which of these the greater, 
which of these the less? My friends, when 
we arrive at these, we are no longer among 
the measurable planets, but among the im- 
measurable fixed stars. Sirius flashes indeed 
with greater splendor than Vega, and Vega 
than Arcturus, and Arcturus than CapeUa, 
and Capella flashes with greater splendor than 
Aldebaran ; but who shall undertake to say 
which of these suns is the greater, which 
is the less? The difference of splendor is 
not in the stars themselves, but in our eyes. 
And at this our immeasurable distance from 
these souls who are nighest unto the throne 
of the Most High, it is not for me, the worm, 
as I stand before you, to presume to measure 



Lecture V. i6i 

which is the greater, which is the less. Rather 
than spending our time in profitless weighing 
and measuring, let me beseech you to bow 
your heads in awe and gratitude, praising God 
for the mercy which sendeth now and then 
unto men the living voice, the helping voice. 

8. Tolstoy, therefore, is one of those spirits 
whom I cannot approach with the dissecting- 
knife, as the critic does the author, in order to 
" account " for him. To do this, that total free- 
dom from sentiment is required which was 
possessed by the enterprising reporter who 
on the death of a prominent citizen forthwith 
requested an interview with "corpse's un- 
cle." In an age when sentiment has become 
a byword of impotence, and the heart has 
become a mere force-pump for the blood ; in 
an age when charity has to be put in swad- 
dling-clothes lest it injure a brother by help- 
ing him ; when the poor are preached to by 
their rich visiting friends, not to make a home 
for themselves when their love for a mate is 
bom in the heart, but only when it is bom 
in the purse, — in such an age that reporter's 
freedom from sentiment is indeed a most val- 



i62 Lectures on Russian Literature. 

uable acquisition ; but I, alas 1 as yet possess 
it not ! I shall therefore neither judge the 
preacher Tolstoy, nor measure him. I shall 
only point out to you to-day wherein he dif- 
fers, as he must needs differ, from the rest of 
that noble band of the chosen messengers of 
God to which he belongs. 

9. And the first striking difference is that 
Tolstoy is a consummate artist, a creator, in 
addition to the great preacher. For Marcus 
Aurelius is no artist. He is merely a speaker ; 
he delivers his message in plain tongue, un- 
adorned, often even unpolished. Epictetus, 
equally simple, equally direct with Marcus 
Aurelius, comes, however, akeady adorned 
with a certain humor which now and then 
sparkles through his serious pages. Ruskin 
brings with him quite a respectable load of 
artistic baggage ; he brings an incisiveness, a 
sarcasm, often a piquancy with him, which 
makes him entertaining besides inspiring. 
Emerson and Carlyle bring with them much 
that, as artistic work, might, under more favor- 
able auspices, have been worth saving for its 
own sake : the one brings a grace, a sportive- 



Lecture V. i6^ 

ness, and a brilliancy which fascinates^ the 
other a fervor, an imagination, a grim-humor, 
a lightning-flashing, which dazzles. But none 
of these live in letters because of their art. 
Were they to depend on this alone, they 
would quickly perish. They live because of 
the spirit which worketh through them; so 
that were you to take the Jeremiah out of 
Carlyle, the John the Baptist out of Ruskin, 
and the Solomon out of Emerson, you would 
deprive them of their literary life. Tolstoy, 
however, even though the preacher be gone 
from him, still remains a mighty power in 
letters because of his art For not only are 
his works filled with the highest purpose, — 
they are also created with the highest art. 
And I cannot show you this difference any 
better than by quoting two passages, one 
from Carlyle, the other fix)m Tolstoy, both 
treating of the souPs well-nigh noblest emo- 
tion, — Repentance. 

'' On the whole, we make too much of faults. 
Faults ? The greatest of faults, I should say, is 
to be conscious of none. Readers of the Bible, 
above all, one would think, might know better. 



1 64 Lectures on Russian Literature. 

Who is called there * the man according to God's 
own heart * ? David, the Hebrew king, had 
fallen into sins enough ; blackest crimes ; there 
was no want of sins. And therefore the unbe- 
lievers sneer, and ask, ' Is this the man accord- 
ing to God*s own heart ? ' The sneer, I must 
say, seems to be but a shallow one. 

" What are faults, what are the outward de- 
tails of a life, if the inner secret of it, the re- 
morse, temptations, true, often-baffled, never- 
ending struggle of it be forgotten ? ' It is not in 
man that walketh to direct his steps.' Of all 
acts, is not, for a man, repentance the most di- 
vine ? The deadliest sin, I say, were the same 
supercilious consciousness of no sin ; that is 
death ; the heart so conscious is divorced from 
sincerity, humility, and fact, — is dead; it is 
* pure,' as dead dry sand is pure. 

** David's life and history, as written for us in 
those Psalms of his, I consider to be the truest 
emblem ever given of man's moral progress and 
warfare here below. All earnest men will ever 
discern in it the faithful struggle of an earn- 
est human soul toward what is good and best. 
Struggle often baffled, sore baffled, down as into 
entire wreck; yet a struggle never ended; ever 
with tears, repentance, true unconquerable pur- 
pose begun anew. Poor human nature ! Is not 
a man's walking, in truth, always that, — *a 
succession of falls ' ? Man can do no other. 



Lecture V. i6^ 

In this wild element of Life, he has to struggle 
onward; now fallen, deep abased; and ever 
with tears, repentance, with bleeding heart, he 
has to rise again, struggle again still onward. 
That his struggle de a faithful, unconquerable 
one; that is the question of questions. We will 
put' up with many sad details, if the soul of it 
were true. Details by themselves will never 
teach us what it is." 

ID. Powerful as this passage is, I cannot 
help feeling that Tolstoy has treated the same 
subject more artistically than Carlyle, by em- 
bodying his lesson in objective shape, where 
Carlyle treats it subjectively. And now listen 
to Tolstoy : — 

THE REPENTING SINNER. 

There lived in the world a man for seventy 
years, and aU his life he lived in sin. And this 
man fell ill, and still he did not repent. But 
when death was nigh, at the last hour, he began 
to weep, and said, " Lord, as thou hast forgiven 
the thief on the cross, so do thou forgive me ! " 
He had scarcely spoken, and away flew his 
soul. And the sinner's soul began to love God, 
and, trusting his mercy, came to the gates of 
heaven. 



i66 Lectures on Russian Literature. 

And the sinner began to knock, and to ask 
admission into the kingdom of heaven. 

And from behind the door he heard a voice: 
'* Who is this knocking for admission into the 
gates of heaven, and what are the deeds this 
man in his lifetime has done ? " 

And the voice of the accuser gave answer, 
and recounted all the sinful deeds of this man ; 
and of good deeds he named none. 

And the voice from behind the door an- 
swered : <* Sinners cannot enter the kingdom of 
heaven. Get thee hence ! " 

Said the sinner : " Lord, I hear thy voice, 
but I see not thy countenance and know not 
thy name." 

And the voice gave in reply : " I am Peter 
the Apostle." 

Said the sinner : *' Have mercy upon me, 
Apostle Peter ; remember the weakness of man, 
and the mercy of God. Was it not you who was 
a disciple of Christ, and was it not you who 
heard from his own lips his teaching, and saw 
the example of his life ? And now remember, 
when he was weary and sad in spirit, and thrice 
asked thee not to slumber, but to pray, you 
slept, because your eyes were heavy, and thrice 
he found you sleeping. The same of me. 

"And remember likewise how thou hast 
promised to him not to renounce him until thy 
dying day, and yet thou didst renounce him 



Lecture V. 167 

thrice when they led him away. The same of 
me. 

"And remember likewise how crowed the 
cock, and thou hast gone forth and wept bit- 
terly. The same of me. Not for thee 'tis to 
refuse me entrance." 

And the voice from behmd the gates of 
heaven was hushed. 

And after standing some time, again knocked 
the sinner, and asked admittance into the king- 
dom of heaven. 

And from behind the doors there was heard 
another voice which spake : ** Who is this, and 
how has he lived on earth ? " 

And the voice of the accuser gave answer, 
and repeated all the evil deeds of the sinner ; 
and of the good deeds he named none. 

And the voice from behind the door called ; 
*' Get thee hence. Sinners such as thou cannot 
live with us in Paradise." 

Said the sinner : " Lord, thy voice I hear, 
but thy face I see not, and thy name I know 
not." 

And the voice said unto him : ** I am David, 
the king and the prophet." But the sinner 
despaired not, nor went he away from the 
gates of heaven, but spake as follows : ^^ Have 
mercy upon me. King David, and think of the 
weakness of man and the mercy of God. God 
loved thee and raised thee up before men. Thine 



i68 Lectures on Russian Literature. 

was all, — a kingdom, and glory, and riches, and 
wives, and children ; yet when thou didst espy 
from thy roof the wife of a poor man, sin betook 
thee, and thou hast taken the wife of Uriah, and 
himself hast thou slain by the sword of the 
Ammonites. Thou, a rich man, hast taken his 
last lamb from the poor man, and hast slain the 
owner himself. The same of me ! 

^* And think further how thou hast repented, 
and said : < I confess my guilt, and repent of my 
sin.' The same of me. Not for thee 't is to re- 
fuse me entrance." 

And the voice behind the door was hushed. 

And after standing some time, again knocked 
the sinner, and asked admission into the king- 
dom of heaven. And from behind the doors 
was heard a third voice which spake: ** Who is 
this, and how hath he lived on earth ?" 

And for the third time the voice of the ac- 
cuser recounted the evil deeds of the man, but 
of the good he named none. 

And the voice from behind the door gave in 
answer: **Get thee hence! The kingdom of 
heaven not by a sinner can be entered." 

And replied the sinner : " Thy voice I hear, 
but thy face I see not, and thy name I know 
not." 

Answered the voice : " I am John, the be- 
loved disciple of Christ." 

And rejoiced the sinner, and spake : " Now 



Lecture V. i6g 

verily shall I be let in. Peter and David shall 
admit me because they know the weakness of 
man, and the grace of God ; but thou shalt ad- 
mit me because thou hast much love. For hast 
thou not writ in thy book, O John, that God is 
Love, and that whosoever knoweth not Love, 
knoweth not God? Wert not thou he that 
spake in his old age unto men only this one 
word: * Brethren, love ye one another'? How 
then shalt thou now hate me and drive me 
hence ? Either renounce thine own words, or 
learn to love me, and admit me into the king- 
dom of heaven." 

And the gates of heaven opened, and John 
embraced the repenting sinner, and admitted 
him into the kingdom of heaven. 

II. Tolstoy, then, is the sole example among 
men of the harmonious combination of lofti- 
est aspiration with highest artistic skill. Tol- 
stoy sees in himself only ^he preacher, and 
therefore at the age of sixty he does not hesi- 
tate to repudiate all those works of his which 
are not those of the preacher, however great 
their value as works of art. Turgenef sees in 
him only the artist, and therefore beseeches 
from his death-bed his fellow-craftsman to 
give himself back to the forsaken art. Both 



170 Lectures on Russian Literature. 

are here right, both are here wrong. For 
each sees only one side, while Tolstoy is nei- 
ther the preacher alone nor the artist alone. 
Tolstoy, like Janus of old, is two-faced, — the 
artist, when his soul is in a state of war ; the 
preacher, when his soul is in a state of peace. 
Turgenef looks only upon the fece of the 
artist ; Tolstoy looks out into the world with 
the face of the preacher. 

12. This noble combination of the preacher 
and the artist has accordingly determined the 
character of Tolstoy's art. For the first ques- 
tion Tolstoy asks of every event, of every 
phenomenon he has to depict, is. What effect 
has this on the soul of man ; what bearing 
has this on the life of man ; what, in short, is 
its moral meaning? Hence when Tolstoy 
paints, he paints not only objectively, but 
also subjectively. In the storm-scene, for 
instance, which I have read you at the first 
lecture, Tolstoy is not satisfied to give you 
merely the outward appearance of the storm, 
its appearance in Nature, he rests not until 
he has painted also its effect on the soul ; and 
the progress of the terror inspired keeps pace 



Lecture V. 171 

with the advance of the cloud. Hence the 
sudden introduction of the beggar from under 
the bridge, with his horrible stump of hand 
stretched out as he runs beside the carriage 
begging for alms. This incident is as much 
part of the storm, and as terrifying to the 
little Katenka and the little Lubotshka as the 
glare of the lightning and the crash of the 
thunder. Tolstoy the artist never sees Nature 
with the eyes of the body, but with the eyes 
of the spirit ; he never sees matter without the 
underlying mind; he never sees the object 
without its complement, the subject Tolstoy, 
therefore, is tlie first great artist (and if the 
one-eyed prophets of the merely objective art 
prevail, who now clamor so loudly, he prom- 
ises, alas ! to remain also the last) who has 
painted Nature enture. Tolstoy is the first 
great artist, therefore, into whose pictures en- 
ter not only the details visible, but also the 
details invisible. To Tolstoy, the vibration of 
the string is not described in completeness 
tmtil he has also shown how its music has 
made to vibrate not only the air, but also 
the soul. Painter then of the inward uni- 



!y2 Lectures on Russian Literature. 

verse as well as of the outward^ of the 
spiritual as well as of the natural, of the 
things unseen as well as of those seen, Tol- 
stoy has exhausted Nature. He has plunged 
into her nethermost depths, like Schiller's 
diver, and lo ! forth he comes from the abyss 
with her swallowed-up treasure. Verily, here 
Tolstoy is unapproachable. Only one other 
man of letters hath here even distant fellow- 
ship with him, and this is Ralph Waldo 
Emerson. 

13. That an art which is bom of such a 
union of the preacher with the worshipper of 
beauty as it exists in Tolstoy, can only be of 
the highest, and must be of the highest, I 
therefore no longer hesitate to affirm. Read, 
therefore, in this light the successive chapters in 
Book VII. of "Anna Karenina," where is told 
the birth of a son to Kitty and Levin. Our 
modem apostles of the gospel of fidelity at all 
hazards, even though it be the fidelity of dirt, 
would have here made you look at the blood, 
at the towels, at the bowls, at the bottles, 
would have made you smell the odors, — 
they would have recounted to you all those 



Lecture V. 17) 

details which, however pathetic to those 
doomed to be by-standers in the sick-room, 
can only be nauseating to those out of the 
sick-room. Tobtoy the preacher is im- 
pressed with the immeasurable pain which at- 
tends the entrance into the world of a newly- 
born human soul, — agony unendurable, all 
the more unendurable because inexplicable, 
inscrutable. His great artistic soul rests not 
until it hath relieved itself with at least a cry 
over such sorrow. Paint it therefore he must ; 
but he paints it, observe, not directly, by 
photographing the tortures of Kitty, but in- 
directly, by picturing the agony of Levin ; for 
the one would have only nauseated, the other 
stirs the reader to his very depths. The hus- 
band suffers more than the wife, because he 
sees her not with the eyes of the head, but 
with the eyes of the heart ; the groans of 
Kitty, which reach him from the neighbor- 
ing chamber, can indeed be silenced by the 
physician's drug ; but no drug can silence the 
groan of Levin, for it is pressed out by the 
agony, not of the body, but by the agony of 
the soul. And as love, sympathy, is ever an 



iy4 Lectures on Russian Literature. 

eye-opener, so here Tolstoy, the consum- 
mate artist, has reproduced the scene of the 
sick-room with the highest fidelity, because 
he has reproduced it not with the arts of 
cold mechanical photography, but with those 
of warm, sympathetic imagination. Tolstoy 
reproduces therefore with the highest faith- 
fulness because he too sees not with the eye 
of the head, but with the eye of the heart 

14. And for the highest example of such 
art I will venture to read to you the passage 
in which Tolstoy tells of Anna Karenina's fall. 
Until the reader comes to this passage, there 
is not a syllable to tell him that she has fallen. 
Observe then Tolstoy's manner of telling it. 
I venture to think it far more faithful than 
any realistic art could have made it by fur- 
nishing details not necessarily more true be- 
cause less delicate: — 

*' That in which during almost a whole year 
consisted the one, exclusive longing of Vron- 
sky's life, that which had supplanted all his for- 
mer wishes, that which to Anna had been a 
dream of impossible, terrible, yet for this rea- 
son all the more fascinating happiness, — this 



Lecture V. 775 

wish was at last gratified. Pale, with his lower 
jaw trembling, he stood over her and begged 
her to quiet herself, not knowing himself how 
and what. 

*''Anna, Anna,' he spake with trembling 
voice. * Anna, for God's sake ! ' 

*< But the louder he s^ake, the lower sank her 
head, once proud and glad, now abased ; she 
now crouched, and was sinking from the sofo, 
where she had been sitting, to the floor, at his 
feet She would have fallen on the carpet had 
he not supported her. *0 my God, forgive 
me ! ' she sobbed, and pressed his hands to her 
breast. 

^*So criminal and so guilty she felt herself 
that the only thing left her was to humiliate her- 
self and to beg forgiveness. But now she had 
no one in life left her but him, and to him she 
turns with prayer for forgiveness. As she gazed 
at him she physically felt her degradation, and 
she could say nothing more. And he on his 
part felt what a murderer must feel when be- 
holding the body he has just deprived of its life. 
This body, deprived by him of its life, was their 
love, the first period of their love. There was 
something horrible and repulsive in the memory 
of that which was purchased at the terrible price 
of shame. The shame of her moral nakedness 
was stifling to her, and this stifling feeling com- 
municated itself also to him. But, in spite of 



/76 Lectures on Russian Literature. 

all the horror before the body of the slain, the 
body must be cut into pieces, must be hidden 
away, and use must be made of what the mur- 
derer had obtained by his murder. 

''And as the murderer with fierceness, almost 
with passion, throws himself upon the body and 
drags it and hacks it, so he too kept covering 
with kisses her face and her shoulders. She 
kept his hand and moved not. Yes, these kisses, 
— this it was which was bought with this her 
shame. * Yes, and this one hand which will al- 
ways be mine is the hand of my — confederate.' 
She raised this hand and kissed it. He dropped 
on his knees and wished to see her face, but she 
hid her &ce and said naught. At last, as if 
making an effort over herself, she rose and 
pushed him away. Her face was indeed as 
handsome as ever, but it was now pitiful all 
the more. 

*' * 'T is all ended,' she said. ' I have nothing 
left but thee. Remember this.' 

"•I cannot help remembering what consti- 
tutes my life. For one minute of this blessed- 
ness . . . ' 

" * Blessedness ! ' she uttered with terror and 
disgust, and her terror communicated itself to 
him. * For God's sake, not a word, not one 
word more 1 ' 

" She quickly rose and turned away from him. 

" * Not another word,' she repeated ; and with 



■J 



Lecture V. 177 

an expression strange to him, with an expres- 
sion of cold despair on her £ace, she parted 
£rom him. She felt that at this moment she 
could not express in words her feeling of shame, 
joy, and terror before this entrance into a new 
life, and she did not wish to speak of it, to lower 
that feeling with inexact words. But even later, 
on the morrow, and on the third day, she not 
only could find no words for expressing the 
whole complexity of these feelings, but she 
could not find even thoughts, in revolving which 
she might clearly define to herself whatever was 
going on in her souL 

'* She said to herself, *■ No, I cannot think this 
out now; later, when I shall be more calm.' 
But this calnmess for her thoughts never came ; 
whenever the thought came to her of what she 
had done, and of what was to become of her, and 
of what she must do, terror came upon her, and 
she drove away these thoughts. 

"< Later, later/ she repeated, 'when I am 
more calm.' 

"But in sleep, when she had no control over 
her thoughts, her situation appeared to her in 
all its ugly nakedness. One dream came to her 
almost nightly. She dreamed that both were 
her husbands, that both were spending upon her 
their caresses. Alexei Alexandrovitsh cried as 
he kissed her hands, and said, < Ah, how good 
this is ! ' And Alexei Vronsky was there, and 
12 



lyS Lectures on Russian Literature. 

he also was her husband. And she wondered 
why all this had hitherto seemed to her impos- 
sible, and explained to them laughingly how 
simple all this was, and that now they were both 
content and happy. But the dream oppressed 
her like an Alp, and she awoke every time in 
terror." 

15. And of such unapproachable art the 
examples in Tolstoy are well-nigh innumer- 
able. There is hardly a single work of Tol- 
stoy in which he does not display that 
marvellous fidelity which has made Mr. 
Howells exclaim: "This is not a picture <rf 
life, but life itself!" And this fidelity Tols- 
toy attains not so much by depicting the 
event itself as by depicting its effect on the 
soul ; just as the silent sight of the wounded 
on the field tells of the battle more loudly 
than the thunder of the cannon. I say this is 
the highest art, because its method is univer- 
sal, where all others are only particular ; for 
men may indeed differ in the language of the 
tongue, but they do not differ in the lan- 
guage of the spirit. 

16. Read in the same light, then, his un- 



Lecture V. lyg 

paralleled gallery of life-scenes in ** Childhood, 
Boyhood, and Youth." Read in the same 
light the death-scene of Count Bezukhoi inC?) 
" War and Peace ; " read the war-scene on 
the bridge, the wounding of Balkonsky ; read 
the skating-scene in '^Anna Karenina," the 
racing-scene, the meeting between Anna and 
her darling Seriozha. My friends, in the 
presence of such art words M me; I can 
only cry to you, " Read, read, and read ! " 
Read humbly, read admiringly. The read- 
ing of Tolstoy in this spirit shall in itself be 
unto you an education of your highest artistic 
sense. And when your souls have become 
able to be thrilled to their very depths by 
the unspeakable beauty of Tolstoy's art, you 
will then learn to be ashamed of thought that 
for years you sensible folk of Boston have 
been capable of allowing, — the Stevensons 
with their Hydes, and the Haggards with 
their Shes, and even the clumsy Wards with 
their ponderous Elsmeres, to steal away un- 
der the flag of literature your thoughtful mo- 
ments. You will then learn to understand 
how it comes to pass that the artistically cold 



i8o Lectures on Russian Literature. 

passionless Mr. Howells even, the apostle of 
heartlessness in art, — however brave and full 
of heart the noble man be in actaal life, — 
can be struck with awe before the mighty 
presence of Tolstoy, and how it is possible 
^that the only words he can whisper is, "I 
cannot say aught ! " The preface of Mr. 
Howells to Tolstoy's " Sebastopol " has been 
declared by wiseacres to be the symptom of 
his decadence. My friends, believe it not 
This admiration of Mr. Howells for Tolstoy 
is verily not the symptom that he is begin- 
ning to fall, but rather that he is just begin- 
ning to rise. 

17. I consider this double-faced presenta- 
tion, this combination of the subjective method 
with the objective, as the highest in art, be- 
cause it is the most comprehensive. Not that 
Tolstoy is incapable of employing the objec- 
tive method alone with the highest success ; 
when he does employ it he is here second to 
none, not even to Turgenef. Witness for 
example the following description of the ar- 
rival of a railway-train ; still, the essence of 
Tolstoy's art is the universality with which 



Lecture V. iSi 

he grasps whatever comes under his creative 
impulse. 

i8. Vronsky, engaged in a conversation, 
suddenly breaks off. " However," says he, 
"here is already the train." 

<' In truth, in the distance was already whis- 
tling the engine. In a few minutes the platform 
began to tremble, and puffing with steam driven 
downward by the frost, in rolled the engine with 
the connecting-rod of its centre wheel slowly 
and rhythmically bending in and stretching out, 
and with its bowing, well-muffled, frost-covered 
engineer. Behind the tender, ever more slowly, 
and shaking the platform still more, the express 
car came with its baggage and a howling dog. 
Lastly, slightly trembling before coming to a 
full stop, came up the passenger coaches. 

" A smartish, brisk conductor, whistling, be- 
fore the train came to a full stop jumped ofiE ; 
and following him began to descend one by one 
the impatient passengers, — an officer of the 
guard with military bearing and frigid gaze, a 
smiling, lively small tradesman with a bag in 
his hand, and a peasant with a sack over his 
shoulder.'* 

19. And from the same union of the mighty 
preacher with the mighty artist springs the 
second great characteristic of Tolstoy's art, 



i82 Lectures on Russian Literature. 

that which in contrast to Turgenef s archi- 
tectural manner I must call Tolstoy*s pano- 
ramic manner. I have spoken in the last 
lecture of Turgenef as the great architect in 
the art of fiction. Tolstoy is the great pano- 
rama painter of fiction. Of architectural regu- 
larity there is little to be found in him, but 
not because he lacks the fine sense of pro- 
portion of Turgenef, and the sense of beauty 
of form, but because his art is of a nature in 
which regularity of progress and rigid outline 
of form are not required. 

20. Tolstoy's masterpieces therefore are 
panoramas, and his art instinctively seeks that 
material which easiest lends itself to such 
purpose. Hence his " Cossaks," hence his 
" Scenes before Sebastopol," hence his 
"Nekhludof." But a panorama needs no 
plot Hence his " Childhood, Boyhood, and 
Youth " contains not even a trace of a plot. 
It is merely a series of pictures, each indeed 
in itself a thing of unspeakable beauty, but 
all grouped in such a manner as to give col- 
lectively a panorama of the entire growth of a 
human soul fi-om the moment it ceases to be 



Lecture V. i8) 

animal until it becomes man. In a panorama 
it matters little where each particular group is 
placed ; just as in Kaulbach's " Era of the 
Reformation" it matters little whether the 
figure of Luther is on the left or on the right 
" War and Peace " is thus like the Battle of 
Gettysburg, a vast panorama, and " Anna 
Karenina" is a vast panorama; the one is 
a panorama of the political life of the State, 
the other is a panorama of the spiritual life of 
the individual. But a panorama requires not 
so much plots as groups ; hence " War and 
Peace" is not one story, but three stories; 
and each is the story not of one person or 
of one pair, but of a group of persons, of a 
group of pairs. And the same necessity we 
see in " Anna Karenina ; " here again Tol- 
stoy's materials are not persons but groups. 
Viewed as a work of architecture, the book 
seems to lack form, the author seems to lack 
the sense of proportion ; for the book could 
be easily split into two different novels, — the 
novel of Levin and Kitty on the one hand, 
and the novel of Vronsky and Anna on the 
other. As works of architecture, neither would 



i84 Lectures on Russian Literature. 

suffer if severed from the other. But as a 
panorama of the unfolding of heaven in the 
soul of Levin, and of hell in the soul of Anna, 
the story of Kitty and Levin cannot be read 
apart from the story of Anna and Vronsky 
and still remain a unit, and still remain 
intelligible. 

31. This &ct of Tolstoy's art being essen- 
tially panoramic and not architectural, ac- 
counts for the vast expanse of his two great 
works, " War and Peace " and " Anna Kare- 
nina." For it is the very nature of a pano- 
rama to be on an extensive scale. The objec- 
tion therefore made to these two masterpieces 
that they are too voluminous would indeed 
be relevant, if they had been conceived as 
works of architecture ; but it is totally irrele- 
vant when applied to a panorama. Which 
form of art is superior, which inferior, — the 
concise, compact, rigid severity of the archi- 
tect's art, or the overflowing, expanding, 
hence unshackled art of the panorama? Me- 
thinks you can best answer this question your- 
selves by asking another. Which is higher 
as a work of art, that tender song without 



Lecture V. i8^ 

words by Mendelssohn, called " Regret," or 
that indescribably affecting capriccio of his 
marked as " Opus 33 " ? Which is higher 
as a work of art, — that in its sadness un- 
paralleled song of Shakespeare, " Blow, blow, 
thou Winter wind," or his " Othello "? Or 
again ; which is a higher work of art, a noc- 
turne by Chopin, or a sonata by Beethoven ; 
an Essay by Macaulay, or a "Decline and 
Fall " by Gibbon ? Lastly, which is higher as a 
work of art, — the wonderfully accurate spirit- 
edness of Schreyer's painting of a horse, or 
the indescribable power of Wagner's Race 
in a Roman Circus? On its plane each of 
the above is indeed of the highest; but that 
the one is on a higher plane than the other 
few can fail to observe. For, execution of 
design being equal, the broader the scene, the 
wider the horizon, the more comprehensive 
the view, the higher must be the art The 
less extended, because more easily compre- 
hended, may indeed at first give more pleas- 
ure than the second ; but if the final arbiter 
in art be the amount of immediate pleasure to 
be got from it, then Bamum's Circus is indeed 



1 86 Lectures on Russian Literature. 

a greater work of art than Emerson's Book, 
and Mark Twain a greater writer than Car- 
lyle. But if creative power be the final meas- 
ure of art, execution in the different planes 
being equal, then Beethoven must rank higher 
than Chopin, Shakespeare higher than Blanco 
White, Wagner than Meyer von Bremen, and 
Tolstoy than Turgenef. 

22. '* Have you seen any of my later writ- 
ings ? " Tolstoy inquired of a visitor who came 
to him as the admirer of " The Cossaks," of 
" War and Peace," of " Anna Karenina." 
The question referred to his religious writ- 
ings, .When he was told no, Tolstoy could 
only exclaim, " Ah, then you do not know me 
at all. We must then become acquainted." 
In his " Confession," he is no less emphatic ; 
there he boldly declares the art of which he 
has been a noble follower for some twenty 
years, — " balovstvo," foolish waste of time. 

23. A most wonderful spectacle is thus 
presented : on the one hand a writer gaining 
Shakespearian renown for works he repudi- 
ates ; on the other, a public reading and ad- 
miring him because of the very art he thus 



Lecture V. i8y 

repudiates. For 't is idle to assert that Tol- 
stoy's religious writings are what draws read- 
ers unto him. Had he published only his 
religious writings, they might have indeed 
been bought, they might have found their 
place on parlor table, they might have even 
occasionally been glanced into ; but read and 
studied and pondered they would not have 
been. For Tolstoy's religious writings, in their 
spirit, are not one whit different from that of 
Tke Book which has indeed been for ages 
lying in the parlors of almost every Christian 
household ; but it is not read, it is not dis- 
cussed, it is not talked about, likp the. latest 
somersaulting performance of some popular 
magazine-scribe. Nay, the surest way to 
make one's self unavailable nowadays at so- 
cial gathering of the parlor sort would be to 
talk therein solemnly of the very book which 
in so many houses forms such indispensable 
part of parlor outfit. Nay, has it not come 
in society to such a pass that the very pres- 
ence of The Book on parlor table is abready 
an evidence that the host is not a member of 
the circle which looks upon itself as the cir- 



1 88 Lectures on Russian Literature. 

cle, — the select, the exclusive, the highest, 
in short? 

24. The public, then, is interested in Tol- 
stoy the artist more than in the preacher, for 
the same reason that when Emerson lands in 
England only a handful of mortals greet him ; 
while when Mr. Sullivan lands in England the 
streets cannot hold the thousands who flock 
to receive him. Tolstoy, on the other hand, 
protests that whosoever looks to him as the 
artist, sees not him, knows not him ; that he 
is aught else now j that mere art, in fact, is to 
him a business no longer worthy of a serious 
soul. The public again, in its ever-confident 
patronizingness, says unto him : " But for thy 
great artistic genius, O Leo, son of Nicolas, 
with thy latest religious antics and somer- 
saultings, we would call thee — a crank. But 
as to a great genius we shall be merciful unto 
thee, and bear with many a confession, many 
a cobbled shoe, if thou givest us only more 
of Olenins, more of Karenins." 

25. Who is here right, who is here wrong, 
— the public with its millions, Tolstoy in his 
loneliness ? 



Lecture V. i8g 

26. That genius should often misunder- 
stand its own strength, and seek it where it 
is weakest, is indeed no new phenomenon in 
its history. Frederick the Great prides him- 
self more on his flute-pla)dng than on his 
kingship ; and it is not so very long ago that 
in our very midst a university professor called 
the happiest day of his life not that on which 
he discovered a new Greek particle, but 
that on which the crew of his university won 
the boat-race. And a mere chance tour on 
a Sunday through our churches would quickly 
show the lamentably frequent misapprehen- 
sion of genius by itself; for many a fine genius 
for the actor's art is spoiled by an imaginary 
call to the pulpit The presumption there- 
fore is indeed against the great Tolstoy in his 
dispute with the great public. Still, I venture 
to side with Tolstoy. I too venture to think 
that Tolstoy's greatest work is found not so 
much in his works of pure art as in his works 
of pure religion; and with God's blessing, 
my friends, I trust you will see it with me in 
the next lecture. 



LECTURE VI. 



TOLSTOY THE PREACHER. 

I. I HAVE Stated in the last lecture that Tol- 
stoy is the preacher, not of the new gospel of 
deatli, but of the old gospel of life. Tolstoy 
is to be revered as one of the greatest teach- 
ers among men, not so much because he has 
proved indisputably that only by love alone 
can men be said truly to live, nor wholly 
because he shows by logic inexorable that man 
can be truly blessed only when he devotes 
his life to the service of his fellow-men. His 
logic may be bad, his proof may be faulty. 
To be skilled in the art of fighting with words 
is no more essential to a noble soul than to 
be skilled in the art of fighting with fists. 
Both can indeed knock down an opponent ; 
but knocking down is not the business of life, 



Lecture VL igi 

but raising up. And Tolstoy is to be revered 
among teachers because he first of all raises 
up; because he preaches what those who 
have raised men up have for ages preached ; 
because he preaches what Christ has preached^ 
what Emerson has preached, what Carlyle has 
preached, what Ruskin is still preaching, and 
what will ever continue to be preached as 
long as there is a God in heaven, and a hu- 
man soul on earth yearning for the possession 
of that God. " Socialism, Communism ! " men 
bellow to Tolstoy, and think to confound him 
with the hateful name. " Would you have us 
give up," they say, "the fruit of civilization 
and progress, and return to the primitive life 
of the days of yore?" But read Emerson's 
" Miscellanies," Carlyle's " Past and Present," 
Ruskin's " Fors Clavigera," and see for your- 
selves whether Tolstoy preaches aught differ- 
ent fi-om these. And if this be communism, 
if this be socialism, then welcome commun- 
ism, welcome socialism, because ever wel- 
come brotherhood. 

2. Tolstoy is indeed a Russian of the Rus- 
sians, but he is a man before he is a Russian ; 



ig2 Lectures on Russian Literature. 

the greatest of Russians, he is more than a 
Russian, just as Socrates, the greatest of the 
Greeks, was more than a Greek ; just as Christ, 
the greatest of Hebrews, was more than a 
Hebrew. Socrates was sent not for Greece 
alone, but for us likewise ; Jesus was sent not 
for the Jews alone, but for us likewise ; and 
so Tolstoy is sent not to the Russians alone, 
but to us likewise. 

3. Tolstoy, then, came to deliver a mes- 
sage ; but the message of messages has already 
been delivered well-nigh nineteen hundred 
years ago. Not one word is there, indeed, to 
be added to the law laid down in the Sermon 
on the Mount ; and were men to live out the 
gospel of Christ, there would be no need 
of new messengers, the kingdom of heaven 
would then be veritably established, and the 
Master would once more dwell with men as 
he hath foretold. But Christianity, alas ! has 
been on trial for well-nigh nineteen hundred 
years, while the religion of Christ still re- 
mains to be tried. There is therefore ever 
need of new apostles to preach the kingdom 
of heaven, the gospel of Christ ; and it is 



Lecture VL ig^ 

Tolstoy's distinction that he came to preach 
not the new gospel of the nineteenth century, 
but the old gospel of the first century. For 
God sees to it that the way to blessedness 
for men be ever open ; that the kingdom of 
heaven be ever within their reach, if they 
but choose to enter it, if they but choose 
not to give themselves over to the Powers 
of Darkness. 

4. I have affirmed in my last lecture, with 
what articulateness of voice the great God 
hath seen fit to endow me, that there is a 
God in heaven who is the Good. And it 
now, alas ! becomes my duty to affirm like- 
wise that beside the great God the Good in 
heaven, there is also the great Devil the Evil 
on earth; that beside the great Prince of 
Light there is also the great Prince of Dark- 
ness. And he ruleth neither over the heav- 
ens nor over the earth, but he ruleth solely 
over man. And he graspeth with the greedy, 
and he splitteth hairs with the lawyers ; and 
he is flirting with scientific charities, and is 
fortune-hunting with land-grabbers; and he 
discourseth with politicians, and he pufTeth 



!g4 Lectures on Russian Literature. 

up with men of science ; and he balances 
himself on ropes with theologians ; and he 
preacheth from pulpits through mouths that 
have Christ only on their tongues; and he 
prayeth through lips that know God only 
through hymns; and he danceth at balls, 
and he sparkleth through diamonds ; and he 
shineth through gold, and he foameth through 
wme; and he chatteth insincerely at re- 
ceptions, and he iigureth in society-columns 
of the public prints ; and he shrieketh 
through steam-whistles, and he rusheth sixty 
miles an hour, and he edits sensational maga- 
zines, and he dwelleth with the hating ; and 
he is ever after victims, — he, the Prince of 
Darkness. 

5. And the servants of the Prince of 
Light are few ; and the servants of the Prince 
of Darkness are many. Yet the Lord God is 
ever nigh ; and he ever sendeth his messen- 
gers to call together his wandering, his erring 
flock. Tolstoy is a messenger sent out to 
gather together the erring flock back to the 
fold of Christ 

6. Tolstoy, then, is a teacher of men. 



Lecture ^7. 795 

Observe, however, this fundamental differ- 
ence between Tolstoy and the other great 
teachers. To Socrates, the great enemy of 
mankind was ignorance ; to him, therefore, to 
know virtue is to be virtuous, and the central 
idea of his teaching is — knowledge. The seat 
of the soul with Socrates, therefore, is not so 
much in the heart as in the head. To Epic- 
tetus, the great enemy of mankind is pas- 
sion, and the central idea of his teaching is 
self-control ; to Epictetus, then, the seat of the 
soul is not so much in the head as in the wiU. 
To Emerson, the great enemy of mankind is 
authority, and the central idea of his teaching, 
therefore, is self-reliance ; to Emerson, then, 
the seat of the soul is not so much in man's wiU 
as in man's pride. To Carlyle, the great ene- 
my of mankind is consciousness of self, and 
the central idea of his teaching is unconscious- 
ness of self, the forgetting, the drowning of 
self in work. To Carlyle, therefore, the seat 
of the soul is not so much in man's pride as 
in his hands. Tolstoy has no such central 
idea of his own. His central idea is tliat of 
his Master, Jesus, which is love. To Jesus, the 



196 Lectures on Russian Literature. 

great enemy of man was hatred, and the seat 
of the soul to him was neither in the head, 
nor in the will, nor in the pride, nor in the 
hands. To Jesus, the seat of the soul was 
solely in the heart And Tolstoy proclaims 
above all the doctrine of Jesus, not be- 
cause he thinketh lightly of ignorance, not 
because he thinketh lightly of passion, not 
because he thinketh lightly of authority, 
not because he thinketh lightly of self- 
consciousness, but because he believes that 
Love conquereth all the children of Dark- 
ness. Hence the burden of his message 
is the ever-recurring. Brethren, follow Christ I 
Follow Christ with your heads, and your 
metaphysics will take care of themselves; 
follow Christ with your will, and your pas- 
sions will take care of themselves; follow 
Christ with your hopes, and your self-respect 
will take care of itself; lastly, follow Christ 
with your hands, and your work will take care 
of itself. Tolstoy's book is therefore only 
the fifth gospel of Christ, and Tolstoy him- 
self is therefore only the thirteenth apostle of 
Jesus. 



Lecture VI tgy 

7. I must emphasize this fact, my friends, 
because church-societies are still discussing 
the propriety of admitting his book into their 
libraries ; I must emphasize this fact, because 
hitherto not one preacher of the gospel of 
Christ has yet ventured to utter one word of 
greeting, one word of fellowship, to Tolstoy. 
I must emphasize this fact, because Tolstoy 
having forsaken art and having betaken 
himself to the cobbling of shoes, the wise 
world, that ever knoweth the duty of an- 
other better than he doth himself, is forth- 
with at hand with its estimate, its disapproval, 
its condemnation. Turgenef therefore gently 
remonstrates with his fellow-craftsman for his 
new departure, and beseeches him to return 
to the forsaken higher field, — to the art of 
amusing folk abready over-amused. The Rev. 
Mr. Savage, the only servant of God in 
the pulpits of this great God-fearing city 
who has even dared to make Tolstoy the sub- 
ject of a Sunday discourse, respects indeed 
his character, but boldly declares the man 
Tolstoy and his Master Jesus of Nazareth to 
have been teaching imfwacticable teachings ; 



ig8 Lectures on Russian Literature. 

impracticable^ indeed, in an age when bank- 
stock and a grandfather, and foam and froth, 
and social fireworks are the only acceptable 
signs of strength. Mr. Savage, however, fol- 
lows at least Pope's direction, and damns 
with faint praise, while that wee, tiny mani- 
kin from that State of Indiana does not even 
think this necessary, and therefore, standing 
on tiptoe, screeches at the top of his voicelet 
to Tolstoy, " Crank, crank ! " 

8. But what if in God's eyes there be no 
higher work, nor lower work, but merely work ? 
What if in God's eyes there be no higher duty, 
nor lower duty, but merely duty? If it be 
necessary to chop wood, and sifl ashes, and 
mend shoes, wherefore should this be a lower 
occupation than to thump on the piano, and 
read poetry, and write books, and even lis- 
ten unto lectures? But the artist is held in 
higher esteem than the house-drudge ! What, 
then ! shalt thou make the esteem of thy fel- 
lows, which is as changeable as the wind, thy 
motive for doing, rather than the esteem of 
thyself, thy conscience, thy God? To do all 
we ought, be it never so humble, this is doing 



Lecture VI. 199 

the highest work, God's work. But chopping 
wood and mending shoes brings no recogni- 
tion, no esteem, no applause in gorgeously- 
lighted parlors, as does the reading and the 
singing and the writing for select audiences. 
What, shalt thou do thy duty for the sake of 
the reward, the mess of pottage it brings, O 
wretch? 

9. Crank, indeed ! My friends, was there 
ever a time when the great souls on whom 
we must feed, if we are to live at all, were 
proclaimed aught else but cranks and nui- 
sances? The children of Darkness are ever 
abroad, and the messengers of Light are 
never welcome unto them. Such a nuisance 
was the noblest of the Greeks to his country- 
men, that they could not wait for his peace- 
ful departure, even though he was already on 
the brink of the grave ; and the old man of 
seventy had to drink the poison to rid his 
fellow-citizens of the burden of his presence. 
Of the two noblest sons of Boston, which it 
has yet produced in all the two hundred and 
fifty years of its existence, one was dragged 
through its streets with a rope round his neck, 



200 Lectures on Russian Literature. 

not by a mob of unkempt anarchists, but by 
a mob of well-shaven, broadcloth-clad citi- 
zens, — by the ancestors, perhaps, of the very 
men who now can watch the statue of that 
same Garrison from their plate-glass windows 
on Commonwealth Avenue. And the other 
was shunned as an ill-balanced intellect, and 
abused by those who look upon themselves 
as the best of his townsmen, so that a monu- 
ment to Wendell Phillips cannot even be 
thought of at this late day. England's no- 
blest living voice, the voice of John Ruskin, 
is at this very moment engaged in cr3dng unto 
his countrymen, "Good my friends, if ye keep 
on howling at me as ye have done, I shall in- 
deed become insane ; but I assure ye, up to 
this hour, maugre your vociferous clamor- 
ing, I am still in possession of my senses, 
thank God 1 " And of America's greatest in- 
spirer, while his gentle spirit was still walking 
on earth, Jeremiah Mason, the clear-headed 
man, the far-seeing judge, the practical states- 
man, could only utter the joke, '/don't read 
Emerson ; my gals do ! ' And, O ye good 
people, tell me, I pray ye, what reception 



Lecture VI. 201 

would Christ himself be likely to receive at 
the hands of your swallow-tailed butlers, were 
he to appear at your doors without silver- 
headed cane, without Parisian kid gloves, with- 
out engraved pasteboard announcing him to be 
the Scion of his Majesty King David ? Would 
not a mere glance at his bare feet, his flowing 
garment, and his untrimmed hair be sufficient 
to convince Mr. Butler that for such folk the 
lady of the house is never at home, or if at 
home, is just about to dress for dinner or to 
go out for a drive, and therefore begs to be 
excused ? Yes, my friends, of the greatest, 
of the noblest souls, it has ever been the lot 
to be scorned, since their message of light is 
ever unwelcome to the children of darkness ; 
and if against their characters not a word can 
be said, recourse must be had to the abuse at 
least of their intellects ; and Christ and Tol- 
stoy are declared to be weak intellects ! This 
is the meaning of the cry raised against Tol- 
stoy as unbalanced, in this latest change of 
his life from riches unto poverty. 

10. Tolstoy, then, is nothing but a preacher 
of Christ; and the first articulate utterance 



202 Lectures on Russian Literature. 

in his message is therefore that of boundless 
faith in the practicability of living according 
to Christ ; that of insistence upon the literal 
following of the words of Christ as ^practi- 
cal guide of life. 

II. And out of this emphasis of the supre- 
macy of Love comes the second articulate 
utterance in the message of Tolstoy, which is 
the supremacy of heart over head as a meta- 
physical guide of life. For God ever reveal- 
eth himself unto men, but he speaketh unto 
them not through their cold intellects, but 
through their warm hearts ; not through logic, 
but through love. The reasoner searches 
God without man and finds him not; the 
lover finds God within man in his heart, and 
hath no need of searching him. Hence the 
following significant utterance of Tolstoy in 
his *' Confession." In his search for the an- 
swer to the ever-recurring question, " Where- 
fore shall I live ? " he at last goes abroad to 
find light : — 

** My life abroad, and the intercourse with 
Europe's most advanced scholars, still more 
confirmed my faith in perfection as such ; for 



Lecture VL 2oj 

the same faith I now found in them likewise. 
In me this faith took the same form which it 
takes in most of the educated men of our time. 
Its watchword was — progress. Then I thought 
that this word meant something. Its utter 
meaninglessness I then could not yet under- 
stand. Here I was tormented, like every living 
soul, with the question, ' How can I better my 
life ? ' and I answer, * Live in accordance with 
progress.' But this is exactly the answer of a 
man borne along by wind and tide in a boat. 
He puts the to him all-important question, 
* What direction must I steer for my safety ? * 
and he receives in answer, * Oh, we are borne 
along somewhither 1 * 

** All this I did not perceive at the time. Only 
rarely not my reason but my feeling rebelled 
against this universal superstition with which 
men shield themselves against their ^ilure to 
comprehend the meaning of life. Thus while in 
Paris the sight of capital punishment revealed 
to me all the ghastliness of this superstition of 
progress. When I beheld how the head was 
severed from the body, and how the one and the 
other each in turn thumped in the box, I un- 
derstood not with my reason, but with my whole 
soul, that no theory of progress, no theory of 
the reasonableness of our present mode of liv- 
ing, could justify this one deed ; that even if all 
men ever since creation, on whatever theory. 



204 Lectures on Russian Literature. 

had found that this must be, I know that this 
need not be ; that this is evil ; that the judge of 
all this, what is good and needful, is not what 
men say and do, is not the theory of progress, 
but I with my heart." 

12. Trust ye, therefore, your heart ere you 
trust your logic. Whatever the heart dictates 
must be from God, logic or no logic ; what- 
ever the heart rebels against must be from 
the Devil, reason or no reason. Time never 
yet was when the Devil lacked reasons ; and 
if he can find reasons nowhere else, he at last 
finds them in science and in Scripture. Next 
to the slaveholders themselves, the last to for- 
sake the sinking ship of slavery, were the 
preachers of the gospel of the brotherhood 
of man, who argued finely from Scripture 
twisted for the purpose, that the great God 
having made Mr. Preacher white and Mr. 
Negro black, had therefore intended that 
black shall be the minion of white. Time 
never was when reason and logic most in- 
exorable could not find excuse most suffi- 
cient for the shedding of blood of brother 
by brother, for the burning of village and 



Lecture VI. 20^ 

town, for the erecting of luxurious palace 
within stone's-throw of the homeless. Time 
never was when logic could not show the fine 
propriety, nay, the utmost necessity, for com- 
petition and struggle for existence; when 
men, who might create a paradise of this 
green earth of ours, if they but chose to help 
one another, transform themselves into pigs, 
jostling and pushing one another at the trough, 
and grunting with satisfaction abundant at 
having driven the weaker piglet off into star- 
vation, — all of which is our modem, neces- 
sary competition in business; and this is 
logical, reasonable, scientific struggle for ex- 
istence ! 

13. No, no, my friends, let logic cry never 
so loudly at the necessity of struggle for ex- 
istence, and competition for bread between 
men, when the great God hath provided 
enough for a hundredfold of the present 
number of men if they but chose to help 
one another. The heart saith it is wrong; 
and whatever logic makes it out to be right 
is accursed, is from the Devil ; and it is for ye, 
if ye are to become the children of the Prince 



2o6 Lectures on Russian Literature. 

of Light, and not the children of the Prince 
of Darkness, to have none of such logic, and 
trust the God within you, who dwelleth not 
in your heads, but in your hearts. 

14. And once more, out of this fundamen- 
tal idea of the supremacy of love and the 
brotherhood of all men, — of all men, ob- 
serve, — follows the insistence of Tolstoy upon 
the words of Christ, — "Give to him that 
asketh." For it is not for man to judge his 
neighbor, but for God. To Tolstoy, therefore, 
all men are his brothers, the unworthy as 
well as the worthy ; or rather, he never asks 
whether they be worthy. To him therefore 
the law of Christ stands not for utility, nor for 
fear of consequence, but for mercy and trust 
in God. Hence Tolstoy would never fear to 
help from what are branded as sentimental 
motives. And the third articulate utterance 
in the message of Tolstoy is therefore the 
supremacy in charity of the sentiment which 
comes from God over the logic which comes 
from the Devil. 

15. Relief given from sentimental motives 
(frx)m mere love of helping for its own 



Lecture VL 207 

sake) only keeps the pauper population 
alive, we are told by our scientific charities. 
Heinous, indeed, is the awful crime of keep- 
ing pauper population alive ; and heinous, in- 
deed, is the crime of having any sentiment of 
heart in an age of progress of species and 
self-respecting supply and demand. Then 
the great God who sendeth his sunshine 
and his rain upon members of Associated 
Charities as well as upon members of Dis- 
sociated Charities, upon the worthy as well 
as upon the unworthy, upon the properly 
introduced as well as upon the improperly 
introduced, — then his beneficence is verily 
sentimental. Yes, my friends, the great God 
is the great sentimentalist, for he blesseth 
men and bestoweth his mercy upon them 
not because they are deserving, but because 
he loveth to be merciful. When the flower 
buddeth forth in the spring with matchless 
beauty, no label is tacked on to its stem with 
ominous reminder : " Not to be gazed at by 
the eyes of the unworthy. All worthy per- 
sons, of good moral character, can obtain 
tickets by applying to Archangel Michael" 



2o8 Lectures on Russian Literature. 

When under His eternal laws the cooling 
spring babbleth forth merrily from the cave, 
whispering to the weary, heated wanderer, 
"Come thou hither, and be refreshed/' no 
sign-board is placed at its entrance : " Be- 
ware ! this spring is only for the worthy ; mem- 
bers of the pauper population are warned, 
under penalty of law, not to trespass on these 
premises." Verily, I say unto ye, the Lord 
God is the sentimentalist of sentimentalists ! 

1 6. And the Son of God, like unto his 
Father, was also a sentimentalist When the 
sinner came unto him in her distress, he did 
not inquire for her letters of introduction ; he 
did not inquire whether she was indorsed in 
most acceptable society-fashion by the lead- 
ing ministers of the town. He did not lift 
the skirts of his garments in scorn of the per- 
son unworthy of his company ; he gave no 
orders to his butlers that when Madame Sin- 
ner calls next he is not at home for her. Nay, 
Christ did not even send down to the Central 
Office of the Associated Charities to look up 
poor sinner's record. Without much parley 
he stretched forth his holy hand, gave it to 



Lecture VI. 209 

his pauper sister, and with a voice of love 
spake, " Go thy ways in peace, thou art for- 
given ! " Verily, I say unto you, Christ was 
a sentimentalist of sentimentalists. 

17. And the father of the prodigal son was 
only increasing pauperism when he received 
the unworthy youth with open arms ; he had 
set a premium (in the words of our scientific 
charities) upon other sons becoming likewise 
prodigal 

18. And so is a sentimentalist every noble 
soul that believeth in God's wisdom more 
than in man's wisdom; that believeth more 
in the power of trust than in the power of 
fear; more in mercy than in calculation; 
more in charity than in justice; more in 
love than in political economy; more in 
Christ than in Octavia Hill; more in the 
Gospels than in Parliamentary Poor Reports. 
By their fruits ye shall judge them. If the 
fear of pauperism result in excusing that 
vilest of sins, the withholding of help by 
one brother from another, then away with sci- 
entific charity and its talked-of diminution of 
pauperism ; and if the lending of a helping 

14 



2to Lectures on Russian Literature. 

hand even to the unworthy be the result of 
aentinientalism, then welcome sentimentalism^ 
Uesied be sentimentalism ! 

19. The obedience to the commands of 
Christ has thus furnished Tolstoy with a basis 
for existence which he had hitherto sought in 
vain from science and metaphysics ; the obe- 
dience to the commands of Christ has thus 
furnished Tolstoy a solution of social prob- 
lems which he had hitherto sought in vain in 
ethics and sociology ; and lasdy, obedience to 
the commands of Christ has furnished Tol- 
stoy a solution of financial problems found 
neither in political economy nor in statistics. 
And the fourth articulate utterance in the 
message of Tolstoy is his merciless distinc- 
tion between the money of the poor, which 
they have earned by their toil, and the money 
of the rich, which they have forfeited by their 
idleness. 

20. Tolstoy is thus the preacher, the cause 
of a change in the hearts of men ; but while he 
is thus a cause unto others, he' himself is like- 
wise an effect of the change which has begun 
to take place in the hearts of men. The pos- 



Lecture VU 211 

sibility of a Tolstoy in the nineteenth centiuy 
is the most hopeful sign of the times with re- 
gard to the social brotherhood of men. In 
theology, the feeling of the equality of men 
before God has so permeated the minds of 
men, that the claim of superiority which for- 
merly each made over the other, though still 
tacitiy implied, is now no longer upheld by 
sober thinking folk ; in politics, too, equality 
of men before the law has at last become ac- 
knowledged, if not always in practice, at least 
in theory. And if monarchies and aristoc- 
racies still do exist, it is not because all con- 
cerned in the decision have deliberately de- 
cided for them, but because it is safer to 
endure irrational institutions that are old, than 
to undertake the sudden establishment of ra- 
tional institutions that are new. Only in the 
social field the feeling of the equality of men 
has not yet permeated them enough to rouse 
their souls against the present division of so- 
ciety into industrial lords on the one hand, 
and industrial slaves on the other. That 
two men bom on the same day, at the same 
hour, in the same nakedness, one in a palace 



2i2 Lectures on Russian Literature. 

without his merit, the other in a hovel with- 
out his fault, should each pass his lifetime, 
the one in luxury and idleness, the other in 
want and toil, is still looked upon by thinking 
men, by feeling men, as something that must 
be, as something that should be, since Provi- 
dence evidently meant men to be thus divided. 
The idle thus go on enjoying their unearned 
idleness ; the toiling thus go on enduring their 
unearned hardship, and all is quiet. 

21. Quiet? Alas! no. Burglars, robbers, 
tramps, beggars, forgers, defaulters in abun- 
dance, jails, prisons, reform-houses, stand out 
palatially amid lawns and green woods and 
winding rivers. The silent darkness is oc- 
casionally lighted up by the lurid torch of the 
incendiary, and now and then we are treated 
to spectacular fireworks with powder and 
dynamite and bomb. 

22. Of course men have preached reform 
ever since God had resolved that however 
men may refuse to do his will, they shall at 
least not fail to hear his voice as uttered by 
his messengers. But though political freedom 
had been preached by every thinking soul 



Lecture VI. 21 } 

from Plato to Rousseau, it required an Ameri- 
can and a French Revolution to open a path 
for the entrance of their ideas into practical life. 
Religious freedom, too, had been preached 
from the mouth of every soul that had the 
genuine love for its kind in its heart From 
Christ to Emerson in our world, to say naught 
of the heathen world, the burden of the song 
of all saints has been, " Love your neighbor 
as ye love yourselves." Your neighbor, ob- 
serve I Not your Baptist neighbor, nor your 
Methodist neighbor, nor even your infidel 
neighbor, but your neighbor. Plain as this 
teaching is, it still required Inquisitions, Bar- 
tholomew nights, and Thirty-Year- Wars, to 
establish not even religious brotherhood, but 
only religious toleration. 

23. Social brotherhood, too, has been 
preached for ages, beginning with John the 
Baptist, who in answer to the question, What 
are we to do ? can only say, ** Whosoever hath 
two coats, let him give one to him that hath 
none," and ending with John Ruskin, who, 
smarting under the unequal distribution of 
wealth, founds his Company of St. George. 



214 Lectures on Russian Literature. 

Preached then social brotherhood has been, 
as all else has been preached ; but acted out, 
even under the guise of hypocrisy, it has not 
yet been. Will this change of heart likewise 
have to be brought about by blood and 
slaughter? 

24. Tolstoy, in the feeble way of a single 
man, but in the mighty way of a single soul, 
giveth unmistakable answer to this question. 
We must begin the revolution, says he, not 
witliout us, with others, but within us, with 
ourselves ; not by force of arms, but by force 
of love. Of what use are alms handed out 
with one hand, when with the other we up- 
hold idleness which is the creator of the need 
of alms? Let each one work, he says, as 
much as he can, and if he produce more 
than his own needs, there will ever be enough 
of the unfortunate and the ailing who can- 
not produce enough for their own needs. 
Not leisure, then, idleness, is the haven to 
be steered for, but work; and work, too, 
not such as shall pander to the wants of the 
lazy, but to the wants of the industrious, — 
work, in short, which shall enable others to 



Lecture Vl. 21^ 

enjoy that labor of the body and that rest 
of the soul which alone in their union make 
the perfect life. 

25. In his Introduction to " My Religion," 
Tolstoy says that he has at last tasted that 
joy and happiness which even death could 
not take away. He has thus attained true 
blessedness, that heavenly peace which falls 
to the lot of all souls from whom love of self 
and pride of intellect have forever fled. But 
such heaven can be attained by human soul 
only through struggle, — struggle often for life 
and death with sin, with doubt, with faithless- 
ness, with despair. For the fable of Sisyphus 
is not mere fable; this ever rolling back of 
the stone to the hill-top for the tenth, for the 
hundredth, for the thousandth time, is only 
the history of the soul on its journey heaven- 
ward ; the gold, ere it be freed from the dross, 
must be scorched, burnt, melted, dissolved ; 
and the soul, to be made pure in its turn, 
must be likewise burnt, melted, fused. Think 
not, therefore, that Shakespeare, ere he wrote 
** To be or not to be," had been perching on 



21 6 Lectures on Russian Literature. 

the tree and warbling right gladly all his days. 
His sorrow is not indeed found in his plays, 
but surely it was found in his life. Think not, 
therefore, that the sportive, merry, joking Soc- 
rates was gay through all the seventy years of 
his life. Not from a gay heart came those 
words spoken at the end of his days, " We ap- 
proach truth only in so far as we are removed 
from life." And lastly, my friends, not from 
a gay heart flowed that gentle spirit, that 
boundless love, of the possessor of whom 
not once, in all the four Gospels, is recorded 
the fact that he ever laughed ! Verily, only 
through sorrow can be reached the haven of 
the soul, that union with God which is free from 
pride of intellect and love of self. And so 
Tolstoy's life too, ere he attained that heavenly 
peace, was filled with sorrow immeasurable, 
sorrow unspeakable. For fifteen years of his 
life the thought of suicide was not out of his 
mind for a day ; he upon whom Fortune had 
lavished every gift which in the opinion of 
the world can alone make man happy, he 
who had riches, fame, fiiends, position, ad- 
miration, appreciation, — this man Tolstoy has 



Lecture VI. 217 

for years to hide his gun lest he shoot himself, 
and his towel lest he hang himself. Where- 
fore, then, such misery? Because, my friends, 
he was natively endowed with a heaven-aspir- 
ing soul, between which and the doctrine of 
the world there can be no peace. One 
must perish, or the other, — either the doc- 
trine of the world, or his soul. His soul, 
indeed, was destined not to perish \ but the 
devil in man dies hard, and for fifty years 
the doctrine of the world held in him the 
upper hand. 

26. Hence though the essence of Tolstoy 
is the preacher, he was during these fifty 
years never the preacher alone ; but this very 
struggle in his soul between the powers of 
Light on the one hand and the powers of 
Darkness on the other is also the reason why 
he never remained the artist alone. Like the 
thread of Theseus in the labyrinth of Minos, 
the preacher's vein is seldom, if ever, absent 
from Tolstoy. Hence his " Morning of a 
Proprietor," written in 1852, at the age of 
twenty-four, is as faithful an account of his 
experience as a visitor among the poor as 



2i8 Lectures on Russian Literature. 

his *' Census of Moscow," written twenty-five 
years later ; hence his " Lutzen," written 
when he was yet under thirty, is as power- 
ful a plea for the beggar as his "What to 
Do," written at the end of his career. The 
final detaching of the preacher from the artist 
is not therefore a sudden resolve, but the out- 
come of the life-long struggle of his spirit. 
The detaching of the preacher from the artist 
took place therefore in Tolstoy as the detach- 
ing of the nourishing kernel takes place from 
the castaway shell. When he found his haven 
and saw that the only meaning of life can be 
found solely in love of man, and in living and 
in toiling for him, when the doctrine of the 
world, in short, was defeated by the soul, then 
the severance of the preacher from the artist 
becomes complete, the shell is burst, and in 
all its native nourishingness there at last lies 
before us what is eternal of Tolstoy, — the 
writings, not of the artist Tolstoy, but the 
writings of the preacher Tolstoy. 

27. My hearers, my friends, I have now 
spoken unto ye for well-nigh six hours. From 



Lecture VL 21 g 

the manner in which you have listened unto 
me, I judge that ye have been entertained, per- 
haps even instructed. And yet I should feel 
that I have spoken unto ye to but little pur- 
pose, if my words have merely entertained, 
merely instructed you ; for mere entertain- 
ment you can find already in abundance else- 
where, — in the circus, in the play-house, in 
the concert-room, in the magazine, in the wit 
of the diner-out, and not unto me is it given 
to compete with these. And mere instruction 
likewise you can find already in abundance 
elsewhere, — in the cyclopaedias, in the uni- 
versities, in the libraries, in the Browning- 
reader; and neither is it given wholly unto 
me to compete with these. Not, therefore, 
to amuse, not even wholly to instruct ye, have 
I come before ye these successive evenings, 
and asked you to lend me your ear. But 
I had hoped that on parting from me, as 
you will this evening, perhaps for aye, you 
might perhaps carry away with ye also that 
earnestness of purpose, the absence of which 
made so barren the muse of Pushkin; that 
sympathy for a soul struggling upward, the 



220 Lectures on Russian Literature. 

want of which made so cheerless the life of 
Gogol ; that faith in God, the lack of which 
made so incomplete the life of Turgenef ; 
and lastly, that faith in the commands of 
Christ, the living out of which makes so in- 
spiring the life of Tolstoy. 

28. Would to God, my friends, ye might 
carry away with ye all these things besides 
the entertainment, besides even the instruc- 
tion you may have found here. In the 
days of old the great God was ready to savjt 
from perdition a whole city of sinners if onlf 
ten righteous men could be found within its 
walls; and so shall I feel amply repaid {qk 
my toil, if of the large number who have lis- 
tened unto me at least ten leave me with the 
feeling that they have got from my words 
something more than mere entertainment^ 
something more than mere instruction. 



THE END. 



3 



v^ 



f 



■ r "H 



H 3 2044 055 016 22 



is book should t 

■ r ti 



The borrower must return this item on or before 
the last date stamped below. If another user 
places a recall for this item, the borrower will 
be notified of the need for an earlier return. 

Non-receipt of overdue notices does not exempt 

the borrower from overdue fines. 



Harvard College Widener Library 
Cambridge, MA 02138 617-495-2413 



IAN ?\f -V)2 



Please h^ 



^WVi tare. 



t 



