Google 



This is a digital copy of a book that was preserved for generations on library shelves before it was carefully scanned by Google as part of a project 

to make the world's books discoverable online. 

It has survived long enough for the copyright to expire and the book to enter the public domain. A public domain book is one that was never subject 

to copyright or whose legal copyright term has expired. Whether a book is in the public domain may vary country to country. Public domain books 

are our gateways to the past, representing a wealth of history, culture and knowledge that's often difficult to discover. 

Marks, notations and other maiginalia present in the original volume will appear in this file - a reminder of this book's long journey from the 

publisher to a library and finally to you. 

Usage guidelines 

Google is proud to partner with libraries to digitize public domain materials and make them widely accessible. Public domain books belong to the 
public and we are merely their custodians. Nevertheless, this work is expensive, so in order to keep providing tliis resource, we liave taken steps to 
prevent abuse by commercial parties, including placing technical restrictions on automated querying. 
We also ask that you: 

+ Make non-commercial use of the files We designed Google Book Search for use by individuals, and we request that you use these files for 
personal, non-commercial purposes. 

+ Refrain fivm automated querying Do not send automated queries of any sort to Google's system: If you are conducting research on machine 
translation, optical character recognition or other areas where access to a large amount of text is helpful, please contact us. We encourage the 
use of public domain materials for these purposes and may be able to help. 

+ Maintain attributionThe Google "watermark" you see on each file is essential for in forming people about this project and helping them find 
additional materials through Google Book Search. Please do not remove it. 

+ Keep it legal Whatever your use, remember that you are responsible for ensuring that what you are doing is legal. Do not assume that just 
because we believe a book is in the public domain for users in the United States, that the work is also in the public domain for users in other 
countries. Whether a book is still in copyright varies from country to country, and we can't offer guidance on whether any specific use of 
any specific book is allowed. Please do not assume that a book's appearance in Google Book Search means it can be used in any manner 
anywhere in the world. Copyright infringement liabili^ can be quite severe. 

About Google Book Search 

Google's mission is to organize the world's information and to make it universally accessible and useful. Google Book Search helps readers 
discover the world's books while helping authors and publishers reach new audiences. You can search through the full text of this book on the web 

at |http: //books .google .com/I 



Il 




f 






\ • ■"■■ 

I 

( ' 

LABOR: 



THE DIVINE COMMAND. 



MADE KNOWN, AUGMENTED AND EDITED 



H\ho\a«^^'"^ ^"""^ 



BY 

COUNT LYOF TOLSTOI. 

AUTHOR OP " THB KRBUTZBR~SONATA.^^ 






TRANSLATED BY 

MARY CRUGER 



INTERDICTED BY THE CZAR OF RUSSIA. 



NEW YORK: 

THE POLLARD PUBLISHING COMPANY, 

X3 BARCLAY STREET. 

1890. 



Tt53 



Copyright, xSgo, 

ВТ 

ТНВ POLLARD.fSX9$SHING COMPANY. 
? • • • - 



• • • 



%^0г : The Divine CpmmamL 









V 






TABLE OF CONTENTS. 

PAGE 

Introduction, by the French translator, 5 

Of What Labor Consists, 5 

The peasant Bondareff Inspired the Social Theories of Toi- 
^чс;>^ stol. — The Two Laws of Humanity: that of Manual 

Labor for Men, that of Motherhood for Women. — 
Tolstof s Review of Bondareff.— The Bible and the 

>»> Gospel, 13 

^ How the Theory of Manual Labor should be Interpreted. — 

^ The Working of the Land, a Remedy for Social Evils. 

— Extent and Consequences of this Theory, . . . . 17 
The Book of Bondareff. —Remarks on its Translation, . . 18 

LABOR, BY LYOF TOLSTOI AND TIMOTHY 

BONDAREFF. 

First Part. 
Labor and Bondareff's Theory, by Count Lyof Tolstoi, . 19 

Second Part. 

Labor, According to the Bible, by the peasant Bondareff. 42 
I. Introduction. — Life of Bondareff. — Object of His 

Work, 42 

II. Labor According to the Bible, 46 

Appendices. 

Love and Labor, 134 

Bondareff's Will, 157 



( 

4 

t 

i 



INTRODUCTION. 



Of what Lador consists : 

The peasant Bondareff inspired the social 
theories of Tolstoï, — the two laws of humanity, 
that of manual labor for men, that of mother- 
hood for women. 

Tolstoi's review of Bondareff. 

The Bible and the Gospel. % 

How the theory of manual labor should be in- 
terpreted. The working of the land : a remedy 
for social evils. Extent and consequences of 
this theory. 

The book of Bondareff. Remarks on its 
translation. 

Labor is the work of Count Lyof Tolstoï and 
of the peasant Timothy Bondareff. But it is 
not, properly speaking, a collaboration. The 
book is in fact composed of two different 
studies, which are as two parts of one book: 
one by Lyof Tolstoï, entitled The Work and Theory 
of Bondareffy which serves as introduction to the 

5 






6 Labor, 

other, which is by Bondareff, and is entitled 
Labor, by the peasant Bondareff, i 

Labor is composed of three principal chapters, 
which we have entitled : 

I. Introduction. Life of Bondareff. Object 
of his work. 

II. Labor according to the Bible. 

III. Appendices. Love and Labor. Bonda- 
reff's Will. 

Bondareff is a peasant of the district of 
Manoussinsk. He belongs to that class, so 
numerous in Russia, which seeks for truth in 
holy books. But while many know only the 
Gospels, Bondareff, who belongs to the sect of 
SabbatistSy read the whole Bible. Scarcely able 
to spell, he puzzled out each verse, believing 
from the outset to have discovered here the 
solution of all social questions. He found for- 
mulated in Genesis the essential law for man 
in the obligation of manual labor. Persuaded 
that salvation depends on labor, he learned to 
write that he might make known what he con- 
sidered to be the truth of truths. At the ag;e 
of sixty-five years he composed an essay in 
w^hich, under the form of biblical verses, he un- 
dertook to show that tilling the earth is the 
highest of all labors. He overcame all the dif- 
ficulties arising from his ignorance and his ad- 
vanced age. Working all day in the fields, and 
devoting the hours of night to his writing, he 
accomplished after several years the project he 

d conceived. But the manuscript sent to the 



Labor. 7 

Czar, in the form of a request, was rejected, and 
its printing was forbidden by the authorities. 

In the meantime, in 1885, Bondarefî became 
known to Tolstoï, whose renown was already 
great among the people. Struck by the pro- 
found truth of the peasant's theories, the author 
of My Religion introduced into his own life the 
reform that Bondareff had preached ; he set 
himself to follow the plough, to use the awl, 
and. in a word, to work with his hands. Till 
then he had had but glimpses of these reforms, 
without professing them openly.* The truth 
only appeared to him in all its brightness, when 
Bondareff placed before him his manuscript. 
He then developed Bondareff's views, while 
modifying them and giving them a wider and 
more profound meaning, in his great works. 
What is my Life ? (of which the true title is, 
What then must be done f) f and What should be 
done, which is the answer to the first, and forms 
with it one complete work.:|: 

* See, in War and Peace, the reflections of Pierre Bezon- 
chof and of Léonie. Consult also, Anna Karénine and My 
Confession, 

f What is my Life? translated by Gatzouk and Em. Pages. 
One volume. Illustrated Library , гЬШ, 

X Tolstoi was familiar with the work of Bondareff, before 
writing What is my Life ? and What should be done. Besides 
the many other points of resemblance that they display, we 
give here a passage from What is my Life? (page 164.) where 
Tolstoi makes evident allusion to Bondareff. "Wealth/* says 
Tolstoi, ** is but slavery; it has the same object and like results. 
Its object is to free man from the primordial law, according to the 



8 Labor. 

In 1888, to show that the ideas of which he 
made himself the apostle were not illusive 
dreams, or the conceptions of a paradoxical 
mind, Tolstoï himself edited in Russian Wealth * 
Bondareff*s book, whose publication had been 
forbidden. On this occasion he wrote a pro- 
found essay on the work and theory of Bonda- 
reff, which we publish herewith together with 
Bondareff's own production. 

The principal reason for presenting to the 
world a translation of Labor is that it possesses 
great value, not only as showing Tolstoi's own 
views, but as displaying the great intelligence 
belonging to the reform that he advocated. 
Bondareff's work is the simple but profound 
effort of an uneducated peasant, who stammer- 
ingly proclaimed in 188 1 the great reform of 
which Tolstoï subsequently became the cham- 
pion and herald. 

I. 

Between the doctrine of the peasant Bon- 
dareff and that of the noble Lyof Tolstoï 
exists a strong and remarkable resemblance. 
Tolstoï, as we have said, knew Bondareff ; he 

expression of a popular writer, or the natural law of life as we 
call it. This law prescribes to each of us personal labor as the 
means of existence." — * ' The popular writer " of whom Tolstoi 
speaks is no other than Bondareff, who, as we shall see, bases 
manual labor on the primitive or primordial law : " In the 
sweat of thy face shalt thou eat bread." 
* A journal published under the direction of M. Obolonski. 



Labor. 9 

had questioned him on the idea he had con- 
ceived that labor was a social remedy ; he had 
read his work, and had also edited it. Bonda- 
reff had thus been the inspirer of Tolstoi's social 
theories, as the sectary Soutaïef inspired his re- 
ligious beliefs.* 

We shall find in Tolstoi's last philosophic work, 
What should be done, his ideas on social reform. 

Every man should by the work of his hands 
support himself and his family. Every woman 
should nourish and educate her own children. 
To man, according to the Bible, God gave the 
law of manual labor, to woman that of mother- 
hood. To violate these laws is death. But 
while to man disobedience to his own duty 
would be followed by speedy death, for woman 
the punishment comes more slowly. But the 
violation of both laws would lead ultimately to 
the annihilation of humanity. 

But for a long time men have disregarded the 
law of labor. For a long time certain classes 
have oppressed others, and at this day the 
breaking of the law is pushed to the verge of 
folly. Do we not see Renan and others filled 
with the vain dream that one day machinery 
will accomplish all sorts of labor, while men 
will become but " bundles of enjoying nerves'* ? 

While men so transgress their law, women 
usually obey theirs. Thus, according to Tol- 

* Under the heads of toîstoîsm and soutatéidsm^ see in the 
Revue des Deux- Mondes of September 15, 1888, a masterly es- 
say by M. Anatole Leroy- Beaulieu. 



I о Labor. 

stoï, women are stronger than men, and to them 
men owe the hope o( becoming in the future 
more faithful to primitive law. Still a mother 
who disregards her maternal duties, and finds 
all her pleasure in luxury and worldly enjoy- 
ments, will bring up her children to false ideas, 
and will teach them to neglect the duty of la- 
bor, by usurping the fruits of others* exertions. 
On the contrary, the faithful parent would in- 
struct her children that labor is necessary to 
life. 

We can compare these ideas with those ex- 
pressed by Bondareff in the ^rst paragraphs of 
Labor according to the Bible. Bondareff inter- 
prets the account given in Genesis as meaning 
that Adam was punished for eating the for- 
bidden fruit, that is, for taking the fruits of oth- 
ers* labor. He was condemned to seek his 
own food, "to knead his bread,'' to use Bondàr 
reff*s expression, by the sweat of his face.* 

It is by manual labor and above all by till- 
ing the ground, and not by the merits of Christ, 
not by sacraments or other virtues, that Adam 
was to save his soul from hell. His descend- 
ants have inherited with original sin the obli- 
gation to labor for their redemption. The 
penance inflicted on Adam by Jehovah is not 
allegorical. That of Eve, " In sorrow shalt thou 
bring forth children,** must be taken literally. 
Thus, on one side, man must procure by the 

* It is shown by note on page 21 how this mode of inter- 
preting the Bible can be justified. 



Labor, 1 1 

labor of his hands the bread necessary for his 
own subsistence and for that of his wife and 
children ; on the other, woman must acquit her- 
self of all the duties of motherhood. Neither 
one nor the other can evade their respective 
obhgations. 

It is from Labor according to the Bible that 
Tolstoï has taken the leading idea which he has 
given in What is my Life ? and What sfiould be 
done. But while Bondareff claims that the 
law of labor and that of motherhood are the 
effects of a divine malediction, Tolstoï protests 
energetically against that notion. What we 
find in the verses of Genesis cited by Bondareff, 
and on which he rests his theory, is this : God 
said to Adam, "In the sweat of thy face shalt 
thou eat bread ;'* and to Eve, " In sorrow shalt 
thou bring forth children/* * But according to 
Tolstoï it is an error to believe labor is a curse ; 
and to this error he attributes man's efforts to 
evade the law and to usurp the fruits of others* 
work. He ceases not to proclaim that labor is 
not a sorrow but a joy. Neither is motherhood 
a curse. It is a sacred and imperative duty; 
but it is also a joy, and an utter satisfaction. 

Tolstoï thus arrives at the same conclusions 
with Bondareff, but from a different standpoint. 
That is, he opposes the Gospel to the Bible. 
He even claims to find in the Christian precept 

* It is remarkable that the Talmud also teaches that every 
man should have a manual profession, and the Sanhedrim de 
dares that labor is ordained by the law of Moses. 



12 Labor. 

of love and charity the law of manual labor. 
As he says so eloquently on page 36: "The 
man who professes, not only by words but by 
actions, the doctrines of truth and love, will 
not deceive himself as to the object of his life. 
Never would the man whose idea of existence 
is to serve others imagine that he can help 
those who are dying of cold and hunger by 
making new laws, by casting cannon, Avorking 
on objects of luxury, or by playing on the piano 
or violin. Love cannot be so foolish." 

Though disagreeing on this point, Bondareff 
and Tolstoï unite in proclaiming that manual 
labor is not only man's duty, but that it is also 
the most excellent moral remedy, and an effica- 
cious agent for salvation. Bondareff has shou n 
Tolstoï how tilling the ground (which he so ex- 
pressively calls " labor for bread ") is the primi- 
tive occupation to which all men should apply 
themselves, and by which they should live. A 
man should not attempt secondary tasks till he 
has worked in the ground for forty days. In 
this way a man can nourish, clothe, lodge, and 
shelter himself without needing aid from others. 

Both Bondareff and Tolstoï arrive at the con- 
clusion that physical labor does not exclude in- 
tellectual activit)% but, on the contrary, they 
hold that it augments the mind's dignity and 
power. 

Thus Labor shows us that what Tolstoi has 
taught, Bondareff had previously put in prac- 
tice. If we compare What should be done^ with 



Labor. 13 

Labor, we shall see that Tolstoi's theories are the 
same as Bondareff*s. Without doubt the philo- 
sophic novelist has his own originality of ideas; 
but it is not the less true that he found the first 
outlines of his doctrine in Bondareff's book. 
And is it not an admirable spectacle to behold 
this great genius, the celebrated author of War 
and PeacCy seeking in the home of the humble 
peasant the word of life, the magic formula 
which permits us to construct here below the 
heavenly Jerusalem of which we all dream? 



II. 

Labor does not only show us how, under Bon- 
darefl*s influence, Tolstoi's ideas on the social 
reform to be produced by physical labor are 
developed, but it enables us to comprehend 
more clearly how this theory and its conse- 
quences are only now arrived at. 

What have they not said of Tolstoï, as laborer 
and shoemaker ? A recent letter says : " Tol- 
stoi's compatriots fail somewhat in respect to- 
wards this grand old man. From them comes 
the story of his learning the trade of shoemak- 
ing. We see this nobleman established in a 
shop, and we hesitate whether to admire or pity 
him. We should do neither. He does not 
make the trade his condition of life, but only a 
distraction, seeking a mental repose in manual 
exercise. Others make arms or weights ; he 



i4 Labor, 

has a horror of useless efforts, and prefers to 
make shoes." 

But this is far from being the spirit of 
the doctrine of Tolstoï and Bondareff. Physi- 
cal labor is with them the highest duty, the 
essential character of man, and the true, the 
only mode of life. Without doubt, one must 
work to maintain the equilibrium between mind 
and body, but that is not the motive which led 
Tolstoï to the plough and the shoemaker's 
bench. He does not hold strongly the argu- 
ments of Jean-Jacques in favor of bodily labor. 
We must work with our hands because life con- 
sists in a battle with nature for the means of 
existence, and physical labor is the law of life. 
Man finds in the accomplishment of this duty a 
complete satisfaction for his bodily as well as 
his spiritual needs. To nourish, clothe, and 
care for himself and his family satisfies his 
bodily wants. To nourish, clothe, and care for 
others becomes a spiritual duty. No form of 
activity is legitimate that does not seek to 
gratify the primitive wants of man, for in these 
rests his very life. 

Let us go further. Tolstoï is an idealist. Na- 
ture is what we ourselves make it. Nature in 
its true form is Mind, and the universal Mind is 
far above the individual personality. Let us rec- 
ognize individuality as an illusion, and that we 
are working at an infinite task, which is infinitely 
beyond us. To put aside our personality and 
follow the path of renunciation and self-abnega- 



Labor, 1 5 

tion should be our rule of life. Now, the acs 
tion in which this idea clothes itself, that in 
which it takes form, is labor, the secular task 
that unites all generations of men and makes 
of the universe a completed harmony, a single 
being accomplishing' a single work.* 

Consequent upon this theory of labor is the 
belief in the possibility of a paradise in this 
world, and also a contempt for mere industrial 
work, the condemnation of commerce, and a 
hatred of cities, which he calls " truly impure 
Babylons." We must, says Tolstoï, abandon the 
cities where there are but consumers and not 
producers, and renounce those habits of city life 
which, far from constituting progress, are but 
the worst forms of corruption. 

Again, in adopting this theory of manual 
labor, the problem of pauperism will be readily 
solved ; we need but to scatter the poor of the 
cities among the peasants of the country. How, 
asks Tolstoï, can we leave the village, where 
we are surrounded by fields, by forests, by 
grain and herds of cattle, in a word by all the 
riches of the earth, to seek nourishment where 
only dust and stones are to be found ? t 

Live by the work of your hands, " labor for 
bread," thus Tolstoï and Bondareff advise those 
who seek a remedy for social evils, and whose 

* See Leon Tolstoi's book entitled Of Life^ one volume, 
published by C. Marpon and E. Flammarion, 
f What is my Life? p. ill. 



l6 Labor, 

hearts are full of love for humanity and the 
sentiment of justice. 

Tolstoï adds that if there were one, two, three, 
or ten men, who, without entering upon any 
personal conflict, without troubling the govern- 
ment, or resorting to revolutionary violence, 
should solve for themselves this great ques- 
tion which divides the world, it would result in \ 
other men's seeing true happiness within their 
reach; and the hitherto irreconcilable antipa- 
thies between conscience and the organization of 
society would be settled by physical labor. Cruel 
inequalities would disappear, and it would be as 
though heaven had descended upon earth. 

Science, Political Economy, and all exterior 
means are powerless to dispel this evil. The 
only remedy is in an individual moral reform, 
based upon charity and manual labor. Human- 
ity can change only with- the individual's re- 
form. The whole social question is one of 
morality. To an honest man social reform must 
come from within. If each of us should avoid 
sin and cultivate fraternity and Christian charity, 
there would soon be no need of soldiers, con- 
stables, or judges. 

Does not this offer an original and powerful 
incentive to reform society and to save the 
human race ? Is not the reform that Tolstoï 
advocates possible ? He only can doubt it who 
has not comprehended the true doctrine of 
Christ, which teaches the renunciation of indi- 



I 



Labor. 17 

vidual life and admits no immortality except 
that of humanity. 



III. 

We have endeavored in few words to por- 
tray and to compare the doctrines of Tolstoï 
and Bondareff. We have shown their tendency 
and their social results. We have but to add a 
comment on Bondareff 's own book. 

Its perusal is highly interesting and sugges- 
tive. We find in this peasant a profoundness of 
thought united with great simplicity of charac- 
ter. Doubtless his ideas are not always ex- 
pressed with sufficient clearness, which is due 
to the biblical style he has adopted. But this 
difficulty is easily surmounted, if we read with 
due attention. 

We have endeavored to give his language as 
precisely and exactly as possible, leaving un- 
touched the style of speech familiar to the Rus- 
sian peasants, who are indefatigable readers of 
the Holy Scriptures. 

We have sought to explain by notes every 
serious difficulty that occurred, and to illustrate 
the texts of Tolstoï and of Bondareff by com- 
paring them with each other. 

4k 4k 

) I owe thanks to my brother, M. Emile Pages, 
who has already translated a work of Tolstoï's 
( What is my Life f one volume, Illustrated Li- 



1 8 Labor. 

brary\ and who will soon publish Wraltk and 
Literature by the author of My Religion^ as well 
as an essay on his life and works. In j888 he 
visited the great Russian author at Moscow, 
and received from him the manuscript of Labor^ 
whose translation he entrusted to me, being too 
much occupied to attempt it himself. That 
Lyof Tolstoï and the peasant Bondareff may 
recognize their work as we have translated it 
will be the best reward of our efforts. 

Amédée Pages. 






LABOR. 



KiRSX F*ARX. 



LABOR, AND BONDAREFF'S THEORY. 

BY COUNT LYOF TOLSTOÏ. 

The work which I now offer to the public is 
by Timothy Michaïlovitch Bondareff. I have 
made no change in it, except to substitute for 
Bondarefl's peculiar orthography one more 
generally used in books. 

One other difference consists in my division 
of the work in two parts; reserving under the 
title of Appendices all that seemed to be a 
repetition of or digression from the principal 
subject. 

This work is, in my opinion, remarkable for 
its force and clearness, the beauty of its lan- 
guage, the sincerity of conviction which each 
line betrays, and, above all, the importance, the 
truth, and the profundity of its fundamental 
idea. 

The master-thought of the book is this: Un- 

19 



20 Labor» 

der all circumstances of life, it is essential not 
only to know what is good and necessary, but 
to know which, among these good and neces- 
sary things, is of the first or second impor- 
tance. This, which is of supreme need in the 
affairs of life, is still more so in those of religion, 
for which faith fixes duties of such great import 
to humanity. 
Tatian,* one of the Fathers of the early 

* Tatian, an apologist of the second century, attracts the 
historian by the originality With which he assimilates revealed 
truths, and the somewhat rude eloquence with which he brands 
pagan corruption for its lapse from orthodoxy to the Gnostic 
heresy. He was born in Assyria, as he himself states in his 
Discourse to the Greeks, 

Having vainly sought, as well in the popular faith, in the Ori- 
ental mysteries, and in the schools of philosophy, for a doctrine 
that would appease his intellectual doubts and satisfy the more 
elevated demands of his conscience, he found it ultimately in 
the Gospel, and described it in his first and most celebrated 
work, the Discourse to the Greeks^ as the motive of his conversion, 
This apology, which would seem to have been written during 
a sojourn in Rome, is distinguished from all others that were 
written at that period by the irreconcilable antagonism it 
portrays between the pretended wisdom of the pagan and the 
Gospel. On one side all is light; on the other, utter darkness: 
here stand mythology with its absurd fables whose subtle alle- 
gories scarcely conceal their coarseness, art devoted entirely 
to sensual pleasures, and philosophy with its contradictions 
and its nothingness ; there, Christianity with its simplicity and 
universality, its purity of life, and the courage in the presence 
of death with which its followers were inspired. 

After the death of Justin Martyr, Tatian returned to Syria, 
and affiliated himself with one of the numerous sects to which 
Oriental fervor of imagination gave rise. 

As far as can be ascertained where so much controversy 
existed, Tatian joined the sect of the Encratites, although he 



Labor. 21 

Church, says that the misfortunes of men come 
less from their ignorance of the true God than 
from their faith in false gods. This is equally 
true in regard to men's individual duties. Their 
misfortunes and crimes result not so much from 
igorance of real duty as from admitting false 
ideas of duty, and from not regarding as their 
sole duty that which is highest and most clearly 
established. 

Bondareff affirms that the crimes and mis- 
fortunes of men result from their accepting as 
sacred duties precepts that are frivolous and 
hurtful, while they forget and conceal from 
themselves and others that which is incontest- 
ably the first and most important of duties, 
and which is contained in the first chapter of 
Holy Scripture : " In the sweat of thy face 
shalt thou knead bread." * 

was not its founder. (E. Strachlin, Encyclopedia of Religious 
Science») 

The best known of his works of that period, the Diatessaron, 
must have been a harmony of the four Gospels of which Euse- 
bius speaks without having seen it. Tatian composed this to 
expunge from the canonical text the genealogies and other 
passages which make the Saviour belong to the race of David 
in the flesh. 

* Tolstoi and Bondareff thus render this verse of Genesis as 
better expressing the idea of manual labor. It is usually 
translated, "In the sweat of thy face shalt shou eat bread." 
We give a passage translated by Reuss from the Hebrew text: 
" And the Eternal God said : Because thou hast hearkened to 
the voice of thy wife, and hast eaten of the tree of which I 
commanded thee thou shalt not eat of it, cursed is the ground 
for thy sake; in sorrow shalt thou eat of it all the days of thy 
life. Thorns also and thistles shalt it bring forth to thee, and thou 



22 Labor, 

To those who believe in the sacredness and 
infallibility of the Divine Word as given in the 
Bible, it will be evident that this command, 
ment strongly asserts its own truth, since it 
was given by God and has never been annulled. 

As for those who do not believe in Holy 
Scripture, if they will, without prejudice, con- 
sider this precept as a simple and natural ex- 
pression of hunjan wisdom, they will see clearly 
its sense and truth if they also examine the con- 
ditions of human life: and it is precisely this 
that Bondareff has done in his book. 

They may be prevented making successfully 
such an examination, because so many are 
accustomed to the absurd and erroneous expla- 
nations that theologians give to the Holy Scrip- 
tures. It will need but to recall to them that a 
doctrine is susceptible of different interpreta- 
tions, and they will exclaim with disdain : 
"What do we care for Holy Scripture? We 
know that whatever one chooses may be based 
upon it, and that it is all false/* 

Nothing could be more unjust; for we must 
not take for Holy Scripture man*s mistaken 
views of it, and he who really speaks the truth 
may Avell do so in the words of the Scriptures. 

shalt eat the herb of the fields in the sweat of thy face shalt thou 
eat bread, till thou retu»^!! to the ground; for out of it wast thou 
taken, dust thou art, and unto dust shalt ihou return.'* 

We see this interpretation of Tolstoi and Bondareff is not in- 
exact. They have reason to believe that Genesis teaches lis 
that the natural condition of man is to labor in the ground. 



Labor. 23 

If we admit that what we call Holy Scrip- 
tures is not the «work of God, but of men, and 
if, on the other hand, while it is purely and 
simply the work of men, it is regarded as com- 
ing from God, let us not forget there is a reason 
for its continued existence. 

It is easy to perceive this reason. 

Superstitious men call it God's work because 
it is more profound than all human science, and 
because, notwithstanding continual attacks upon 
its verity, it remains to this day without losing 
its divine authority. It is called divine, and is 
transmitted to us, because it contains the great- 
est possible wisdom. And this is true of the 
greater part of what we call the Bible. 

This in fact, and in a literal sense, is what 
Bondareff takes for his text, in proclaiming the 
commandment that the human race has for- 
gotten, or has so interpreted as to destroy its 
force. 

One usually regards this sentence of God and 
all Adam's life in paradise as a real and historic 
event, although we should also give it an alle- 
gorical aspect, as showing the contrary tenden- 
cies that God has placed in human nature. 

Man fears death and is subject to it. One 
who knows of neither good nor evil would seem 
to us most happy, and yet we are eager to know 
everything. Man loves the pleasures and the 
gratifying of his wants which bring no pain with 
them, and yet it is by pain and suffering that he 
and all his race attain life. 



г 

f 



24 Labor. 

These words, " Knead thy bread in the sweat 
of thy face," are important, not only because it 
is claimed that God himself uttered them to our 
father Adam, but because they are true, because 
they affirm an irrevocable law of human exist- 
ence. 

The law of gravitation is not true only be- 
cause Newton discovered it; but, on the con- 
trary, we know of Newton because he made this 
discovery, and we are grateful to him for show- 
ing us an eternal law which serves to explain a 
whole class of phenomena. 

It is the same with the law, " In the sweat of 
thy face shalt thou knead bread." It is also a 
law which explains a whole class of phenomena. 
Having known it once, we can never forget it, 
and we are full of gratitude to him who discov- 
ered it. 

This law would seem to be simple and well 
known ; but that is but a delusion, as we discover 
on looking around us. Not only is it not 
recognized, but another that is diametrically 
opposed to it prevails. All who believe in God, 
from the emperor to the beggar, seek to evade 
rather than to obey it. 

To show its eternity and immutability, and to 
explain how its infringement must necessarily 
result in misfortune, is what Bondareff has un- 
dertaken in his book. 

Bondareff calls it the primitive law, the first 
commandment, and places it above all others. 
He shows that sin and all faults and disloyal 



Labor. 25 

actions belong to those only who break it. In 
his eyes, the principal of humanity's positive 
duties, the first and incontestable need of each 
individual, is to work with his hands for bread ; he 
understands by it that each man, by long and 
painful labor, should preserve himself from dy- 
ing of cold and hunger, and that he should pro- 
cure by manual labor food, clothing, warmth, 
and shelter. 

Bondareff's fundamental idea is that this law 
(man must work to live), now regarded as 
merely necessary, should be considered as the 
highest of all. It ought to be held as a relig- 
ious duty, like observing the Sabbath and cir- 
cumcision are among the Israelites, fasting and 
the sacraments among Christians, and the pray- 
ing five times a day and other practices among 
the Mahometans. 

He claims that if men regarded working for 
bread as a religious duty, no other occupation 
would deter them from fulfilling it, even as 
nothing can deter believers from celebrating the 
feasts prescribed by their religion. 

We have more than eighty feast-days in the 
year, while working for bread only requires, 
according to Bondareff's calculation, about forty 
days. 

How extraordinary it seems, at first glance, 
that a means so simple, so easy to be understood 
by all the world, and requiring neither skill nor 
science to accomplish it, should be able to save 
humanity from all terrestrial evils, no matter 



20 Labor. 

how numerous they may be! But how much 
more surprising is it that, having in our hands a 
means so simple, so clear, so long known to all 
the world, we should neglect it, and seek to 
cure our woes b)'' various false and subtle theo- 
ries ! 

It is acting like one who, instead of putting a 
new bottom in a broken cask, tries to invent all 
sorts of artifices to make it hold water. And 
our efforts to cure our own woes are like these 
vain artifices. 

Whence come, then, all the misfortunes of 
men, excepting those which result in assassina- 
tions, prisons, combats, and all the cruelties of 
which they become guilty because they cannot 
lorbear to use violence ? 

All human misfortunes, direct violence ex- 
cepted, result on the one hand from hunger and 
privation of all sorts, and from discouragement 
in labor, and on the other from riches, idleness, 
and the vices they engender. Ought we not to 
endeavor to destroy this inequality b)'' which 
some are plunged into the evils of misery and 
want, and others into those which belong to the 
temptations of wealth? How can we do this 
but by taking part in the labor which satisfies 
our wants, and in abandoning wealth and idleness, 
which are the parents of vice and temptation ; 
in other words, in obeying the law which com- 
mands men to labor each for his own bread, 
and to earn their living with their Own hands? 
We are so overwhelmed with the multitude of 



J 



Labor. 27 

religious, social, and domestic laws that are im- 
posed upon us ; we have invented so many com- 
mandments in announcing, as Isaiah says, "line 
upon line, precept upon precept,'* one rule for 
this, another for that, that we have lost all clear 
perception of good and evil. One says mass, an- 
other recruits for the army, or collects taxes, a 
third is a judge, a fourth is a student, a fifth cures 
disorders, a sixth teaches ; all, in fine, hy these or 
similar pretexts evade the law of labor, leaving 
it for others, and forgetting that there are around 
them men who are dying with hunger and 
fatigue. But before giving the people priests, 
soldiers, judges, doctors, and professors, we 
should know that they are not perishing with 
hunger. Not only do we forget that many duties 
may present themselves for fulfilment, but also 
that there is a first and a last duty, and that we 
cannot undertake the last till the first is ful-. 
filled, any more than we can harrow the 
ground before it has been ploughed. 

It is to accomplish the duty which is the first 
in practical order that Bondareff's doctrine is 
given. 

Bondareff shows that the accomplishment of 
this duty does not interfere with any other 
occupation, presents no difficulties, and saves 
raan from poverty, want, and temptation. 

It destroys above all the odious division of 
man into two classes who hate each other and 
hide under a veil of humility their, mutual dis- 
like. 



28 Labor. 

Labor for bread, says Bondareff, renders all 
men equal, and clips the wings of luxury and 
covetousness. 

One cannot cultivate the ground or dig wells 
in rich clothing, with white hands, or on delicate 
food. 

By giving themselves up to an occupation 
that is good and holj- for every one, men come 
nearer to each other. Labor for bread restores 
intelligence to those who have lost it or have 
led unworthy lives ; and it also bestows joy and 
happiness ; for God and nature have reserved 
this as a glad and interesting work for mankind. 

Labor for bread is a remedy that saves man- 
kind. If men would recognize this primitive 
law as divine and immutable, and regard labor 
for bread as an indispensable duty, all would 
then be nourished by their own work, be 
united by the same faith in God and in love for 
one another, and thus destroy the povertj' from 
which so many suffer. 

We are so accustomed to a contrary state of 
affairs, and to regard wealth, freedom from 
the need to labor, and high social position as 
gifts of Heaven, that we do not choose to see 
how unjust and incomplete it is. 1 

Let us analyze it with care, and see if it is just. "^ 

There are on this point religious and political ' 

theories to suit all tastes. Let us judge Bon- 1 

dareff*s theory as a mere theory. Let us con- 
sider what would happen if, following Bon- 
dareff*s wish, all the clergy should undertake in 



Labor, 29 

their sermons to explain this first command- 
ment, and if all men should accept the holy law 
of labor. What would be the result? 

All the world would labor and eat the fruit 
o£ their labor, and bread, being an object of 
necessity, would neither be bought nor sold. 
What then ? No one would die of hunger. If 
a man could not earn enough for himself and 
his family, his neighbor would help him. He 
would do so because he would have no other 
use for products that he could not sell. It 
would follow that man would have no more 
temptations; he would have no occasion to 
obtain by ruse or violence the bread he could 
not otherwise procure. 

Violence and deceit would not then be neces- 
sary as they are now; and he who resorted to 
them would do so from evil impulse, and not, 
as now, from Avant or privation. 

Those who are weak and cannot earn their 
bread would no longer need to sell their labor, 
and perhaps their souls, to obtain food. 

No one would then, as now, seek to escape 
from the burden of labor or to throw it on 
others ; nor endeavor to crush the feeble with 
it, while on the strong they heap all manner 
of work. We would no longer find men devot- 
ing all their intellectual forces to facilitate, not 
labor for laborers, but idleness for the idle. 

In taking part in the labor for bread, and in 
recognizing it as the principal human occupa- 
tion, we act as one who, seeing a carriage drawn 



ЗО Labor, 

by fools with the wheels in the air, turned it 
over and replaced it on its wheels. It then 
went smoothly. 

The life we lead in scorning labor, and in try- 
ing to reform it contrary to nature, is as this 
upset carriage with the wheels in the air. 
And all our efforts will be vain till we place 
the carriage in its proper position, and our- 
selves in ours. 

This is Bondareff*s doctrine, in which I entire- 
ly believe. 

Let me further explain his notion. 

There was once a time when men devoured 
each other. The idea of equality gradually 
developed among them, however, so that this 
state of affairs did not continue. Thus canni- 
balism was abandoned. 

Then followed a period in which they made 
slaves of their fellow-beings, and possessed 
themselves of the fruits of their labor. But in 
time human consciences became too enlightened 
for this, and slavery was abolished. 

While these gross forms of tyranny have now 
disappeared, its spirit is still existing beneath 
hypocritical deceptions. Man no longer openly 
avails himself of the labor of others without 
form of recompense. To-day exists another 
phase of violence : the rich, profiting by the { 

needs of the poor, still enslave them effectually. à 

But, according to Bondareff, the time is com- 
ing when all men will be equal, and one cannot 
profit by the need of another, or through his 



I 

i 



Labor, 3t 

suffering from hunger or cold succeed in enslav- 
ing him. Man, admitting that labor for bread 
is a law imposed on all, will consider it a strict 
duty not to permit the sale of bread (that is, 
articles of actual necessity), but will nourish, 
clothe, and care for each other. 

I regard Bondareff's work from another 
point of view, which is this : 

You will often hear it said that we must not be 
content with negative laws and command- 
ments, that is, the rules which decide what we 
must not do; but we should have positive laws, 
which determine in a precise manner what we 
ought to do. 

For example, Jesus Christ gave five negative 
commandments:* 

1st. Never regard any one as a fool or idiot; 
and never be angry with any one.f 

2d. Do not look on marriage as a mere 
source of pleasure. Let not the husband leave 
his wife, nor the wife her husband. % 

* Tolstoi's moral law is all contained in these Gospel pre- 
cepts. See, for the development of this doctrine, and his ex- 
planation of tb« Sermon on the Mounts his book entitled My 
Religion. 

\ ** But I say unto you. That whosoever is angry with his 
brother without a cause shall be in danger of the judgment; 
and whosoever shall say to his brother, Raca, shall be in dan- 
ger of the council: but whosoever shall say, Thou fool, shall be 
in danger of hell fire." (St. Matthew, chap. v. 22.) 

J ** It hath been said. Whosoever shall put away his wife, let 
him give her a writing of divorcement; 

But I say unto you. That whosoever shall put away his wife, 
saving for the cause of fornication, causeth her to commit 



32 Labor. 

3cl. Swear not ; do not make promises to any 
one or for any cause.* 

4th. Submit to offence and violence, and do 
not resist wicked men.f 

5th. Do not regard men as enemies. Love 
your enemies even as you do your neighbors.^: 

It is said these commandments teach us only 
what we must not do. 

It may seem strange that there should not be 
in the doctrine of Christ a precise command- 
ment as to what we should do. But whoever 

adultery: and whosoever shall marry her that is divorced, com- 
mitteth adultery." (Ibid. v. 31, 32.)' 

* *' Again, ye have heard that it hath been said, by them of 
old time, Thou shalt not forswear thyself, but shalt perform 
unto the Lord thine oaths. 

But I say unto you, Swear not at all, neither by heaven; for 
it is God's throne: 

Nor by the earth; for it is his footstool: neither by Jerusa- 
lem; for it is the city of the great King. 

Neither shalt thou swear by thy head, because thou canst 
not make one hair white or black." (Ibid. v. 33-37.) 

f " Ye have heard that it hath been said, An eye for an eye, 
and a tooih for a tooth. 

But I say unto you that ye resist not evil; but whosoever 
shall smite thee on thy right cheek, turn to him the other also." 

(Ibid. V. 38-39-) 

t '* Ye have heard that it hath been said, Thou shalt love 
thy neighbor, and hate thine enemy: 

But I say unto you. Love you renemies, bless them that 
curse you, do good to them that hate you, and pray for them 
which despitefully use you and persecute you. 

That ye may be the children of your father which is in heav- 
en ; for he maketh his sun to rise on the evil and on the good, 
and sendeth rain on the just and on the unjust." (Ibid. 
V. 43-45.) 



Labor. 33 

believes fully in the doctrine of Christ will find 
there not only these five negative command- 
ments, but also the positive doctrine of all truth. 
Now, the doctrine of truth, as proclaimed by 
Jesus Christ, is found not in laws, not in com- 
niandments, but only in the sense by which we 
understand life. 

It teaches that life and its welfare consist not 
in personal happiness, as many believe, but in 
serving God and our neighbor. And this is not 
a duty to be performed for recompense, it is 
not a mystical expression of hidden and incom- 
prehensible meaning, but a revelation of the 
law of life hitherto ignored, a demonstration 
that life cannot be good if it is not given its 
highest phase. 

So the doctrine of Christ and of truth is ex- 
pressed in these words : Love God, and thy 
neighbor as thyself. 

Christ's direct laws and commandments, and 
the Judaic and Buddhist precepts, indicate the 
ways in which the world's temptations turn men 
irom the right way. 

Thus, there may be many such laws and pre- 
cepts, while it needs but one positive rule of 
life to teach us what to do. 

The life of every man consists in following 
some one aim. Whatever it may be, he tends to- 
wards it, as he sees it more or less clearly. 
Christ has shown us the right way, and how 
we may be turned aside from it. For this there 
are many diverging paths, and the five com- 



34 Labor. 

mandments are given to guard us from their 
errors. But only one precept is needed to 
show us the right way ; and for those who be- 
lieve Christ's teaching, and know the true way 
of life that he has pointed out, no positive laws 
are needed to enforce his doctrine. 

The different actions which result from fol- j 

lowing the true path of life are clearly defined 
for those who accept Christ's teaching. They ' 

are, to use his expression, as a well of pure wa- i 

ter bursting from the soil , and their actions ^ 

flow naturally from the pure source, in spite of 
all obstacles. || 

No man, believing in the doctrine of Jesus • 

Christ, would ask what were his positive duties, 
any more than the water springing from the »y 

earth would ask what it should do. It flows in j 

its abundance to refresh the grass, the trees, and 
the flowers, while birds, animals, and menTpal 
take of its bounty. 

Thus the man who accepts Christ's definition 
of the path of life goes unquestioning on his 
way straight to the goal. He need not ask what 
he has to do. Love, which will become the prin- 
ciple of his being, will show him clearly the right 
path, and what duties belong to the present and 
future. 

The first and most pressing claims of this \ 

work of love are to feed the hungry, to clothe ) 

the naked, to succor the sick, and to visit the 
prisoners. This is the counsel of Christ as well 
as of our own hearts. And above all are we 



Labor. 35 

exhorted by reason, by conscience and feeling, 
to secure to our brother-men their lives, to pre- 
serve them from the suffering and death which 
result from their unequal contest with nature,* 
and to urge upon them the labor for bread, the 
most important and most wearisome of all 
work, and which is distinctly imposed on all 
men. 

Even as the spring may not ask where it 
shall send its waters, whether it shall sprinkle 
from above the grass and the leaves of the trees, 
or seek their roots beneath the earth, so a man 
who knows the doctrine of truth may not ask 
in advance what he must do, whether he is to 
teach men, to defend them from the enemy, to 
amuse them and give them the pleasures of life, 
or to succor those who perish in want. A 
spring does not flow upon the surface, quench- 
ing the thirst of animals and filling the ponds, 

* This idea of an incessant struggle with nature as being 

man's principal duty and occupation occurs frequently in 

Tolstoi's works, and notably in What should be done, " The 

\, first and most undoubted duty of man/' he says, ** is to partake 

in the struggle with nature for his own life and his neighbor's." 

:■ \ And again : " Whether it results for good or for ill, this is the 

^ I decree of God, or the law of nature which created man and the 

* world. The situation of man in the world, as we know it, is such 

' \ that, being naked, without shelter, and unable to find his food 

j 1 in the fields, — like Robinson Crusoe on his island, — he is under 

\ I the necessity of contending always with nature for food, cloth- 

\ j ing. and shelter. Food must be prepared to satisfy his own 

^ hunger several times in the day, and also that of the children 

'' who are too young for labor, as well as of the feeble old 

folk.'* 



i 



36 Labor. 

till it has first watered the earth ; thus a man, 
knowing the doctrine of truth, cannot seek to 
satisfy men's minor needs till he has relieved 
the greatest want, and has aided to nourish 
them, and to save them from the death that 
attends the unequal contest with nature. The 
man who professes, not only by words but by I 

actions, the doctrines of truth and love, will not 1 

deceive himself as to the object of his life- 
Never would the man whose idea of existence 
is to serve others imagine that he can help ^ 

those who are dying of cold and hunger by 
making new laws, by casting cannon or work- 
ing on objects of luxury, or by pla)âng on the 
piano or violin. Love cannot be so foolish. 

Even as love for a person does not consist 
in reading to him a novel when he is hungry, 
nor in giving him jewels of great price if he is 
cold, neither can it consist in amusing those who 
are satiated, while those who are cold and hungry ^ 

are left to die in misery. True love, showing itself I 

by actions rather than by words, is far from being ] 

wanting in intelligence. On the contrary, it is 
full of true wisdom and sagacity. So a man in- 
spired by love will not deceive himself; he will 
accomplish at once the first duty that his love for J 

mankind points out, in carrying succor to those 
who suffer, or who are cold or hungry. But to 
aid the famished and unhappy is to fight hand 
to hand with nature. Only he who is willing to 
deceive himself and others in the moment of 
dangerous contest with misery will refuse to aid 



\ 



\ 



Labor. 37 

them, and will augment their misfortunes, while 
pretending to those who are perishing before 
him that he has other occupations by which he 
will seek a means to save them. 

A true man, one for whom life consists in do- 
ing good, could not use such language ; and if he 
made such a response, his conscience would ever 
reprove the falsehood ; he can find no defence 
lor it save in the crafty and diabolical theory of 
the Division of Labor. ^ 

Among all the doctrines of human wisdom, 
from that of Confucius to that of Mahomet, we 
find this idea strongly expressed only in the Gos- 
pel. We there find ourselves convinced of the 
necessity to aid men, not by a theory of division 
of labor, but by means that are simple, natural, 
and indispensable. It is the Gospel which 
teaches us to minister to the sick, the prisoners, 
and those who perish with cold and hunger. 

But we can only do this directly by at once 
laboring ourselves, for the sick and the famished 

* Tolstoï has discussed the theory of the division of la- 
bor, showing its disastrous effects, in What should be doney at 
page 1Ô4 of the French translation, and those following it. 

Without doubt, according to Tolstoï, the division of labor 
exists in human society, but the question is how to render it 
just. It has made in our day an admirable progress, but, by 
some unhappy chance, it has aggravated instead of ame- 
liorating the condition of the greatest number, who are the la- 
borers. 

How then shall we make a just distribution of labor? To 
preserve life by a manual labor, common to all, is the first 
duty ; which is to be personally fulfilled^ yet in a manner ihat 
aids our neighbor also. 



38 Labor. 

л 

are still dying for want of aid. The man who i 

practises the doctrine of truth will demonstrate 
in his life, that is consecrated to the service of I 

his fellow-men, the primitive law which is formu- i 

lated in the Book of Genesis : ** In the sweat of à 

thy face shalt thou knead bread." This is the 
primitive law, or the first commandment, as 
Bondarefï calls it, and he shows us that it. is a 
positive law. 

This is a law as well for those who have not 
comprehended the true meaning of life as indi- A 

cated by Jesus Christ ; for those who lived before 
him, and also for those who have not believed in j 

him. It is a positive law, exacting from all of us, : 

conformably to God's will, as it is manifested in 
the Bible and to our intelligence, to support our- 
selves by labor. It preserves this character even 
when the true meaning of life, as indicated by 
the doctrine of truth, is unknown to men. 

But where men well know this aim of life as 
pointed out by Jesus Christ, the law of labor for 
bread will become part of Christ's positive doc- 
trine (to love one another), and will then have a 
negative and not a positive meaning. À 

When men comprehend the true Christian 
doctrine, this law will show them the old temp- I 

tations which they must avoid, that they be not 
turned from the true path. 

To a believer in the Old Testament who does 
not recognize the doctrine of truth, this law has 
the following meaning : " Work for bread with 
your own hands." 



J 



\ 



Labor. 39 

But to the Christian its signification is nega- 
tive. It says to him : " Do not believe you can 
do good to mankind while overwhelming them 
with labor for others, and while not earning your 
food with your own hands." 

It shows to the Christian one of the oldest 
and most criminal temptations that have assailed 
mankind. Against this temptation, that is so fatal 
in its consequences, and which we recognize with 
difficulty as deceitful and contrary to human 
nature, Bondareff's book is directed. His words 
are as obligatory to the believer in the Old Tes- 
tament as to him who accepts the Gospel, to 
the man who rejects Scripture and relies on his 
own reason, as to him Avho comprehends the 
doctrine of truth. 

Reader, dear brother, whoever thou art, I love 
thee ! Far from seeking to grieve thee, or to 
bring evil or offence into thy life, I wish only to 
serve thee. 

I desire to prove fully the truth of this thesis, to 
refute all the objections that are made against it ; 
but I might Avriteat greatest length and with ut- 
most talent, I might give the most logical rea- 
sons, and yet I could not convince thee, if thy 
spirit contends with mine, and thy heart remains 
cold and insensible. 

One thing I should fear, lest, in disputing with 
thee, the pride and coldness of my own spirit 
should overshadow thine, and I should thus 
harm thee. Then let us not reason. I only ask 
of thee one thing: do not discuss or demonstrate 
the matter, but only question thine own heart. 



4 о Labor, 

Whoever thou art, whatever may be thy 
qualities, however good thou art, in whatever 
condition thou art placed, canst thou take tran- 
quilly thy tea and eat thy dinner, canst thou oc- 
cupy thyself with politics, fine arts, science, 
medicine, or teaching, when thou seest and hear- 
est the man who is lying at thy door sick and | 

starving? No ! But thou wilt say, they are not 
always there at my door. It may be so; but 
they are perhaps but a short distance away 
from thy house, and thou knowest it. Then 
thou canst not live tranquilly ; whatever maybe 
thy jo\% it is poisoned by this knowledge. Not 
to see those who are miserable, thou may est 
barricade thy doors, and drive them afar off, or 
fl}' thyself to a retreat where there may be no i 

danger of finding them. But they are every- ? 

where. And if thou couldst find a place where 
thou canst not see them, canst thou escape thine 
own conscience? What then is to be done? 

Thou knowest, and Bondareff's book proves it, 
that thou must descend into the depths, or what 
appear to thee to be the depths, but which are 
really the heights. Join thyself to those who 
feed the hungry and shelter them from the cold. 
Fear nothing. Far from being worse, thy new 
estate will be better than that which preceded 
it. Place thyself on the level of others ; under- 
take, Avith thy feeble and unaccustomed hands, ^ 
the work of nourishing and clothing the needy ; \ 
labor for bread, contend with nature, and for 
4ie first time thou wilt feel the ground firmly 



Labor. 41 

with thy feet, thou wilt be filled with a sense of 
independence, liberty, and strength ; thou wilt no 
longer think of flying, but thou wilt taste, with a 
pure joy, innocent pleasures of which the world 
has never given thee the least notion. Thou wilt 
know at last those strong, simple-hearted men, 
thy own brothers, who, notwithstanding the dis- 
tance at which they have hitherto stood apart 
from thee, have always nourished thee. 

To thy great satisfaction, thou wilt see in them 
virtues hitherto unknown; thou wilt find in 
them a modesty and goodness of which thou 
wilt feel unworthy. Instead of scorn and hatred 
from those that wait upon thee, thou wilt receive 
gratitude and respect, because, after having 
lived fcy their services all thy life, thou wilt now 
remember their miseries and endeavor with 
feeble hands to succor them. Thou wilt find that 
the islet on which thou didst seek refuge from 
the flood that would have engulfed thee is but 
a heap of rubbish, whilst the seeming sea thou 
didst fear is the earth itself. ТЬоц wilt now 
tread it with bold, tranquil, and joyous feet. 

It will be thus with thee, because in abandon- 
ing the dark, false ways in which thou hast been 
wandering unwittingly and against thy true 
intention, thou wilt now enter upon the path of 
truth and life. Having hitherto disobeyed 
God's will, thou wilt now faithfully accomplish 

it. 

Lyof Tolstoï. 

Moscow, March, 1888. 



Skcond Part. 



LABOR, ACCORDING TO THE BIBLE. 

BY THE PEASANT BONDAREFF. 

** In the sweat of thy face shalt thou knead bread: dust thou 
art, and unto dust shalt thou return." — Genesis, iii. 19. 

Before undertaking to treat with all my en- 
ergy of the questions of labor and idleness, let 
me explain who I am. Am I not like those who, 
in pointing out to others the good path they 
should follow, wander themselves in that ^hich 
is evil, and most opposed to equity and right- 
eousness ? 

Up to the age of thirty -^even years I worked 
as a laborer on the estate of a pomestchik* on 
the Don, named Tchernozouboff. Every one 
knows how one in that condition of life is over- 
burdened with work. Later the pomestchik 
enrolled me as a soldier, and my five children, 
being under age, remained beneath his heavy, 
intolerable yoke. 

When I arrived in Siberia, in 1857, with my 
wife and two children, we possessed only the 
clothes on our backs, and those had been given 
us by the State. 

* The proprietor of an estate. 

42 



Labor. 43 

But within fourteen years I have acquired a 
small cottage with a bit of ground, so that lam 
as well off as though I had always remained a 
peasant. 

And how did I accomplish this? Simply by 
cultivating the ground. And this is the way in 
which I labored. When they reaped the grain, 
where it takes two laborers to bind the sheaves 
after the reaper, I did it alone, in spite of my 
sixty-five years of age, and the work was well 
done, the sheaves strongly bound. God is my 
witness, reader, that I tell only the truth. 

You will thus see that, while with you in the 
great world the superiority is given to the gen- 
eral, with us it is gained by the good workman. 

In strict justice, I should then have the right 
to be seated by the side of the general. By his 
side, do I say ? He ought to remain standing 
before me. 

And why ? asks the alarmed reader. Because 
the general eats the bread produced by my 
labor, since the reverse is not true : and this I 
will presently show in my justification. 

The reader now knows who I am. 

Have I then no reason to speak and write of 
labor and of idleness ? I have it truly, and will 
use it. 

If, among the developments and reasonings 
that follow, any be found that seem useless or 
even hurtful, I desire they shall be ignored. 
They will not result from an evil intention ; it is 



44 Labor. 

that to the Aveakness of my mind, they have 
wrongfully seemed to contain some interest. 

You, of the hi<^her classes, write your thou- 
sands of books. Are they less mistaken or hurt- 
ful than mine? And yet yours are approved 
and published. 

But we, of the lower class, write this little 
essay for all time and in self-defence, and doubt- 
less you will reject it, as I have been assured you 
will, claiming that it possesses neither talent nor 
eloquence. It will be great injury to us, and 
even to God ; and I know with great certainty 
that Heaven will one day come to our side if you 
thus reject the bread of life, which is the truth. 

Can you deny this truth, and live without 
food ? No ! In an hour you would stretch out 
j'our hand to the tree of life which is forbidden 
to you, — to gather the bread earned by another's 
labor, and to carry it away with you. *Phat 
deserves thought. 

Therefore I pray you, reader, to have pit}' on 
yourself; give due thought to this question, and 
you will be reasonable. If others refuse to ex- 
amine it, you will not be responsible. 

Do I expect a recompense for the trouble I 
am taking? Is it for that that I labor and 
write? No ; I expect but punishment for it, as 
the rich have assured me. 

If you would address your reproaches, say 
they, to an inferior class, you would receive a 
recompense; but since you stab to the quick 



Labor, 45 

persons of importance, you will not escape pun- 
islinaent any more than you will death itself. 

But what may perhaps save you will be that 
they will destroy this work. 

One must have an aim, 1 have replied. For 
the truth we profess we must be willing to 
suffer, and even to die. But it may be that 
their fault is the gravest, and that for them will 
be the severest punishment, as we will show 
presently. 

So I have answered the idle ones who have 
predicted for me terrible sufferings. It might 
be for my interest to speak in allegory, but I 
will not ; be they angry or no, I will still take 
the straight path. 

Many rich ones, having read my writings, 
are offended by them. ** You write," they say, 
" not against the world, but against us only." 

Therefore, in the name of the God of truth, 
I pray you, reader, not to imagine likewise. I 
have written, in the name of all laborers, against 
those, whoever and how many soever they may 
be, who do not produce the bread they eat by 
the labor of their own hands. 

All my writings may be condensed in two 
sayings : 

1. Why, according to the first commandment, 
do you not labor for the bread that you eat, 
instead of eating that which the labor of others 
has produced ? 

2. Why, in both secular and theological 
books, are not the laborer and his work com- 



ф Labor, 

mended, instead of being treated with extreme 
contempt? 

To state these questions ought to be enough. 
But as you contemn manual labor in every 
way, I must write at greater length, on the sub- 
ject. 

To conclude, I pray you, reader, not to eat 
for two days before judging my book. 



' The human race is divided into two classes: 
one is noble and honored, the other humble and 
despised. Those belonging to the first are 
richly clothed, possessing tables well furnished 
with exquisite dishes, and they are majestically 
seated in places of honor; but those belonging 
to the second are covered with rags, their 
strength exhausted by poor food and hard 
work, and they have an air of sorrowful 
humility, as they remain standing on the thresh- 
old : these are the poor laborers. 

The truth of my words is confirmed by the 
parable in the Gospel. •* There was a certain 
rich man, which was clothed in purple and fine 
linen, and fared sumptuously every day : and 
there was a certain beggar named Lazarus, 
which was laid at his gate, full of sores, and 
desiring to be fed with the crumbs which fell 
from the rich man*s table: moreover the dogs 
came and licked his sores." (St. Luke xvi. 
19-21.) 

Well ! I will speak to my companions, the 
laborers who stand on the threshold: Why do 



Labor. 47 

you stay there always, as silent as so many quad- 
rupeds? Without doubt one should be silent 
before a man of greater merit, but we should 
know wherefore and to what extent we are to 
be silent, and not humble ourselves basely, or 
adore him as an idol. 

Thus, in the name of this latter class, I address 
myself to the former, and I say : Reply to the 
que,stions I will ask. 

1. Adam, for having infringed God's command, 
" Ye shall not eat of the fruit of the forbidden 
tree," lost paradise not only for himself, but for 
all his race unto the end of the world. We see 
by that that he was guilty of a great sin, but 
we must not believe that his crime consisted 
merely in eating the forbidden fruit, that is, the 
apple. 

2. Then he tried to hide himself among the 
trees of the garden, as the Scripture recites. 

But from whom would he hide? Men did 
not yet exist. From God, then. 

Behold, then, the madness in which sin 
had plunged man! Could he hide from the 
eyes of God ? We see that, having recognized 
his fault, he waited to receive his punishment, 
and this is God*s unexpected decree : 

" For having disobeyed the command I gave 
you, behold your punishment: In the sweat of 
thy face shalt thou knead bread : dust thou art, 
and unto dust shalt thou return." 

3. Ought not Adam, then, to have shed tears 
of gratitude towards God for the great mercy 



48 Labor, 

shown him? What was this punishment to 
that which he might have looked to receive ? 

4. — May we then believe that Adam labored 
for nine hundred and thirty years, and that he 
eat his bread in the sweat of his brow, living 
by the work of his hands, although he was a 
noble, according to his time, since he is the 
father of the human race? 

5. Did he desire dominion, or any power 
whatever? No. For though he listened in par- 
adise to the words of the serpent, who said to 
him and to his wife, *' Ye shall be as gods, 
knowing good and evil," — that is, you shall live 
like pomestchiks, and you will be the most in- 
telligent beings in the world,— they nevertheless 
so lost spirit as to seek concealment from 
God. 

Following the counsel of the serpent, Adam 
hoped to live in the world without labor; but he 
was, on the contrary, condemned to seek his 
nourishment in the sweat of his face, and instead 
of being elevated to a supreme rank, he lost his 
birth-place, and in exile was poor and with- 
out shelter. Thus to him the serpent became a 
horrible creature, to whose frightful influence 
he owed his own loss and that of all his race. 

6. Thus you will see, reader, what is the re- 
sult of this desire for possessions. 

And what must we think of one who thus 
gains possessions, that is, who can be sheltered 
beneath an umbrella, having white hands, and 
who during all his life eats the bread that 



Labor, 49 

others have earned ? The solution of this enig- 
ma is beyond the limits of reason. 

I know that you have already a crowd of ob- 
jections to make to my ideas, but do not criticise 
them, I pray, till you have heard me to the 
end. 

7. Did Adam hope for a moment, by means 
of money that did not yet exist, or by any other 
subterfuges whatever, to turn over his labor to 
strange hands, to remain himself under an um- 
brella, and wait for the results of others* labor, 
like a beggar or a drone? Thus many do in 
these days, who regard it as a great crime to 
take from any one a blade of straw or a grain of 
corn, but who do not think it a crime to take 
and eat the food, earned by others, which is 
served at their tables. 

8. But if our father Adam received a pun- 
ishment in proportion to his crime, and sub- 
mitted to it willingly, — in other words, if he 
labored with his hands to the end of his life, as 
is said, ** Thou shalt return to the ground, 
whence thou wast taken," — we see that he is 
now innocent, and has atoned to God for his 
crime. 

9. Holy Scripture again says: "For then 
Adam will stretch out his hand and eat of the 
fruit of the tree of life, and will live forever.** 
It has been supposed this means literally the 
tree on which Christ was crucified. But that is 
an arbitrary supposition. Can we admit that to 
the merits of another, of Christ, that man, who 



50 Labor, 

has no merit of his own, obtains pardon for his 
sins? That notion was evidently invented to 
strengthen the hope that we may without labor, 
and while resting at ease, inherit eternal life. 

But if this tree represents Adam*s penance, 
and means the duty of laboring for bread, then 
a severe task is imposed on ourselves. 

Is not, then, my interpretation just, by which, 
if Adam ate the bread his own hands had earned, 
he should then, and then only, live throughout 
all ages ? 

For example, if no one stretches out his hand 
towards the tree of life, that is, to labor for 
bread, what would become of most of us? In 
that case, could the world itself exist ? 

We see, then, clearly that we, who are labor- 
ers, are near the tree of life, but you, who will 
not labor, are near the tree of death. Havel 
spoken justly ? One must, at least, acknowl- 
edge that my conclusions are true. 

10. Thus it is evident that if Adam by his 
punishment has won forgiveness of his crime 
towards God, that penitence ought also to atone 
for the sins of his whole life. 

But as man continues to sin against God as 
long as he lives, this chastisement is decreed : | 

" To dust shalt thou return." I 

Is this just? 

11. And you of the higher classes, лvhich are g 
but branches of the same trunk, wh}^ will you 

not, in all your existence, submit to this penance, 
and why mu5t ^'ou eat seyeral times in the 



Labor, 5 1 

day ? Are you not as miserable as I am, and as 
are the laborers, my companions ? 

But as you are above us, you are more intel- 
ligent and better educated, and yet you commit 
the greatest of all crimes in the sight of God 
and the world. 

You say, ** We work harder.than the laborer ; 
and it is with the money gained by our labor 
that we buy bread." 

We will speak of that presently. 

12. We see by what has been said that we 
vainly consider how we should atone for our 
sins, for God knows what treatment should be 
prescribed for our illnesses or wrong-doings, and 
he has prescribed this ; only we should accept 
it with sincere ardor, and not use divers pre- 
texts to evade its application. 

Is this true ? 

13. But if we, Adam's posterity, have inher- 
ited his sin, and share in the penance attached 
to it, and if we are really more guilty than Adam, 
because he did not know all that we have been 
taught, then we ought not to try to escape that 
punishment, nor to evade the penance which 
God himself decreed for Adam and his posteri- 
ty. Each of us should labor to gain his bread 
with his own hands, whether he be rich or poor, 
and whatever may be his merit or rank, excus- 
ing only the sick or aged persons who are too 
feeble to work. 

14. Doubtless, if we do not examine manual 
labor attentively, the duty of earning our nour- 



52 Labor, 

ishment, and their respective merits, they will 
not seem of sufficient value to atone for all our 
sins, and to render us innocent in the sight of 
God. Because if we work only for ourselves, 
what recompense can we expect ? 

I have already said w^hat this recompense is, 
and I will repeat it. 

But if the merit of labor seems to you insuffi- 
cient, you will be little disposed to accomplish 
it, even if an angel came down from heaven to 
explain it. 

15. You see, then, how Adam atoned for the 
first sin. But it has been asserted that he was 
for that exiled to hell during five thousand five 
hundred years, and that he suffered there till 
Christ delivered him. 

But this is certainly an interpretation con- 
trary to the law. And w^hy do you assert what 
is not conformable to law ? Is it to be delivered 
from " these abominable occupations," and to 
live like a pomestchik? But if it is just to be- 
lieve that Adam owes his deliverance to manual 
labor, then let us devote ourselves assiduously 
to that duty. Is it just ? 

16. I ask, then, why God did not prescribe to 
Adam as a penance our most esteemed virtues, 
such as fasting, prayer, partaking of the sacra- 
ments, etc. Why did he, instead, direct this 
labor in which men of education can find no 
virtue, but who regard it as almost a vice? 
Why is this ? 

17. From the developments thus far reached, 



Labor, 53 

it would seem that Adam belonged to our class, 
to that which is inferior and ignorant : he knew 
not how to read, to write, nor to speak elegant- 
ly. God gave him an occupation which suited 
his spirit ; and he, being weak, submitted to it. 
But God orders now the same duty for men who 
are instructed in Scriptures and by the voice of 
conscience; and these make a thousand objec- 
tions to it, which God himself would not know 
how to answer. 

1 8. Till now, we have spoken only of Adam*s 
penance, and not that of Eve. Could not God 
in the beginning have created many thousands 
of people ? Why did he create only these two, 
the husband and the wife, Adam and Eve? 
Evidently because in human life there are two 
principal affairs, two duties of equal value and 
importance : the one, that of motherhood ; the 
other, that of manual labor. God said to Eve : 
" I will greatly multiply thy sorrow, and thy 
conception: in sorrow shalt thou bring forth 
children." And he said to Adam : " In the 
sweat of thy face shalt thou knead bread ; and 
thpu shalt return to the ground whence thou 
wast taken." 

10. Now I ask why, in the woman's penance 
only, there is no hidden meaning or allegory, 
but it is accomplished literally, as God pro- 
nounced it? The woman who lives in a poor 
hut and the empress on her throne, wearing a 
crown on her head, have the same destiny : 
they " bring forth children in sorrow." There 



54 Labor, 

is no difference between them. No : they bring 
forth children in such sorrow that it often costs 
them life itself. 
Is this true? 

20. But the woman of the higher class may 
say : *' I have not time for maternal duties. 
They would take me from urgent affairs of state, 
and occasion more loss than profit. And then, 
why should I descend to the level of the meanest 
peasant ? Let me rather pay another with gold 
to undertake this duty for me, or I will buy a 
new-born child which will belong to me as 
though it were my own.*' Can she do this, and 
carry out such plans ? * 

21. No, that cannot be done; we cannot 
change the order established by God. 

You may give all the treasures in the world 
to purchase a child, but it will not then be your 
own. It never has been yours, and never can 
be. It belongs only to its own mother. 

It is the same with the question of food. A 
man may neglect the duty of laboring for bread, 
he may buy a loaf with money ; but that loaf 

* Bondareff*s ideas, as given above, have inspired several 
passages in Tolstoi's What should be done, 

** Thou shalt earn thy bread, he says (page 216 of the French 
translation), in the sweat of thy face, and thou shalt bring forth 
children in sorrow. 

'* But we have changed all that ! as exclaimed Moliere's 
character, who proclaimed that the liver is on the left side. 
Men no longer must labor for food : that will be done by ma- 
chinery; and women need no longer bear children. The world 
will not now be overcrowded with people." 



Labor. 55 

still belongs to the person whose labor earned 
it. 

For even as a woman cannot purchase moth- 
erhood with money or in any other way, so a 
man ought by the work of his own hands to pro- 
cure the necessary food for his own subsistence 
and that of his wife and children. He cannot 
elude the obligation by any means, whatever 
may be his rank or merit. 

22. No species of animals, of birds, or of rep- 
tiles, nothing that lives in the air or on the 
earth, can escape the destiny God has planned 
for it. Man alone, the most educated and intel- 
ligent of beings attempts it. And how does he 
excuse the attempt? Will he have recourse 
anew to the falsehood : " I work more than the 
laborer, and I buy my bread with the money I 
have earned by my work?" Let him abandon 
this excuse which is so f^^lse! For he may buy 
everything in the world with money excepting 
only bread. 

23. I ask once more, why is the penance in- 
flicted on woman to be literally fulfilled, accord- 
ing to God*s command, and only man's penance 
to be considered allegorical? What excuses, 
falsehoods, and pretexts can you offer that are 
not so many refutations in themselves of your 
views ? " This command,*' says the educated 
and intelligent man, "does not say I must work 
in the field with scythe, harrow, or flail. I eat 
my bread in the sweat of my face. That suf- 
fices.** And a simple, ignorant man like me will 



$б Labor. 

believe that he is right and that he is perfect. 
And for the third time I ask for an answer to 
this question : Why is woman's penance to be 
taken literally, while man's is regarded as an al- 
legory ? 

24. Again, God says to the woman, according 
to the Scriptures : ** I will greatly multiply thy 
sorrow." One sees here that there can be no 
other meaning for her penance. . The sorrows 
of motherhood are beyond description ; the 
heart only can comprehend them. "Thy desire 
shall be to thy husband, and he shall rule over 
thee." Now all this occurs as it is written in 
the Scriptures. Then why, if the duty of the 
laborer's wife is literally expressed, should it be 
regarded as allegorical with the woman of the 
educated class? 

25. How I regret the want of eloquence ! I 
feel all the truth and value of this reasoning, 
and yet, for want of eloquence, I can only ex- 
press it weakly and obscurely. But this hope 
sustains me, that if gold can be rescued from 
the very mire, so much more shall bread won 
by labor be preserved, which is so much better 
known and so much dearer to us than gold. 

26. God said to the woman : " Thou shalt 
not work to earn thy food, but thou shalt bring 
forth children in sorrow." Why, then, do our 
women work ? Reader, while waiting till you 
have found an answer to this, I will myself re- 
ply tQ it. 

You who eat in idleness the food we have 



Labor. 57 

worked for are, in Russia, of the number of 
about thirty millions ; but if our wives are not 
to work, as says the commandment, what would 
happen ? Just one thing : the world would 
perish with hunger. 

So we see clearly and certainly that our wives 
work for you, and accomplish your task : you 
eat the fruit of their labor. I wonder that you 
do not fear the. justice of God. But I forget 
that you buy your food with money. 

Do you think that excuses you ? 

27. If a woman should destroy her children, 
would she not merit severe punishment for 
violating God's commandment against murder? 

And should not men be equally punished for 
violating the command God has given them? 
It has been said : if they will not work, neither 
should they eat. But no, they eat several times 
a day with avidity ; without that they could 
not live. 

28. A woman who has destroyed her child 
does penance all her life. From her soul she 
implores pardon of God, and to her dying hour 
she will fast and pray in penitence for her sin. 
1 hus she may hope to obtain forgiveness from 
God for her crime. 

But thou, reader, dost thou repent all thy life 
for having eaten the bread that another has 
earned ? Dost thou ask pardon of God and man ? 
No, thou dost not even think of it ; thou art only 
proud of thy wealth, thou livest well, and think- 
est to owe God nothing. 



58 Labor. 

29. To woman, who is weaker than man, God 
has given an imperative duty. We also of the 
lower class, being weaker than thou in spirit, 
have an imperative duty. 

But thou, being better educated and more 
intelligent than we are, dost as thou wilt in the 
matter. If thou choosest to do so, thou wilt 
labor with thy hands, but not otherwise ; and no 
one can compel thee to work. 

Since thou knowest thy duty, and leavest it 
for others to fulfil, we may judge thee without 
mercy, for thou dost not act in ignorance. As 
for me, who Ixave all my life eaten my own bread, 
and nourished others through my labors, I show 
perhaps a poor spirit, but I have thus gained 
God's forgiveness. 

3p. One may ask why this commandment 
which transcends in importance all others, should 
be unknown among men. 

I think the cause is as follows: 

If it were given to laborers to explain the law, 
they would give it its full extent and meaning. 
Then all the emperors, kings, and princes would 
comprehend that the first and most sacred duty 
is that of laboring with one's hands. Then the 
lower classes, which are now so oppressed, could 
take breath, and could carry in their hearts the 
Igey of all laws, " Do not covet what belongs 
to thy neighbor." 

31. Those who explain our laws scarcely know 
what grain is, or how it is produced ; thus they 



Labor. 59 

have overlooked its value, and the labor required 
for its production : 

Because, in the light of this law, all religious 
practices which are easy of accomplishment, 
and exact no labor, would lose their force and 
fall into disuse ; 

And also because he who explains a law 
should exemplify it by his example, and in set- 
ting those white hands to work, they would be 
found incapable of such labor. 

For all these reasons this law has slumbered, 
and has been, as it were, consigned to a living 
tomb, whence it will not be resurrected to the 
end of the world. 

32. If this commandment, the first which God 
has given us, which promotes all the virtues, and 
whence we derive all eternal good, whether 
earthly or heavenly, were duly comprehended, 
men would so cherish the cultivation of the 
ground that a father would give this order to his 
son : '* When I am at the point of death, carry 
me into the field of grain, that my soul may there 
leave my body ; and in that same field inter my 
remains/' 

But now, what happens? 

The man who labors expects no recompense 
from God ; and he who uses the fruits of 
another's labor looks for no punishment. 

33. If, I repeat, this commandment were com- 
prehended, how ably you would assist your 
laborers in their work ! They would then do so 



бо Labor. 

well that one acre would produce what is to-day 
gathered from five. 

But how shall we make you accept this law? 
If it were we who failed in obeying it, you could 
compel us to respect it ; but if it is you who have 
withdrawn from its obligation, as the prodigal 
son of the Gospel left his father's house, who is 
able to recall you to your duty ? 

For we are, in your estimation, but as ciphers 
without units to give them value, as certain 
mighty ones have said of us.* 

And why would you abase us in this way ? 
Is it only because we nourish you ? 

34. God could certainly have found some other 
way to fertilize the ground and to make it pro- 
duce grain, but he has made this labor the pen- 
ance for our sins. In other words, man could 
not help sinning, and must labor for his own 
support, and it is by this labor that God permits 
us to atone for our sins. 

But you, neglecting this precious remedy, and 
burying it in a tomb, where the inhabitants of the 
earth may not find it, you decide that faith in 
God alone can save you. 

Satan also believed in God, and obeyed him, 
as we see in the Book of Job, ii. 1-3. 

* It might be believed that we invented this, and that no one 
had so spoken of us. But the appellation has been given us 
many times. It is thus we might reply to it: 

You, then, are as the unit i, and we the cipher o. But as we 
are bound to your service, you must unite these figures, i and o. 
which make lo. Thus we are as nine to one. (Author's noiej 



Labor. б I 

You have made labor for bread a secondary 
virtue ; and you will be severely punished by 
God, and judged without mercy, because for 
thousands of years you have hidden this law 
under a bushel, and have slain a living thing. 
Read all the books in the world, and you will 
in them never find labor or the laborers held in 
the least esteem. They are classed below all 
else. And yet it is to the laborer that you must 
go to buy bread, and its productions depends on 
his good-will. Reflect on that. 

35. AU the crimes that are committed on the 
earth, such as thefts, assassinations, frauds, pil- 
lage, exactions, etc., result from the concealment 
of this law from men. 

The rich man will do all in the world to es- 
cape this odious occupation; the poor man is 
eager to throw it off. But explain to men its 
importance and virtue, and all crime will cease 
forever, while men will be delivered from 
poverty and misery, because every one will do 
his best to fulfil this duty to God. 

I remember well that, fifty years ago, the 
money tax was four roubles a head, the custom- 
house dues were trifling, and the king's treasury 
was well filled. 

To-day, the money tax is thirty-five roubles 
a head, and all others are ten times as much as 
formerly; the number of persons liable to be 
taxed is doubled, and yet they complain that the 
amounts collected are insufficient. Thus it may 
be foreseen that in fifty years more the tax will 



б2 Labor, 

be increased to one hundred roubles a head, 
and the people will all be ruined. 

And why? Because every one wishes to be 
elegantly attired, without working for it. On 
all sides you offend us in an insupportable man- 
ner. People have become tricky and given to 
intrigue; they love to deceive ; and thus, having 
no claim on the treasury for the least sum, they 
will assert that it owes them not five but ten 
thousand kopecks, and they will receive them. 

In the last days of March 1883 I learned 
that capital punishment had been re-established. 
I trembled at this news. As one chops meat 
with a blunted axe, so strikes the executioner. 
It is better to kill outright than to torture in 
this fashion. 

I asked myself often what was the best way 
for the executioner to accomplish his duty. 

If there is no other way, if we cannot by any 
possibility constrain men to do right, then we 
must, against our will, consent to shed their 
blood. 

But there is a means, a decisive remedy for 
crime, to be found in God's most ancient law. 
For it was not without intention that God has 
not imposed any command before this, nor 
that he has not ordered us to avoid any vice ex- 
cept neglect of labor. 

We . thus see that labor embraces all virtues, 
while idleness and luxury, on the contrary, pro- 
duce all vices. If, then, a malefactor is found 



Labor. 63 

among laborers, it is because he does not observe 
this law. 

We must not deny that other works have 
merit, but they are only to be considered after one 
has earned his nourishment with his own hands. 

You have permitted the executioner to flog 
men, but what men ? Evidently us only. He 
touches not the rich man, who has for his de- 
fence friends, eloquence, cunning, and, above all, 
money. We have no such advantages. 
' Of course the rich man must expiate his crime, 
if tbe affair reaches the ears of supreme au- 
thority. But it is usually smothered from the 
beginning. It is said in Deuteronomy: *' Presents 
dsLZzle the judges* eyes." 

Of all the petitions I would make to you the 
dearest to my heart is this : Do not crush the 
poor while sparing the rich. And if you must 
crush any, begin with the head rather than the 
tail. Think of my argument against your 
custom of shedding human blood. Let the exe- 
cutioner disappear from among men, and let 
even his name become unknown in all the world. 

36. But will not the baser sort among the 
people say, Here are such and such ones who 
live on the labor of others, why may not I do 
likewise? 

Then I will rob, slay, and exact the uttermost 
penny; I will live like a pomestchik, with my 
hands in my pockets; I will command, and no 
longer obey. For it is not by honest labor that 
you acquire your fine houses. " Honest labor 



б4 Labor, 

will not make you rich, but hunchbacked; if 
you do not sell your soul to the devil, you will 
not make money.'* ^ 

And you will condemn such a man and exile 
him to Siberia, when you are yourselves the 
sole cause of his crimes. 

37. You see now, reader, how much evil there 
is in this wrong, this neglect of labor for bread. 
You see the evil that white hands may do, and 
the good that labor-stained ones can cause to 
spring from the earth. You see, in fine, the good 
result of making known this commandment. 

Have good writers given themselves much 
trouble to explain and teach it? They should 
have shown how useful is its observance, how 
wrong its evasion. They should have en- 
deavored, by speech and writing and by relig- 
ious ceremonies, to exhort all the world to 
manual labor. That would be worth a thousand 
times more than founding a faith on the works 
and merits of Christ alone, and of abandoning 
the task prescribed by God. It would be well if 
writer and preacher should set the example ; but 
how can we make people labor who find it so 
great a fatigue to carry their food to their 
mouths? 

38. If I were, in truth, a man who would avoid 
labor, and who knew nothing of it, and still 
sought to impose these opinions on others, every 
one would have the right to spit in my face, and 

* Russian proverb. 



Labor, 65 

to treat me with disdain. And if I had hitherto 
been held in esteem among men, I might well be 
henceforth treated as a nobod)^ 

This is the reason why writers have never 
spoken of this commandment, nor ever will 
speak of it to the end of the world. 

Adam committed a crime. God punished 
him according to the greatness of his fault, as 
we see in Holy Scripture, and he thus gained 
forgiveness from God. Why, then, should tradi- 
tion say that he was sent to hell for five thou- 
sand five hundred years? 

The New Testament makes no allusion to this 
exile. Whence, then, comes the legend ? If it 
is true, God, in imposing on him the penance of 
labor, deceived Adam by a false promise. For 
if this labor was of no utility to Adam, if, after 
enduring all its fatigues during his life, he was 
condemned after death to the torments of hell, 
every one would exclaim, "Is this thç recom- 
pense God gives us for our labor?" If that be 
true, what can we do? How shall we act? 
How must we live ? by robbery and murder ?. . . . 

And then you invent new laws, you have need 
of the executioner, you brand men with hot 
irons, you send them into exile, women remain 
widows, and orphans become in their turn a 
prey to vice and crime. 

And whose is the fault ? 

Evidently his who has concealed, and con- 
tinues to conceal, the law of labor. 

39. If there were in the world a man having 



бб Labor. 

over you the same power that you hold over 
us, he might permit you — though with reluc- 
tance and much gnashing of teeth — -to live 
without manual labor. But you excite envy 
in the laborers; and in displaying the idleness 
of your life, you weaken the hands that are de- 
voted to labor. Instead of helping them, the 
sight of your idleness discourages their work, 
and even tempts them to commit crimes. 

What a pity there is not such a man in au- 
thority over you ! For we hear the cry, " God 
is in heaven, and the Czar afar off." 

40. We may see, by what has been said and 
by what follows, that the man who eats the bread 
he has earned by his own labor is happy in this 
world and blessed in the world to come. 

But the contrary happens to him who con- 
sumes the results of another's labor. No other 
virtue can save him, because he hais disobeyed 
the principal commandment, and obedience to 
others cannot supply a remedy. 

41. All the products of the earth are bought 
and sold at their price, which is neither more 
nor less than is suitable, and each merit has its 
own recompense. But when our labor, that is, 
our bread, is taken from us for nothing, we are 
neither paid nor recompensed. Why is not our 
labor paid, you ask, reader? Must I, then, 
repeat the same thing ten times over? 

42. Tell me, I pray you, conscientiously, will 
you labor for your bread as much as thirty days 
in the year ? Does that seem impossible to you ? 



Labor. 67 

Is it because you canaot, or that you will not 
do tbi$? Tell me sincerely. 

43. -Labor for bread is a sacred duty for each 
of us^and we should not make excuses to avoid 
it. The more a man is educated, the more he 
owesthe example of labor» neither pretending 
to discover obstacles to it, nor abandoning it 
altogether. 

44. Ought I to seek theological proofs because 
I desire your salvation ? No, but because only 
that theology offers good reasons in favor of 
labor; and because, also, people of my class be- 
lieve firmly in God, in a future life, and in the 
Holy Scriptures. When they hear these words 
they will eagerly grasp this, and all other kinds 
of labor, like those who are dying of hunger and 
thirst. 

45. Then the dark night will become to them 
as the bright day, the passing storm will reveal 
a serene sky, cold will become warmth, and old 
age will blossom into a flourishing youth. 

Therefore I draw from the Holy Scriptures 
the arguments therein contained, but I do not 
address them to you. 

Who will read these articles to the people ? 
You have not the right to do so. Must you 
persuade the laborers themselves to read them ? 
That is impossible, for in so doing you will com- 
mit a grave error. 

46. As the proverb says, " we have not every 
day a feast,'* but on the contrary it is always 
Lent. We should always instruct others to be 



68 Labor. 

pleasing to God and useful to society. But the 
time has come when we have but to ask this 
question : Why do you teach others, when you 
cannot teach your own selves? As is said in 
the same sense, " You place upon the shoul- 
ders of men heavy burdens, that you would not 
so much as touch with your little finger." We 
must set the example of virtue, and encourage 
people to cultivate it, lest the scythe in cutting 
the grass shall become broken against a slxme. 

47. О ye who belong to the upper classes of 
society, reflect on this : If all the laborers in the 
world should abandon labor for bread as you 
do, then every one would die of hunger. Do 
vou admit that we could do this with as much 
reason as you do ? 

We do not rest, you say, we work unceas- 
ingly. We do not eat food without paying for 
it with the money we have earned by our work, 
and we give the price that the laborer demands. 
We eat our bread in the sweat of our face. 

And if we all work, where will the poor get 
their money ? We give it them, and they 
give us bread. We live by them» aad they by 
us. We cannot govern and direct others^ and 
at the зате time labor with our hands. 

The commandment given to Adam applies 
not only to labor for bread, but to all our other 
occupations. Even as we cannot live without 
bread, we cannot live without the things with 
which we occupy ourselves. God, in creating 
the world, intended that we should labor at dif. 



Lober. 69 

ferent sorts of worlc Man amasses weal<?h tô ^et 
rid of this uncongenial labor. In short, it is im- 
possible to be occupied with many affairs at once. 

1 have no rest ; night and day I have my oc- 
cupations, I have scarcely the time to eat food 
already prepared. If we jtoo must labor for 
bread, then the universe must of necessity per- 
ish. I have plenty of money, and I use it in 
great enterprises without labor, and yet you 
want me to go into the fields and torture myself 
for thirty kopecks a day ! I would be regarded 
аяа simpleton. I ptefer to work with my money 
at home. 

But if alt the world manst labor, let those begin 
who are a hundred times rither thtan I ! 

48. These are the pretexts and objections that 
you make to the law ; these are the reasons 
why you wha belong to the upper class would 
decline to labor for bread. If all of us laborers 
did the same, M^ould you admit it as a justifica- 
tion when the plea is made by us? 

No ; but with your absolute power, у oto w^onld 
smother us and our re^Mms together: 

But, I ask you, why do you look upon your 
excuses as legitimatie? 

Bring together a number of men belonging 
to the great world, who waste their thoughts 
on its vanities, and aek thekH what answer you 
ought to make to this question^ 

4^ Bread should be neither bought, nor sold; 
nor used in traffic. You cannot with bread 
heap up richeS) for its value is beyond human es- 



JO Labor. 

timatîon. It is only in certain cases that it may 
be given away, as to hospitals, to orphanages, to 
prisoners, to countries ruined by bad harvests, 
to people deprived of everything in a fire, to 
widows, to orphans, to the infirm and aged, and 
to those who have no homes. 

50. This law is ignored in the world, as we 
have seen, and as I will show you further. 
They might have placed it among. virtueis of less 
importance, but they have not even accorded it 
that much honor. 

Nature herself leads the laborer to seek the 
highest good ; that is to say , bread. 

But if, not content only to see that it is indeed 
an excellent thing, he can penetrate Nature's 
profound mysteries, he will then realize what 
has been said in the preceding article. It will 
no longer be said, " Give me bread," but rather,; 
" Take of my bread," and I do not believe any 
man will enjoy eating the bread that another 
has prepared. 

But at present, what must be done? You 
have put away this commandment as one plunges 
a stone into the depths of the sea, so that its 
name and its memory are lost to the world. 
God will judge between us and you. 

51. Here are some objections that a rich man 
has made to me : " How can you say that it is 
forbidden to buy and sell bread, and to make a 
profit by the traffic ? Besides that which histor- 
ians relate, we see in the Holy Scriptures that 

read was bought and sold and used in traffic, * 



Labor, 71 

yet in spite of that, they sinned not against God, 
You maintain also that bread cannot be ex- 
changed for money ; that we must absolutely la- 
bor fbr it with our hands. It is an evident absur- 
dity. Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, and other ancestors 
of the human race were rich, and had their 
slaves, both male and female. We must conclude 
that they did not work themselves, but ate bread 
produced by the labor of others ; and yet they 
were not for that reason held guilty before 
God. 

52. And to prove more strongly the falsity of 
your assertions, the two great legislators, Moses 
and Jesus Christ, have never spoken of this 
commandment. When Moses wrote : " Knead 
thy bread in the sweat of thy face,'* he referred 
to all occupations. This must be the sense we 
are to give to his words, if we. remember that 
Moses lived for forty years at the court of 
Pharaoh, king of Egypt, without working. 
During the following forty years, he herded 
sheep in the pastures of his father»in-law Jethro, 
in the land of Midian * ; but he did not labor for 
bread. During forty other years he commanded 
the Israelites in the Wilderness,without laboring. 
Thus he never labored. Nevertheless, God ac- 
cepted him, loved him, and placed him above 
all other prophets ; but, according to you, Moses 
was a parasite^ 

53. It is the same with Jesus Christ. He is 

*** Moses kept the flock of Jethro, his father-in-law, the 
priest of Midian." ' Exodus iii. i.' 



72 Labor. 

hitnself God, the Creator of heaven and earth, 
and '\i was he who judged Adam in paradise ; 
but instead of *' Knead thy bread in the sweat 
of thy face/' he says in the Gospel, ** BehoM 
the fowls of the air; they sow not, neither do 
they reap, nor gather into baras ; but God feed- 
eth them;" 

Do you not, then, see that labor ior bread is 
of slight benefit, дог has it in t-his life even utU- 
ity ? It is ^deed the otost useless of all labor, 
and God imposes it on the idle. 

54. And furthermore, show me a laborer 
whom God has admitted into Ьеал'^еп for his 
work's sake. We do not know if the prophets 
were rich, but neither do we know that they 
were poor. But as their books were approved, 
we may conclude they were rich, because à poor 
man's book would never be approved, no mat- 
ter bow useful it might be. 

To this Sirach, a man inspired by God, bears 
witness when he says : " The rich man uttereth 
a folly, and all are silent, his words are vaunted 
to the skies. The poor man speaks reasonably, 
and instead of approving him, they say, ' Who 
art thou?** . 

» ■ ■ ' ■! H ■ ■ ' « M il P »^ ■ » » I 1 I H J » t > ■ I ,1 , , I I • 

♦**If the rich man is deceived, every oee helps him; If he 
speaks insolently (if he reveals what should have been a secret), 
he is jusU6c)d* Bnt if the poor man is deceived* Ые is xtt- 
proached; if he speaks wisely, he is not listened tp. 

** When the rich man speaks, all are silent, and t^ey тдпвС 
his words to the skies. When the poor man speaks, they say, 
Who art thou? (they reproach him with his poverty, and force 
him to be silent.) And if he makes a mistake' they will pass 
it over." (Ecclesiasticus xiii. 26. Translated by Sacy.) 



Labor^ 73 

It is true Jesus Christ calls the poor "his 
brethren," but this is only to «ûcourag^ them, 
lest they fall into despair. The proof of this is 
that He himself frequented only the houses of 
the cicb, ^i^d never entered those of the poor. 

5^5^ My adversary continues by saying : When 
Noah came, into the world, his father Lamech 
said>: '' This same shall comfort us concerning 
our work, and toil of our hands, because of the 
ground whtdk the Lord hath cursed/' (Genesis 
V. 29.) 

Aad thus we. are delivered from the curse of 
labor ; but you, the laborers, are still kept mvl^ 
der \%\. and it must be hoped that God will, not 
condemn you, becauee our class has trampled 
you. under its. feet. And is that a sin in God's 
eyes ? No, for it has been God's will that it 
shoulok be so^ 

56w It is further written in the Scriptures: 

'' Cursed sfaalt thou; be in the city, and cursed 
sha:i£ thou» be in the field» 

Cursed shall be thy basket and thy store. 
Cu!rsed shall be the fruit of thy body, and 
the fruit of thy land, the increase of thy kine, 
and the flocks of thy shee^« 

" Cursed shalt thou be when thou comest in, 
and cursed shalt thou be when thou goest out. 

''The Lord' shall send upon thee cursing, 
vexation, and rebuke im all that thou settest thy 
hand unto for to do, until thou be destroyed, 
and until thou perish quickly ; because of the 






74 Labor ь 

wickedness of thy doings, whereby thou hast 
forsaken me.** (Deuteronomy xxviii. i6t-2o.) 

The adjective cursed signifies unhappy. I 
ask, cries the rich man, to whom do these words 
apply ? to the rich or to the poor ? Certainly 
to the poor laborer, he adds. Do you see now, 
Bondareff, how many curses God sends upon 
the poor laborer, upon his goods, and even upon 
future generations ? 

On such laws is founded the society of the 
world. 

57. Have I told the truth ? he asks, and I have 
replied, yes. 

Can I contradict him ? It would be useless. 
Could my arguments overcome him ? 

I am content to say to myself. You speak 
falsely, sir ! You have not so much brains as 
you think, nor am I the fool you imagine me to 
be. On both points you deceive yourself greatly. 

There are many distinguished persons who 
feel no horror of my poverty ; they can judge 
fairly between us. 

58. The rich man says: If a man of your in- 
ferior class obtains some education, he will seek 
an occupation in which he may dispense with 
manual labor. 

Thus if you were all educated, you would 
labor no more, but would imitate us. 

But, I ask, what will we then eat ? 

We will live as Christ's commandment points 
out: "Behold the fowls of the air; they sow 
not, neither do they reap; nor gather into 



^ 



. Labor. 75 

bîtrns; but God ieedeth. them/' Sojieanswers 
me. . ' ' , . 

, AU tbi$se arguments are absolutely, opposed 
t<^ thc^ primitive and До tbe natural law* 

, I jask of the rich ma;n: Which is , the most 
iKomutable law? Is it ihe theological law that 
Qiaa h^a written upon paper^ or the natural law 
that God has written ia our hearts? Truly, 
neither is to be rejected, but I myself prefer the 
natural Istw^ and I hope, reader, that you. will 
agree with me. 

• 59» Well, Bondareff, if you will present your 
propositions to the government, with mine by 
their sidci my arguments will be. approved, and 
recognized as true and praise wcwthyj,. while 
yours will be;rqected, . 

.6o» You see now, reader, how far I have 
carried my loyalty. I might have concealed 
these objections to ray arguments^ but I will 
not palter with th« truth, because it .is wrong 
to. speak of this great and sacred duty of labor- 
ing for bread, and at the same time to disguise 
the truth under an ignoble flattery. 

But if, in my answer, you find a bitterness 
that seems to you insupportable, clench your 
teeth and say nothing. 1 pray you, do not seek 
a quarrel with me^ 

You are so accustomed to listen to flatterers, 

that my frankness will seem to you intolerable. 

6i. Let us return to our question. How many 

thousand measures^ of wheat, how many 

*The measure spoken of contains about 1 6 kilogrammes. 



^6 Labor, 

roubles, are taken from us eacb year for taxes 
and other exactions ? * 

Besides this revenue, the g^aat lords, the 
poniestchiks, the merchants, and all the rich 
possess innumerable millions* But money is 
not given away. It must he earned by <mr 
arms of flesh and blood, according to the com- 
mandment I have giv^en, and not by tihe pen or 
the tongue. 

&2. Your manner of liv^ing is to us a most 
cruel offence, and to yourselves a shame. I 
kmaw you are a hundred tknes more educated 
and intelligent than I, and therelore you take 
my money and my bread. But since you are 
so intelligent, you should have pity on me who 
am weak. It is said, " Love thy neighbor as 
thyself," and I am your neighbor, as you are 
mine. 

Why are we poor and clownish ? It is beoaisse 
we eat the bread of our own labor. Have we 
time to study and to be instructed ? You have 
taken both our bread and our intelligence from 
us by fraud or violence ; you have criminally 
appropriated all. 



*The taxes are not levied on us, but on the mines and 
other works. The manufacturers, howoTer, raise the prices 
of their merchamdise, and so mnJce us pay the ainQvnt of the 
taxes. And I ask you, whose hands have labored to earn this 
money? In truth they are ours. But in whose hands does 
the money remain ? 

In your vbite hands, that you may enjoy yonr luxury. 

In a word, the whole world is in our hands. (Author's note.) 



Labor, ^y 

It is so, reader, whether you like it or not. 
It is not my fault that the truth is bitter. 

63. The eagerness of your desire makes you 
ask of God for purity of air and an abundance 
of the fruits of the earth. It is well. But to 
whose hands do you owe this abundance ? Who 
ought to cultivate the ground? Is it you, or 
some other one ? 

Can it be I, with my white hands ? you an- 
swer. Truly it is to you, laborers, that this 
work belongs. I would rather die of hunger 
than to gather a blade of straw or a grain of 
wheat. 

64. You should ask, before meals, for a bless- 
ing upon your food, not from God, but from us, 
the laborers ; and after your repast you should 
thank us for it, and not God. 

If God sent you manna from heaven as he 
did to the Israelites in the Wilderness, you 
should thank him ; but since it is from our hands 
that you receive your manna, you should thank 
us, because we nourish you as though you were 
infants or invalids. 

65. When I had written this much, some 
laborers said to me: "All this is useless. Do 
you believe you can make the rich man labor 
for his bread ? If the prophets and the masters 
of all wisdom came to urge it upon him, he 
would not listen to them. If God should cry 
in his ears with the trumpet of doom, * You are 
about to die, and to present yourself to me for 
judgment, and your disobedience to my com- 



78 Labor. 

mand merits eternal punishment,' — even then 
the rich man will remain unmoved, for he pre- 
fers his wealth to all divine benefits. Laboring 
for bread is to him more horrible than torture. 
And you, who are but as the dust beneath his 
feet, would seek, by expressing your owti con- 
victions, to induce him to work Г* 

66. I know, I replied to them, that it is in- 
deed impossible. 

But they may approve of ray argiimeirts, 
since they are taken from the chief divine laws ; 
and perhaps they may make themi known to 
their laborers. For this good action alone God 
would greatly reward them. Then, like per- 
sons suffering from hunger and thirst, men will 
hasten to accomplish this work. They will not 
give themselves to other occupations till after- 
wards, for they all depend on labor for bread. 
Then the obscure night will be as the brightest 
day, and all will be easy. For this reason, 
amid all the cares and labors of my life, I have 
undertaken this task. 

бу. And then the superior class will see our 
merit, which it had never before remarked or 
heard of. It will feel culpable towards God and 
man ; it will no longer depend on or oppress us 
as it does now. We are bought at half price, 
and sold for double the amount. When a 
rich man finds himself in a poor country, far 
from the cities and commercial centres, he meets 
no one with whom he can buy or sell. At each 
mouthful of bread men will ask, in spite of 



Labor, 79 

themselves : Whose hands have prepared this 
food? And as for their conscience! Wealth 
cannot silence it. It will compel men to be 
kinder to those Avho supply them with food. 
Hoping this, I have undertaken my task. 

68. And even if this commandment is graven 
but superficially in your hearts, О you of the 
educated class, you will not the less employ 
all your powers to eat only the bread of your 
own labor, and you will reason thus: Among 
the poor and the laborers, not only the strong 
men are laboring for bread, but also feeble 
women, who have young children that are 
thus neglected. The new-born child, in its 
cradle, suffers from the hot air and the insects 
that torment it, while its body is scorched by 
the sun. Children of seven years also labor 
so far as they have strength for it, and old 
men of seventy who cannot bend their backs 
when reaping the harvest, must do it on their 
knees. These things occur even yet; but for- 
merly, in the days of slavery, it was much worse. 
All these families live and die on the earth, 
following the precept, ** Dust thou art, and unto 
dust must thou return." Think a little about 
this, ye educated men ! 

69. But among us, you will say, a man of 
thirty, in good health, continues all his life, even 
in summer, to whistle, with his hands in his 
pockets, while waiting for these poor martyrs 
to put his food between his teeth. 

With us, the laborers, on the contrary, not 



8o Labor. 

only in summer, but even in winter, our gar- 
ments are soaked in the dews of labor. 

Among all Christians, the first and most im- 
portant sacrament is baptism. But I ask you, 
which washes away the most sin? Is it the 
water of baptism, or the sweat which streams 
from our faces, while all our lives are conse- 
crated to laboring for bread ? There is a prov- 
erb often cited amongst us, " The peasant*s 
frock is gray, but the devil has not devoured 
his reason." This proverb is not true, for 1 
know certainly that I might ask questions for- 
ever without getting an answer. Conse- 
quently, tlte devil has devoured my reason.'*' It is 
certain that we cannot discover with our nar- 
row minds the secrets of God's ways with the 
world, but we may believe that while you were 
washed in the water of baptism at your birth, 
that never since has any labor bathed your face 
in sweat. 

For me, I have not been washed in the water 
of baptism ; thus must I all my life be bathed 
in sweat. Nevertheless, which is the cleaner 
of the two — you who have been baptized, or 
I who have not ? 

You see, then, what your falsehood is worth. 
At each word, at each step, you have been com- 
pelled, against your will, to yield to me, who 
am but a feeble man. Possibly you may yet 
triumph over me through your power, which I 



In other words, they look on me as an imbecile. 



Labor, 8 1 

cannot resist; but you can never destroy my 
arguments, or prove them to be false. 

During' 6884 years* we have been silent be- 
fore you. Now we have spoken a word that 
you have never before heard, even in your 
dreams. I do not depend on you, but on your 
conscience. I hope it will come to my aid. 

70* There are in the world many inventions 
that .astonish the mind. To produce one ol> 
ject, of however little importance, machines 
have been invented. A labor that formerly re- 
quired the efforts of several men, is now done 
more perfectly by a machine than any hand of 
man could have accomplished it. 

But the labor for bread has been done by 
peasants from time immemorial. 

71. Would it not be easy for an inventor to 
say these simple words, " Make this or that," 
that men and beasts should be delivered from a 
wearisome labor? 

No ! He would not come near the labor be 
abhors, or the people who perform it He 
would have no pity for the poor martyrs, — I 
mean the laborers, — nor even for the animals 
themselves, although he will several times in a 
day eat this bread — or rather the blood and 
tears of both beasts and men. 

It is thus, О you of the upper class, that you 
offend us, and at the same time you disobey 
God*s command. 

*This article was wriuen io 1884, 



82 Labor, 

Does not your conduct clearly show the ha- 
tred you feel towards God and your neighbor? 
Well, what answer have you to make to that ? 
You cannot justify yourself before the peasant 
nor have you any excuse to offer. 

72. Here are further facts to show that you 
debase and trample everything under your feet 
If some one of you makes a discovery, you 
honor him with a medal bearing this inscrip- 
tion : " Honor to Labor and to Art." Has any 
one ever been rewarded for labor and art in 
gaining bread ? No. And if one were offered, 
it would be given to the proprietors who culti- 
vate a thousand acres of ground by the hands 
of others, but who would not themselves come 
near this shameful labor nor those who perform 
it. Behold, then, those who have always re- 
ceived all such recompense, and always will. 

73. What occurs in the homes of the poor ? 
The husband and wife must support not only 

themselves, but perhaps a dozen children, be- 
sides their aged parents. And yet they sell you 
part of their bread, or rather they give it to you. 
But, though they have numbered several 
millions in each century, has even one of them 
had any reward whatever? Never! Far from 
being recompensed, they have instead received 
the name of ** moujiks," which signifies a 
" beast" ♦ 

• According to Fr. Michel, this meaning of the word mou- 
jik was given to the French word tnouchique about 1815, form- 
ing a souvenir of the Russian peasants. 



Labor. 83 

Is not this sufficient for you, О peasants ? 

We see, then, that society regards labor for 
bread as the hardest vrot\i in the v^orld. Am I 
not right, then, in proclaiming that these men 
love neither God nor' their neighbor, but only 
themselves? 

It is painful to see a millionâ&'e, who has re- 
ceived several medals for pure trifles, marching 
about with his hands m his pockets, and seeming 
to say, ** Look at me !" 

And what is his merit compared to ours ? It 
is biit as ashes dispersed by the wind. 

What shall мге do? **<xod is iti heaven, and 
the G^arafar off!" К Г may, I will write all 
ïtij griefs in a memorial, and present it myself 
to the Czar, and having gained or lost every- 
thing, it would only reiinain for us to five or 
die. I have taken the right path. I will con- 
tinue to follow it till I die ; for I have no inter- 
est in deceiving myself. I have one foot on the 
earth, and the other in the gi'ave, aiid Г am al- 
ready more than sixty years old. 

74. When they read my writings to a laborer 
who does not know a from It, he will well under- 
stand them. My words will sink deeply into 
hîs heart. How he will thank me for discover- 
ing the law of salvation ! How he will apply 
himself the more zealously to his work! 

But he who would escape labor is like the 
dog who gnaws the stone that has been cast at 
him. He will criticise these reflections, and 



84 Labor. 

hate me for halving" written them ; and he will 
threaten me with future e\al. 

Why should there be such a difference be- 
tween these two men? Because the laborer 
and his superiors are so far apart that their 
opinions can never be the same. 

But what has God willed to do with me? 

He has given us the law of labor for bread. 
This labor is not difficult, but easy and useful ; 
it is not long, but short and readily understood. 

Then why are we not grateful to him foi' it? 

And what happens in the world? One half 
of mankind seeks this labor, and the other half 
avoids it as though it were a mortal poison, 
while they conceal themselves in retired places 
that they may not behojd it. 

But who are these who thus fly and hide 
themselves? Are they ignorant? No; they 
are the most educated and intelligent of men! 
Perhaps they do not believe in God? No ; they 
are true believers. 

75. Your principal objection to labor for 
bread is this: Whatever may be a man^s occu- 
pation or mode of work, he obeys the command- 
ment, " Thou shalt knead thy bread in the sweat 
of thy face." This explanation cannot please 
God nor man. 

It has been said, " Cursed is the ground for 
thy sake." Does this allude to your occupa- 
tions ? No. 

And again : " In sorrow shalt thou eat of it all 
the days of thy life." Here labor for bread is 



Labor. 85 

less precisely designated. And again : " Thorns 
also and thistles shall it bring forth to thee." 
Does Ibis allude to your constant occupations? 

And still further : " Thou shalt eat the herb 
of the field." Is there in this an allusion to your 
occupations ? No. 

And, finally : " In the sweat of thy face shalt 
thou eat bread : dust thou art, and unto dust 
sfaalt thou return." 

Well, the wise men find still a loophole ; they 
sa>y, aU tfbis applies to the pen as well as to the 
plough, and they give solid reasons for saying 
so. 

f6^ But is it possible that God gave only to us 
the painful obligation of laboring in the ground, 
while he permits you to evade it by means of 
your rajoney ? 

With roe, says the rich man, money labors for 
bread. 

It is false ! Money has not sinned against 
God. Nor was the commandment set forth 
against money. Besides that, money does not 
eat bread ; it is not, then, obliged to labor for it. 
How, then, can you say, With me, money labors 
for bread ? Do you find yourself entirely just 
before God, and needing no commandment? 
But were you more holy than the Holy of Holies, 
you do not the less eat bread labored for by 
another. 

In truth, you cannot escape alive out of the 
hands of an adversary like me. 

Here is another excuse that you give. If all 



86 Labor. 

the world were occupied in agriculture, the fac- 
tories and work-shops must stop, and the uni- 
verse would perish. — Nothing could be more 
false. The universe need not perish for that. 
There are eighty festivals in the year, on which 
we are free from all labor, and men will spend 
eighty more in idleness. Do you think because 
a man and his wife shall labor in a piece of ground 
during thirty days, at different periods of the 
year, that the universe will perish ? 

In all large cities, as in Moscow, where there 
is a great number of factories and workshops, 
there are about a million inhabitants. Where 
would you find land enough if all the world 
undertook agriculture? This is but another 
excuse to avoid labor. 

I reply to this objection that the manufac- 
turers and work-people came of their own choice 
to the cities. But might not the factories be 
built in the midst of the country, so that the 
workmen could by turns labor for bread and in 
the factories ? That could easily be arranged, 
if you desire to help the lower classes. But you 
only care to be concerned for your equals. 

Do you refuse to labor for bread because, if 
all the world should be so occupied, there would 
not be enough land ? With more reasonableness, 
if )юи decided to labor, you would cultivate 
alone the whole earth ! 

For my part, I now cultivate a bit of ground ; 
hut if this revolution takes place, I must divide 
it with another. You, my friend, may work by 



Labor. 87 

my $ide, with your white hands, in frost or heat, 
in storms and snow, when you will tremble as 
with fever, and your hands will become like 
spiders' feet 

Is it right that we alone shall endure these 
evils ? 

79, If you are so convinced that we eat the 
bread which you have gained by your labor, 
why do you sell it to us? — We do not compel 
you to do so. You beg us to buy it. Is it, then, 
our fault ? 

If all laborers understood the primitive law, 
they would not sell their bread, nor even give 
it away, except in certain admissible cases. — 
Where, then, would they get money? — They 
would know how to find it. 

The idle man, like a door on its hinge, passes 
ail his life lying on his bed. He has never seen 
how labor for bread is done. Thus he will 
scarcely have read ten articles in my book than 
he will throw it aside, saying, "Л is vitriol Г 
This verdict appears to me profound and well 
merited. 

It is not he who has found this word, but 
Providence has put it in his mouth, because to 
him the bread of his own labor would be as 
vitriol, while that gained by another's labor is 
sweeter than honey. 

Do you see, my readers, how deceit loves 
itself? And if it did not seem lovely to itself, 
to whom could it appear agreeable or virtuous ? 



88 LûbvT. 

80. I have asked myself, why' do they give 
deceit the name of deceit? 

They might have given it a better name, be- 
cause it is more veracious than even truth. 
It exposes and betrays- itself. 

It has been said: " The voice of thy brother's 
blood crieth unto me from tlie ground/* Thus 
God spoke to Gain, that is, to the voice of deceit. 
If it cries to God, why is it silent to all the 
Avorld ? " And God set a mark upon Cain," the 
token of the evil doer. Does he not to-day 
mark with this token all wicked ones, and' with 
them the sluggard of whom I have spoken, he 
to Avhom I owe an eternal gratitude ? 

81. You do not answer. Do you-, then, ap- 
prove of what I have said ? Yott^ might, how- 
ever, make this answer, which is the objection 
you offer in reality against labor for bread: 
" I cannot do several things at once. II Г àrti- 
occupied in agriculture, I should hate no time 
for other things.'* 

But, I reply in turn : " I have, besides labor- 
ing for bread, many others things to do. How 
do I, who am an ignorant peasant, bring them 
all to completion ? If I were as educated and 
intelligent as you, I would occupy myself with 
many thousand affairs. Why, then, with your 
infinite spirit, can you attend to only one ? 

82. When you fly from the labor for bread, 
or from the conscience which torments you, 
you say : " If we all labor for bread, where virill 
the poor get their money, for they live by their 



Labor. 89 

labor? They supply us with bread, and in 
return we give them money; and thus the pea- 
sants live by us, and we by them; one hand 
washes the other, and so both are clean.** 

No, your argument does not disconcert us. 
We are not as "stupid as you believe, and you 
yourselves are «ot as intelligent as you think. 
Do .not forget that I who speak am standing 
at the threshold of your palace (like Lazarus). 

Half the people living do not labor for bread ; 
the other half, laboring for and not selling it, 
can scarce support themselves. But why should 
these last not know where to find money, if 
all the world labored for bread ? 

Far from being useful, the sale of bread is 
hurtful. This present year the harvest is good, 
and the laborer sells his wheat to the rich man 
for thirty kopecks the measure. He thinks 
what he has icsft will suffice for his wants. But 
suppose that, next year, the harvest shall be 
bad, and we have a famine : the laborer will buy 
his wheat from the same rich man for a rouble 
and fifty kopecks the measure ; and if he have not 
enough money to pay for it, he will sell his 
^beasts at half price. And while he has not sup- 
{^lied his wants, he has sold his wheat, is de- 
piwdd of his cattle, and will become a beggar. 
Tlius many are ruined by selling their wheat. 
Then how can you say that the peasants cannot 
live without selling their wheat, when by doing 
so they die of hunger? The true conclusion is 
that it is you, not we, who live on others. 



QO Labor, 

Cultivate, then, according to the command 
ment, a piece of ground, and all will belong to 
you that you need. 

83. Sometimes I have not a single kopeck for 
one or perhaps two months. However, when 
I am fatigued with my day's work, I make 
tura,^ I eat well — the tura seems to me better 
than all your dainty dishes are to you; and I 
return to my work singing. 

But you, if you were for two months without 
my bread, what song would you sing? 

Now consider well which of us two lives at 
the expense of the other. Is it you or I ? It is 
you. 

Then why do you not place yourself among 
my friends? Which of us should occupy the 
first place at the table ? It is surely I. But 
why have you taken it? Who has given it to 
you, or accorded you this honor? 

Defend yourself by valid excuses, or else do 
not eat our bread. Or, if you will, cultivate 
with your own hands a piece of ground, and 
then take your place at the table. Otherwise, 
be off Avith you ! 

84. I think your reply would be like this 
which the rich man made to me : I would labor, 
but I know not how. Once in my life I took 
up a scythe; I raised it in the air with all my 
force, and it but glanced over the grass. Then 
I used more strength, and half buried it in the 
ground. Next I took a reaping-hook, and after 

^^^^^^^^'"^^^^"" ' " ' " * ' ' ■■■■-■■■ ■ ■ — --■■—.■■ — ■ II ■ . I ■■ ■ M ■ Щ ■ ^— ^м^^мм^ 

* Bread crumbled and soaked in kvass. 



Labor. 91 

great e0orts I had gathered half a sheaf, when 
I cut my hand. This is what happened to me 
one day that I Avas in the fields. And if I 
should take seriously to work, all my com- 
panions would laugh in beholding such an 
astonishing spectacle. 

But how do you know how to eat? I asked 
him. When you were only two years old you 
could eat, but now, though already old, you do 
not know how to work! Is this for want of 
strength, or because you do not wish to know? 

85. The rich man has also made me the fol- 
lowing excuses : ist. I would labor for bread, 
according to the commandment, but I am 
ashamed to do so; people would point their 
fingers at me. 2d. Is it proper for a rich man 
like me to labor with the poor? 3d. All in- 
telligent and well-educated men would exclude 
me from their society. 4th. In laboring for 
bread, I would earn but 30 kopecks a day, 
while at home, with my pen, I can earn 10 
roubles. Behold the reasoning by which the 
educated classes reject this labor in which they 
can see only loss and humiliation ! 

36. But, they add, are we for that reason 
culpable in God's eyes ? No ; for Jesus Christ, 
when dying for us, exhorted us not to commit 
sin, and not to fulfil this commandment, that \% 
not to labor for bread, in saying : " Behold the 
fowls of the air,** etc. Therefore we do not, 
a«d never will, labor for bread. 

87. But if you are thus redeemed, I reply, 



92 Labor. 

why, then, do you eat the product of another's 
labor? Can it be, that he has redeemed you, 
and not us ? If he had thus redeemed the w^ole 
human race, he should have arrangpsd tiiat wheat 
would be produced already kneaded ii^to bread 
and baked to each one's taste, or he should 
have sent us manna from heaven, as was éone 
to the Israelites in the Wilderness. 

But we see clearly that he did not redeem 
men either from sin or from labor for br<ead. 
Each of us must redeem himself by good works, 
and not rely only on the merits even of Christ. 

88. We sin, we disobey the divine precepts, 
and we incur all the maledictions pronoumred 
in Deuteronomy. It is not so, according' to 
you. Jesus Christ, you would say, t^c^s on 
himself our sins^ our impieties, and our maledic- 
tions. What a fine invention ! and how exact 
your calculation is! No; each one must re- 
deem himself by obeying the primitive com- 
mand, " Eat the bread of thy labor." There is 
no greater virtue ; and to fail in it is the most 
dangerous of crimes. 

89. If you are rich, live in luxury as much 
as you can, be as haughty as you will, 2mA aug- 
ment your dainty dishes, but instead of evading 
labor for breads hasten to accomplish it. 

90. There is always a great enmity between 
the riiDh and the poor. But when they are to- 
gether, they dissimulate. Who has created this 
hatred — the rich or the poor? Says Sirach: 
** What agreement is there between the hyena 



J 



Labor, • 93 

and the dog? And what peace between the 
rich and the poor ? 

*' As the proud hate humility, so doth the rich 
abhor the poor.*' (Ecclesiasticus xiii. i8~20.) 

Whose is the fault? It is the rich man's, not 
the poor laborer's. 

I ask you again, and still more loudly, not 
to forget that I who stand on the threshold 
of the rich man's palace, like Lazarus, address 
myself, in the паше of all laborers, to the higher 
classes, and not only to the reader. 

91. They say: We accomplish ten tiaies 
more work than the laborer. Can we, then, be 
regarded as sluggards? 

On festivals the laborer works, while the rich 
man rests on his couch, serving neither himself., 
his neighbor, nor God. They say then, the 
idle man does his duty, while the laborer com- 
mits a crime, in breaking the fourth command- 
ment. 

Is not. that the position we occupy ? 

During 330 days in ithe year do what you 
will; occupy yourself as it shall please you; but 
during 35 days, at different tinges in the year, 
every man should labor for bread, 

92. But why do I speak at such length, when 
a few words ought to suffice ? It is because I 
must oppose a solid barrier to the subterfuges 
behind which you entrench yo.urselvest; and for 
that, I must r^ply fully to your, many argu- 
ments. 

Can it be because there is neither a past nor 



94 Labor, 

a future for God, but all is to him as the present, 
that he has not comprehended that if man 
must always eat, he must also always labor? 
If he inflicted on you a penance for your sins, 
and said, Take a stone of a h^indred pounds 
Aveight and carry it, you would reply: I caii- 
not do it, Lord, for you have not given me 
strength sufficient. Or if he said, Fly in the air 
like a bird, you would answer: You have not 
given me wings, and it is impossible to obey 
your command. Such excuses would be legiti- 
mate. 

But why can you not labor for bread ? In 
truth, you will reply, it is because of my con- 
dition in life. I have white and delicate hands, 
and the ears of corn will scratch my skin. 

94. Again, you will evade labor for bread 
because you say that in occupying yourself in 
any work, you obey the commandment, "In the 
sweat of thy face shalt thou knead bread." 

One will say : " I have written, to - day, nine 
hundred and ninety-one lines ; thus I have eaten 
my bread in the sweat of ray face." Another 
says: " I have, to-day, given my orders to my 
people, I have seen that they labored well for 
me ; thus have I eaten my bread in the sweat of 
my face." , A third says : " I have, to-day, been 
driven about the city in a rich carriage; I have 
thus eaten my bread in the sweat of my face." 
A fourth says: "I have, to-day, sold damaged 
merchandise for good, and I have defrauded 



Labor. 9$ 

inexperienced men : I eat my bread in the sweat 
of my face." 

And the thief says in his turn : 

"I have not slept during the night, I have 
labored with my hands : I eat my bread, more 
truly than you, in the sweat of my face." 

If it is not by truth, it is by cunning and 
eloquence that you gain your cause, as Kriioff 
has said.* '' All the animals who are provided 
with claws and teeth are innocent, they are al- 

* Kriioff (Ivan Andreiewttcb), the Russian fabulist, was born 
in a small village of Orenburg in 1768, and died at St. Peters- 
burg in 1864. Attracted by the theatre, he composed in early 
youth a farce called "The Coffee-pot" (1783), and several 
comedies and tragedies, of which the principal ones are CUo- 
patra and Philomela. 

But this was not his real vocation. In 1808, by the advice 
of one of his friends» who foresaw his true talent, he translated 
two of La Fontaine's fables. The Mmd and The Oak and the 
Reed, His translation was striking in its originality and its 
picturesque character. 

Published in the Spectator of Moscow, they obtained a great 
success. K/iloff then devoted himself exclusively to the com- 
position of fables, and became the La Fontaine of Russia. 

Nevertheless, the pen of Kriioff gave all subjects a Russian 
aspect. He distinguished himself from La Fontaine and 
Lessing by his coarse pleasantry and cynical wit, which are 
qualities that are popular In Moscow. 

His Fables form a considerable collection (St. Petersburg, 
1847* 3 vols, in 8vo}. Count Orloff published in Paris, in 
i8i5, Russian Fables taken from M. Kriioff* s Collection^ and imi- 
tated in French and Italian Verse by several Authors (2 vols, in 
8vo). M. A. jBaugeault has translated in verse Kritoff's prin- 
cipal fables (Paris, 1852, 8vo). We must also mention the 
metrical version of Charles Parfait (Pion, 1867.) The fable re- 
ferred to by Bondareff is an imitation of The Animals Sick of 
the Plaguct by La Fontaine. 



'96 Labor. 

most holy; but they accuse the timid ox; the 
tigers and wolves cry out against him ; and they 
at once strangle and devour \ m.'* 

It seems to me that Kriloff by the animals, 
meant the laborers, and intended the timid ox 
to personify the rich man. What do you think 
about it, reader? 

95. You who, here in Russia, eat the bread 
produced by our labor number about thirty 
millions, including Jews and Gipsies. How 
can we support you all, supplying you with fine 
clothes, good beds, and warm covering? 

It is for you that we must labor day and night, 
without rest, and endure great privations. 

Is it not unjust? Is it not criminal on j^our 
part? ^ 

96. And as though you had not heard what I 
have been saying, you will ask : Of what injus- 
tice are you the victims, and what crime have 
we committed ? We do not take your bread 
for nothing, but we buy it with the money we 
have earned by our own work. 

And where did you get this money? 

It was earned by working according to the 
commandment. 

But with us our money does not accrue from 
our work. Money is not given for nothing; it 
must be earned by the bodз^ by flesh and bones. 
And then, can you atone for sin with money? 
Can you buy the law of God with money ? 

Your excuse condemns you still further. You 
have the right to buy what you please with 



Labor, 97 

money, but bread cannot be bought at any 
price. \* 

97. Do you think you are saved by the con- 
secrated wafer which' you receive in church 
from the hands of the priest? But, you reply, 
it is not the wafer that saves me, it is my faith 
in Christ, whom I receive under the symbol of 
the wafer. No ! faith without works, that is to 
say, without the commandment, is dead. You go 
to church, having one sin, and you return with 
two, because you have eaten the bread of an- 
other's labor. And where, do you ask? In 
church. 

98. Not only, О ye rich, do you now live by 
the labor of others, but you hope in the future 
life to obtain by the merits of another, who is 
Christ, eternal happiness. Thus you believe 
you have no duty to fulfil, and that you may 
enjoy at ease all the comforts of this world. 
You walk on a wide and spacious path, but 
whither will it lead you ? You know as well as I. 

99. Often among you are found men who, 
when fortune deserts them and they lose all 
their wealth, being forced by circumstances to 
labor for their own bread, fall into despair, and 
become thieves and drunkards, and undertake 
all sorts of criminal enterprises. And usually 
they die a violent death, to escape labor for 
bread. But revive this commandment, whose 
life does not appear among you till you die, and 
the millionaire, finding himself in the same con- 



qS Labor, 

dition with us, will no longer seek to avoid tlâs 
labor, but will turn to it eagerly. 

lOO. Let us speak now, reader, of these three 
classes of men : the Jew, the Gipsy, and the 
educated European, who, like the others, eats 
the bread of another's labor. Which is most dis- 
pleasing to God and man ? 

It is certainly the European, for we cannot 
consider the Gipsy, who is but a half-savage. 
As for the Jew, he was once master of the 
Avorld, and compelled every one to labor for 
him ; but this is no longer so. To-day the Jew 
has gone from the head to the foot, and the 
European from the foot to the head, and, like 
the first mentioned, he also eats the bread of 
another's labor. 

I ask, which of these three is most displeasing 
to God and man ? 

loi. I know the reader will say: Can I com- 
pare myself to a Jew or a Gipsy ? I who live 
by the truth, and they by falsehood and deceit ? — 
Yes, if you have the body of an angel and not 
that of a man. But when you eat the bread of 
another's labor, there is not in this food a particle 
of truth. It is but two hours since you have 
eaten, and you are thinking of again stretching 
out your hand towards the tree of life, to take 
the forbidden bread. How can you, then, boast 
that you live by the truth ? 

I02. From all the preceding arguments, we 
may conclude that there is nothing in the world 
more evil and infamous than to eat the bread of 



\ 



Labor. 99 

another's labor. On the other hand, there is 
notbing more healthful and sacred than to eat 
the bread of one's own labor. I do not say this 
as a supposition, but in accord with God's 
fundamental law, with which our natural law 
also agrees. 

103. I have said that, according to you, an 
idle and luxurious life is conformable to the 
laws of salvation. I did not at the moment an- 
swer this sufficiently. But I will now do so in 
a peremptory manner. (I do not speak of those 
who live from day to day, from hand to mouth.) 

To gain eternal happiness, the servants of God 
retire to monasteries, deserts, mountains, and 
isles, where they lead a wandering life. 

What do these men, who trample under foot 
God's law by eating the bread of other men's 
labor, seek in these places? 

Can they not be virtuous while accomplishing 
the labor God has blessed ? 

104. When the harvest is bad, the poor man 
is sorrowful ; but the rich man is content, be- 
cause, during a famine, he increases his riches. 
Thus he will call a famine a good harvest, 
while it is the chastisement of God. And 
if he joins in the prayers of the poor, do not 
believe him, for he is a hypocrite. 

105. And 3^u say the two classes are not at 
enmity with each other ! The rich man will at 
once make this excuse : What is my wealth ? 
There are many who are a hundred timcsi*iacJi^ 



• • a * J 



lOO Labor. 

than I ; it is to thçm and not to me that you 
should attribute the evils of which you speak. 

To that I reply : Wp must not measure wealth 
by figures, but by the number of peasants who 
surround the rich man ; for, in the country, those 
who have each five thousand roubles are richer 
than the millionaire of Moscow. 

If you readers of the city could see the miser- 
ies that are inflicted on the poor by the rich in 
the country, you would take my arguments 
into consideration. Else you could never be- 
lieve me. 

io6. The poor man, the laborer, studies day 
and night, during all his life, for better ways to 
prepare the earth for wheat, or for duly caring 
for his implements and his cattle. He brings 
up his sons from infancy to the same labors. 
His efforts are crowned with success. And on 
the other side the rich man ponders day and 
night how to buy from the poor man at half 
price and to sell to him again at double rates, 
and he accustoms his sons from infancy to these 
speculations. 

The first and last of God's laws concern la- 
bor, and the principal one is that of labor for 
bread ; but educated and intelligent people 
evade this labor, and live like pomestchiks, with 
their hands in their pockets. They have im- 
posed all labor upon the poor and weak, but 
these, in retaliation, do not sleep or lose their 
grç^iice of mind ; they steal, kill, burn, and de- 
fraud each other. 



Labor. 10 1 

It is well. As says the proverb, the master is 
for his bread (that is, his own interests), and the 
workman is not less cunning than his master ; 
for, if intelligent people put the candle under a 
bushel, there is no reason why we should watch 
it. Act, then, as you can, О laborer ! 

107. Nevertheless, the poor man is very hum- 
ble before thee, О rich man ! And if thou treat- 
est him with hypocrisy, he will fall alive into 
thy hands. 

Thus the poor man goes in his poverty to the 
rich man's house, and returns half naked. Sirach 
says with reason : " Hunting lions is like hunt- 
ing savages in the desert ; so the poor are the 
prey of the rich." * 

This is what often happens in a poor country 
where a single* rich man is settled. The poor 
must sell to him, and must also buy of him. 

And the rich man still says : I make fair and 
honest bargains. I buy and sell loyally. Every 
bargain has an amiable intent. Would you sell 
to me, or would you buy ? There is no sin in 
commerce. I do not sell by false weights or 
measures ; I do not deceive in my accounts. In 
a word, it is just to say that, according to the 
commandment, I eat my bread in the sweat of 
my face. 

And now, to discuss this with him ! 

All that he has said is injurious to us. He 
does not understand the meaning of the com- 

* *' As the wild ass is the lion's prey in the wilderness : so 
the rich eat up the poor." (Ecclesiasticus, xiii. 23.) 



I02 Labor. 

mandment, although his conscience is beginning 
to awaken. 

109. The rich also, present this excuse : I give 
men money that they may work for me. It 
would be to my interest not to give them work, 
but still I do it And I hope to be rewarded by 
God for my good work. And then without me, 
where would they get money for their neces- 
sities ? 

I reply : You should employ in your good 
works treasures gained by your own labor, fol- 
lowing the commandment which I have given, 
that is to say, wash you with clean water, and 
not with that which is impure. But you pretend 
to help men with the product of their labor! 
Who, then, has earned the money that you give 
them ? Is it your money ? No, it belongs to the 
laborers. Then what reward can you look for? 

1 10. It is said in the Law : ** As is the laborer, 
so is the work ; as is the ground, so are the fruits.** 
In other words, if we are but ignorant peasants 
and useless portions of society, why do you love 
our work, that is, our bread? Believe me, 
reader, if I were as educated and intelligent as 
you are, I would never eat bread at all, but only 
silver or gold. 

111. They will tell you: I esteem with my 
whole heart all laborers, and I also love labor 
for bread, and I detest and scorn all sluggards. 
To this 1 reply, in the words of the proverb : " I 
hear the voice of Jacob, but it is Esau that draws 
near to me.'* 



Labor. 103 

112. We ought not to give away a single ear 
of wheat. — Why is that? asks the reader. Be- 
cause one half of the world will not come near 
to cultivate the earth, and the other half work 
against their will, because they do not know 
where to take refuge, since all the corners 
of the earth are filled with sluggards. Where 
three or four men would suffice, ten or a dozen 
arrive ; and not having eaten for two or three 
days, they crowd one upon another. If one were 
driven away, he would become one of the most 
terrible and criminal of brigands. 

113. I repeat, we should not give away one 
ear of wheat. We except only women who 
fulfil exactly the penance God gave to them, 
and which we have cited ; the aged, who labored 
formerly, but now have lost their strength ; the 
infirm ; and the children, whose day of labor is 
yet to come. О Heaven! hear my prayer! 
Grant us for them an abundance of the fruits of 
the earth. 

114. "Do unto others as you would they 
should do unto you *' This is the law. — Very 
good ; for m}' part, I do not think there are any 
other virtues. — But, I ask you, as you would 
not wish others to eat the bread of vour labors, 
why do you eat the bread of theirs? In other 
words, why do you do to others what you 
would not wish they should do to you? 

I buy my bread with топез\ 

Well, let us discuss that. You have always 



I04 Labor. 

the same song on your lips, and it sets my teeth 
on edge. 

115. Have 1 not said openly that bread cannot 
be bought at any price, that it can only be bought 
with labor, because its value cannot be fixed by 
human reason ? In certain cases it can be given 
and received gratis. But you have arrived at 
such a result that in certain cities of Russia a 
loaf of bread costs no more than a piece of dried 
muck. 

What ignominy ! I shudder at the remem- 
brance of this injury that we have received. 

But for you, rich men, there is no better 
bargain than bread. All is for the best. This 
is what you call law. 

116. Ah, have pity on us, О you of the upper 
classes ! Do not destroy my words ! If they 
are illegal, let my body perish, but let my work 
rest among the archives where you preserve 
what is most important to the State. Among 
the future generations one man may be found 
sufficiently just to publish it. I would perish 
gladly, if only my work may give to the millions 
of laborers who will come after me one great 
joy, and that they may obtain from it some 
solace in their labors ! 

117. Notwithstanding your close studying 
from infancy to extreme old age, consider what 
is the distance that separates you from the igno- 
rant laborer: it is but one step only! A man 
of elevated position, a functionary of but one 
degree inferior to yourself, and a man of our 



Labor. 105 

class, the starchina (the magistrate of a canton), 
will meet to make an inquiry in view of a pro- 
posed lawsuit. The canton gives the functionary 
some cases of wine, and he consents to arrange 
matters. He changes the statement of facts, 
and he presents a false report to his chief, who 
does not observe anything irregular in it, and 
signs it. Thus the innocent become guilty, and 
the guilty innocent; and this is through the 
complicity of the superior with the inferior. 

118. But why have they deceived him? Not 
only because he does not labor himself, but 
because he knows nothing of how labor for 
bread is accomplished. If he had joined to his 
science this labor for bread, his intelligence 
would be so enlightened that he could not be 
deceived. See how many faults and errors are 
engendered by idleness ! 

1 19. Behold how the good writers act : if 
they must criticise a superior, they soften their 
terms, and soothe him, as in Kriloffs fable of the 
geese. " It would be easy,*' he says, " to make 
this fable still more intelligible ; but I am afraid 
of irritating the Geese."* 

♦THE GEESE. 

A long rod in his hand, 

Peter drove on a band 

Of geese to market bound ; 

And being pressed for time, he was not overkind, 

But bunted them and hurried them lest he should be behind : 

And would not let them stray, or straggle o*er the ground. 

With rage the birds now gobbled, and in furious manner hissed, 



1об Labor. 

In other words, they do not cast the truth into 
his face, but approach it by a by-path. 

But I, whether from awkwardness or from 
love for the truth, I do irritate the geese. What 
do you think of it, reader? Shall they give me 
blows with their beaks, till death threatens to 
follow? Never mind; cost what it may, I will 
not be silent. I will not hypocritically conceal 



Till the lad was fairly puzzled and his way to market missed. 
A man who chanced to pass that way, the gander soon espied, 
And then began his neck to stretch, as wrathfully he cried, 
(In the goose language,) " Look, kind sir, how cruelly we are 

treated 
By this audacious peasant, who our tempers thus has heated. 
We're geese of noble lineage : our ancestors were holy, 
And in the Roman capitol were worshipped all and solely. 
Karasmin and d'Hosier agree on this if nothing else." 
Said the stranger, ** Worthy creatures, I do not doubt your 

words. 
Your manners show me that you are most aristocratic birds." 
" Truly and of our ancestors we share the glorious name. 
And strive to live up to the deeds that won them endless 

fame." 
*' 'Tis well. Of your great deeds recount me some, I pray." 
*• Our ancestors — " ** I know that yarn for many a weary day. 
They saved great Rome by hissing ; but yourselves, what have 

you done ?" 
" Our ancestors — " '* Oh, bother them! what merits have you ?" 

•'None!" 



Ah, if I chose to listen to the vauntings and the boast 

Of geese who don't wear feathers and who are not good to 

roast, 
What sermons I could preach! " Hush, hush ! I prithee, not 

a word !" 
To-day shines forth the glorious bow of promise from the Lord. 



Labor. 107 

my thoughts. Since I have taken the right path 
I will follow it while I live, not deviating to the 
right nor to the left. 

There is a book called The Civil Marriage, 
I have never read it ; but I know that the po- 
mestchik Novossesslky therein complains to his 
wife of a peasant : ** Would you believe/' he 
says, " that this miserable servant has neglected 
to air my shirt ? " (I can scarcely help laughing 
in writing this.) " I have scolded him, and he 
replies : * I have always given your late father, 
the general, a damp shirt, and he never com- 
plained/ *' 

This characteristic confounds me ! Idleness 
has so taken possession of a man that he finds it 
an insupportable task to put on his own shirts. 
We must conclude that if he was shown the 
everlasting fire in which he and his descend- 
ants must burn eternally, according to the 
Christian doctrine, he would consent to be 
thrown into it, rather than gather one blade of 
straw or one grain of wheat. 

Ah, in what a profound abyss are men 
plunged by idleness and luxury ! Talk to the 
rich of the divine commandment, and he will 
bring up eloquently a hundred arguments to 
prove that he eats his bread in the sweat of his 
face. 

121. I would like to ask (if 1 knew whom to 
address) whether the pomestchiks do have 
their shirts put on them by their servants. It 
is true, comes the answer from all sides; their 



io8 Labor, 

clothes are put on them like dead men's shrouds ! 
Then what do they do with their owft hands all 
the while ? 

This is a feature of slothfulness no one could 
have imagined, if it had not been true. 

122. How these peasant-slaves suffer! The 
very recollection of their sufferings grieves me. 
I shudder when I think of them. It would have 
been better for them never to have been born. 
Had I a thousand tongues, I could not tell all 
the fatal calamities which befall them, or the 
torments these martyrs endure. 

Human lips could notexpress their sufferings. 
But I will tell you one outrage w^e undergo. 
It may be that you who listen are yourselves 
pomestchiks. I will not the less tell the truth, 
for I would not be accused of falsehood. And 
I have myself been a laborer with a pomestchik 
on the Don. 

123. Three days in the week, the peasant 
labors for himself ; the other three days he and 
all his family labor for the pomestchik. His 
wife, his children scarcely twelve years old, and 
the old men of sixty, work in their turn, and like 
beasts of burden. The implements of labor, the 
plough, the cart, the harrows, the scythes, the 
axes, etc., all must be bought by the peasant. 

If he has involuntarily caused some waste in 
laboring for the pomestchik, he must repair it 
at his own expense. He must, besides, thrash 
the corn in a field far from all habitations, and 
there, notwithstanding the cold, he must work 



Labor. 109 

all day for the pomestchik. Many labor while 
half naked, and tortured with hunger ; but it 
matters not, they must labor for the pomestchik. 
Is it not a cruel punishment? And yet these 
people have neither defender nor protector. 

124. Three days for himself and three days 
for the pomestchik ; in a word, one year for 
himself, and one year for the pomestchik: this 
is the peasant's life. But from the year in which 
he works for himself he must first deduct eighty 
days which are festivals, — for these people are 
very pious, — then eighty other days of idleness 
resulting from the accidents of labor. And, 
finally : the peasant is not a stone, he may fall 
ill, perhaps for fifty days in two years. There 
remain, then, only one hundred and fifty-five 
days in which he can labor for himself. 

125. I ask if, in this case, he can, on one hun- 
dred and fifty-five days of work, supply all his 
wants for two years, that is, for this year and for 
the next (in which he labors for the benefit of 
the pomestchik). Consider that he must, besides, 
collect enough money to pay each year the fis- 
cal and personal taxes. If the. husband or 
wife should die, there remain perhaps a dozen 
children under age : to-day they have the fu- 
neral, and to-morrow they must resume work 
for the pomestchik. 

126. Besides that, the pomestchik takes from 
the peasants divers provisions, as chickens, 
geese, eggs, butter, etc. He keeps note of what 
is given, and with those who give nothing he 



I 



I IÔ Labor, 

will deal trickily, and they have no one to 
whom they can complain. Endeavor to speak 
to him of the commandment, and he will not let 
you utter a word. He will overwhelm you 
with arguments, and will prove to you that 
he follows the commandment, and that he is 
himself content to eat his bread in the sweat of 
his face, and that the peasants on the contrary 
are sluggards and parasites, etc. 

Perhaps there are some good pomestchiks 
somewhere; but I insist that at least all those 
on the Don are such as I have described them. 

127. Is it rights you ask, td thus insult th6 
benefactors who nourish you, or, in other 
words, to return evil for good, and hatred for 
love? 

But how can you always thus praise your- 
selves, and claim that no one is just or compas- 
sionate but yourself? 

128. They say : A pomestchik may be a vir- 
tuous man. 

Well, without doubt he might if he labored 
for his own bread. That never has happened, 
nor ever will. 

In the eyes of the true believer, the principal 
means of being absolved from sin is in receiv- 
ing the holy communion. But according to 
God's first commandment, the absolution gained 
by laboring for one's own bread is a thousand 
times more to be esteemed. But the million^ 
aire has paid twenty kopecks the measure for 
wheat, and so he is free of the commandmeôtl 



Labor. Ill 

129, It is claimed that the condition of the 
pomestchik*s peasant-slaves is preferable to that 
of the peasants employed by the State. They 
say that, because they do not know us, for there 
are many thousand of us, and we can prove the 
contrary a thousands times. But the pomest- 
chik stands by himself, and he has but to say 
that the peasants under his protection are 
happier than those employed by the State, and 
his words will be believed. 

130. All that is now over, and slavery is 
abolished ; but the sorrow that the sight of its 
infamies has caused me has not yet disappeared, 
and it will for a long time leave its traces on my 
soul. 

Till the age of sixty, the peasant labors 
for the pomestchik ; deducting from this his thir- 
teen years of childhood, there remain forty-seven 
.years, of which twenty-four are spent in labor- 
ing for the pomestchik, and the twenty-three 
which remain in laboring for himself. 

Try now to hire a peasant who is employed 
by the State, and say to him : Labor for me one 
year with your wife, your children, and your 
cattle : maintenance, clothing, implements, etc., 
to be all at your own cost : if you waste any- 
thing while laboring for me, put it in the account 
against yourself. For what price would the 
peasant consent to labor thus for a year ? 

He would ask at least 500 roubles, which 
would amount in twenty-three years to 11,500 
roubles. 



i 



112 Labor. 

This is the sum that the pomestchik has 
stolen, if not in money, at least in labor, from 
the peasant who has given all his life to his ser- 
vice. 

And this money the pomestchik has lost at 
cards, or has used to satisfy similar caprices. 

Why, I ask, has he taken this money ? Did 
the peasant owe it to him ? No. Had he any 
reason for acting thus? Not one. Then why 
has he taken this large sum ? For nothing ! 

131. From the entire universe complaints are 
being made against God. If his goodness is 
infinite, whence comes the misery that over- 
whelms the poor ? 

If God governs the world with justice, why <^ 

is there this inequality among men? Why is 
vice happy, and virtue miserable? 

But is it the fault of the mirror if our face is 
ugly ? In other words, is it God's fault if we re- 
ject the law that would establish equality among 
men? 

132. Enforce this law which says that no one 
shall eat bread that another has labored for, ex- 
cept in legitimate cases, and then, if men are not 
yet equal, they will nevertheless approach more 
nearly to one another. Labor will cut the wings 
of those who would soar too loftily. 

We are poor through your riches, but you 
are rich through our poverty. 

133. Our great-grandfathers, say you, our 
grandfathers, our fathers, our ancestors in a 
word, have labored, and we also, as you see, 



Labor, IT3 

labor till old age. All that they gained by their 
labor they left to their children, and these have 
transmitted it to theirs. 

Then why am not I rich ? why can I not even 
practice the least economy ? I owe no more 
than my grandfather did, perhaps even less. 

134. Is it that there are sluggards and drunk- 
ards in our family? No, my grandfather has 
said, never! Have my goods been destroyed 
by fire or flood? No, nothing like that has 
happened. 

135. Then what has become of my labor? 
What brigand has stolen my fortune ? Whence 
come your treasures, О rich man ? Answer me 
faithfully. 

136. Oh, if the wrong they do us were only 
temporary I But it is eternal. As the genera- 
tions pass, those of to-day must still suffer 
misery. They will never have defender nor 
protector. But that is only because you have 
buried alive our father, that is to say, the com- 
mandment. 

137. Here is what I have had a glimpse of all 
my life, and what I see clearly to-day, after 
having for a long time studied the meaning of 
this commandment : all the world over the peas- 
ants go into the fields and labor for bread, as- 
sisted by their little children. The newly born, 
who have not yet tasted bread, suffer for want of 
it. To see these people, would they not seem like 
bees flying over the fields and gathering honey 
by the way ? 



I ï4 tabof. 

And îh beholding tnèn of. the upper cla^sscs,. 
I have compared them to^drôr^es, who are con- 
tent to buzz without wor]£ii)g^a^ to live by the 
labor of others. 

Every day robbers are arrested ; but are they 
really robbers, or merely rogues ? I have found 
a robber, a real robber who has stolen from God 
and the Church ; he has tak^n away the primi^ 
tive law which belongs to us labor^rsv I wish 
to show you this robber in person. He who 
does not labor with his own hands for bread, 
but eats the bread of another's labor, be is that 
robber : arrest and sentence him ! 

He has carefully hiddep the comtnandment 
of God, and no one for 7390 years Jias been 
able to discover it Furthermore, he has stolen 
innumerable millions from the poor,, and he has 
left them and their infants, half; naked : and 
starving, while he has by this mça^s çxalte4 
himself to the clouds. 

1 38. The bees clip the wings of the dronei^, that 
they may not eat up the honey they fiave them-; 
selves gathered. Your turn has çôrae, ye. para- 
sites, and we have clipped your wings, that you 
may not eat the bread of our labor. I know 
that you will not the less continue to eat.it; but 
when you lift the bread to your mouth, your con- 
science will take you by the throat, and nothing 
can deliver you from its grasp. If bread could 
be acquired by fraud, and if like all other things, 
it could be hidden in à secret р1дсе xvhere it 
would remain in safety, all would gp well. But 



Labor, 115 

we cannot hide breîd away ; it must be eaten 
at once. 

That deserves reflection. 
139. Now you of the upper classes, who have 
placed yourselves among the clouds, consider 
that you have imprisoned yourselves in the 
bonds of impiety, and that you have not the 
strength to break your chains. 

• Behold y ^Krâetves plunged in a profound 
abyss, whence уом canriot come forth till God 
easts out of ybii the tyrant Idleness and his 
twin-brother Luxury .' 

SWe pray you, th^n, to âurrerider to uà the 
fréasure'that God has created espefciilly for our 
use, and which is'the fundamental law of buman- 
ity ; in other wdrds, prorniilgute it everywhere. 
Theii we will enrich you, and heap up gold for 
^ou, bécâiise, hoping henceforth for safety, not 
only labor for bread, but all other kinds of labor, 
will seem to us easy-^ 

' Ï40. The most weak-minded men, and even 
children, would comprehend, in hearing this law: 
]^ri>elâiméd; thut it is the first that God gave to 
the first than, and that it is more important than 
all other v?rtu<6s or commandments put together. 
They will at once say to theihsèlves : " I ?niiist 
labor more than ever -^ but I will pass my life 
willingly in the fields, to merit happiness in the 
next world.*' 

Surrender to us^ then, О ye rich, the treas- 
ure that you, or rather yoiif ancestors, have 
stolen and concealed from us; give up. to us tbe 



1 16 Lobar. 

raost sacred of our goods, the gift we bold from 
God! 

Above all authorities, the laws that are trans- 
mitted by tradition have seemed to me most 
important. But now they are insignificant, 
because this one commandment, '' Knead thy 
bread," etc, has filled my heart and mind. 

It will result, if it is promulgated, in depriv- 
ing the priests of bread ; for now they eat it 
without laboring, and no one dare reproach them 
with their idletiess. But then, every one will 
cast this truth in their face. 

141. When I left my manuscript after having 
transcribed the preceding article (for I have 
taken six months to copy my work at odd mo- 
ments), they came to ask us to lend bread to 
the city of Krasmo'iarsk. The inhabitant^ of 
our village — veritable Jews — had by a vote 
taken in the communal assembly, accorded fifty 
measures of wheat to the magazine of the J/ir.* 
Why have they given so little? " Because the 
mare has eaten all the bread." f 

Several persons congratulated the mah who 
йсюк the initiative in this proposition ; but many 
were angry. " Fifty measures 1 fifty measures ! 
But that is only twenty pounds to each house. 

* Or communal mag^azine, where each household should 
contribute, for the use of the indignent» the tenth part of its 
harvest. 

See, on this subject, A. Leroy- Beaulieu, Religion in Russia, 
Revue des Deux-Mondes, Sept. 15, 1888. i* 423. 

f Russian proverb. It is a pretext employed to evade giv- 
ing this alms. 



», 



Labor, 1 1 7 

Why do you give only twenty pounds ? they 
say, at the communal assembly. You might as 
well have given nothing at all. If you under- 
take to give at all, you should at least contribute 
two or three measures from each house, or even 
two sacks/* 

142. You see what I predicted has happened. 
Bread must not be sold, but in certain admissi- 
ble cases it must be given gratis. And they 
give it, while you conceal the commandment of 
labor for bread. But if it had been made known 
to all men, without diminishing its importance, 
the burned city of Krasmo'iarsk would have re- 
ceived from our district of Manoussinsk alone, 
several thousand measures of wheat, and each 
commune would cause the necessary succor to 
be distributed. It wpulc| be done in all cases, 
for no one knows what may Yiappen to himself 
to-morrow, or even to-day. 

143. Ask instead for money. It will not be 
given: ist, because the peasant rarely has any; 
2d, because the commandment above cited di- 
rects the laborer to give bread, rather than 
anything else. Besides, money is a lifeless 
thing compared with bread ; it is as a mere 
stone. No one makes gifts in money ; the more 
one has of it, the more the desire increases for 
it. Give all the money and treasures in the 
world to one person: will it make him happy? 
will it satisfy his cupidity? No. But what 
could he wish for more? why would he be dis 
contented ? He will cry, " I would hold the 



ii8 Labor. 

whole world in my hands, I Would control all 
tnen, and beliold in one glance the whole uni- 
verse! Whichever way I look, nothing is 
mine! 

144. But, I will answer him; you must for 
that live a thousand years, because, whatever 
may be your powers, you could never, in an 
ordinary life, absorb everything. You would 
be suffocated. 

But bread is a thing absolutely opposed to 
money ; they are two enemies, even as the la- 
bo rer is the enemy of the idle man. 

145. They say that henceforth taxes will be 
levied on the land ; that is, the amount will 
be proportioned to the area of the land we 
possess. Why do you say, on the land ? Ad- 
mit frankly that it is the laborers alone who 
(>ay the taxes. Here is some land that is not 
cultivated; go and take thence the money and 
bread you need. "According to the decree of 
Him who created me, it wûU answer," Г await 
some one's coming to cultivate me; if you come 
for any other purpose, depart, О parasite.** 

Permit me to ask why you exact taxes from 
those who nourish you with their bread, while 
from thos3 who never labor for bread you do 
not take a single kopeck. If the land were but 
Tree ! But the State has taken it to give to the 
pomcstchiks, and they exact from us ten times 
its value. Whether the wheat ripens or not, 
give us the money: and where shall we get 

It? — 



Labor, 119 

Although the law says : " Turn thy cheek to 
him who smites thee/* when I consider the cry- 
ing injustice of which you are guilty towards 
us, I refuse (and I include all our class of labor- 
ers, the young, the old, and infants at their 
mothers* breasts), I refuse, I say, to grant you 
the right to wrangle over bread, and over the 
earth that produces it ; be contented to speak 
of the stones, and the land that only produces 
bitter wormwood. 

If you had an earnest desire to labor, and 
could not do so for any reason, you would be 
pardonable; but you evade it from idleness. In 
this case, what pardon can you hope for ? I 
know you cannot answer these questions. 

You will employ, you say, even violence to 
procure your food. But could you so live, could 
you swallow one mouthful of the bread that you 
had gained by violence ? No, no ! that mouth- 
ful would choke you, body and soul, no matter 
what rank you occupy. 

Rich man, have pity on us ! For how many 
thousand years have you, like a wild horse, 
galloped over our backs! Consider, for how 
long a time you have torn the flesh from our 
bones ! 

The bread you eat is our body, the wine you 
drink is our blood. 

146. When I had learned the first command- 
ment, notwithstanding my sixty-five years, my 
weakness and emaciation, I labored in the 
ground for a whole year (1881). I harrowed 



I20 Labor, 

• 

without any assistance eight acres of fallow 
ground ; I led the first plough-horse ; I culti- 
vated the same ground a second time ; I labored 
in the fields by day, and at night I took care of 
the horses. But, in spite of all that, I felt no 
fatigue. Then I gathered in the wheat and 
hay with the help of my son and my son's 
wife. 

147. You see the effect that this commandment 
can have. Thanks to it, the old man becomes 
young, the feeble strong, the idle industrious, 
the imbecile intelligent, the drunkard sober, and 
the poor rich. Could I have done all that, 
could I have so labored in the earth, if I did 
not know I was digging where you had hidden 
the commandment ? If the poor knew their own 
strength, they would not submit to such out- 
rages. Man would then deliver himself from 
the indigence and misery which strangle him. 

148. If God sends an abundant harvest to the 
eight acres I have cultivated, I and my family 
will have more than enough to satisfy us. 
Know, also, О idle men, that I could support 
thirty men with the produce of my labor. 

149. If you have an earnest desire to labor, 
and cannot for good reasons do so, you would 
be pardonable by God and man ; but it is from 
idleness that you do not work ; is it then possi- 
ble to esteem you? Never, in any degree. 
Hitherto a superior seemed to me a high per- 
sonage ; but now he is in my eyes the lowest of 
men. I would like to get this notion out of my 



Labor. 121 

head ; but T cannot, it comes back in spîle of me. 
I hear often that it is proposed to unite all men 
in one religion. Is it true? I know not. But if 
it is attempted, I declare that, instead of uniting 
men, they will remain divided in as many sects 
as ever, and the result will be more hurtful than 
useful. It was easy to influence men in ancient 
times, when they were still savage ; they could 
then be led by a mere thread, without fear of 
its breaking. But to-day you may bind them 
with a triple rope, and you will not lead them 
one step, first because of their own customs, 
and then because they have a pride which keeps 
them from submitting one to another. 

Found religion, however, on the primitive 
law, without adding strange rules, and soon all 
the universe will be united. Otherwise it is 
impossible to obtain the union you dream of. 

150. From poverty to riches is but a step; 
inversely the distance is even less. It is the 
same with the general and the soldier. A man 
knows not when his chariot may be overturned ; 
or, in other words, destiny may to-day give him 
a million, and to-morrow make him as poor as 
we are ; to-day he may be a general, and to-mor- 
row our equal. 

151. Behold, then, the path you should fol- 
low. 

Hasten to teach the child, however noble may 
be his family, the first commandment. When 
he has crown up, show him by example how to 
labor for bread. Then, should misfortune over- 



122 Labor. 

take him, be will not even sigh, as he hastens 
with ardor to labor for his own bread. 

** For a long time," he will cr)% " I have wished 
to occupy myself with this labor, but I could 
not withstand my fortune; to-day I thank God 
for having delivered me from the burden which 
made me give way to sin/' Turning back 
his sleeves and the lappets of his coat, he will 
take the plough in hand, which he already knows 
how to use, and will go singing to his work. 

152. But what do we now see? When for- 
tune proves false to a man, and he is forced to 
earn his bread with his hands, he becomes dis- 
couraged, and even disgraces himself, bringing 
misfortune on all his race. And whose is the 
fault ? Yours, because you have hidden, and you 
still hide from him the divine commandment. 
It should not be the subjects who are condemned 
to enforced labor, but our rulers. And why ? 
they ask. Because you should not have con- 
cealed the law of God. The responsibility of 
this crime should rest on the priests and on the 
Israelitish Rabbi, and not on the civil and mili- 
tary authorities, who are not culpable in this! 

153. You see now, readers, that all j^ur 
books are of no value by the side of mine. 
Your eloquent subterfuges are empty nonsense 
compared with our simple language. All your 
precious labors for which you pay so generously, 
are as nothing compared to ours. Neither can 
3'ou compare with us in merit. The treasures 
which fill your houses have no value compared 



Labor. 123 

to the bread for which we labor. All your 
great intelligence is weak before our simple 
faith. Your millions have no more value thau 
our poor possessions. 

154. During all ages we have had the rich 
and the poor, but no one could see why there 
should be any difference in position between 
these two classes of men because one had a 
small capital, another's was twice as great, a 
third's three times as great, etc.; and each one 
points with his finger saying : " Is it I that am 
rich ? Such a one, or another, may indeed be 
called so." 

. It is these rich men of whom Jesus Christ has 
said : " It is easier for a camel to go through 
jthe eye of a needle, than for a rich man to enter 
into the kingdom of God." (St. Mark x. 25.) 

But I have seen a distance between the rich 
and poor like that between heaven and earth, or 
between the east and west. Between us and 
you, as has been said, is a great gulf fixed : we 
cannot come to you, nor you to us. 

155. Suppose, for example, I gave a rich or 
an educated man this counsel : ** You see on 
your side only baseness; come over to ours. 
Do not labor for bread, since you never have 
done it, but, by the mere fact of coming to 
us, you will escape the insupportable reproaches 
of your conscience." " I cannot do it," he will 
reply; ** I would rather die than join you." 

156. Will it not be the same at the last judg- 
ment, as says the Holy Scriptures? In his 



124 Labor. 

mercy, God would welcome j'ou, but for ver}- 
shame you will shrink from him. God, never- 
theless, will not withdraw his mercy, though 
you have scorned the labor for bread that he 
has prescribed, and trampled under foot those 
who have cultivated the ground. 

157. For 7382 years your festival has lasted, 
while we have labored. Now, in 1882, com- 
mences our festival and your labor, if the com- 
mandment is comprehended by every peasant. 
What joy, what triumph this will be for our in- 
ferior class ! 

158. If you have occasion to remain some 
time in the country, you must borrow for some 
days the eyes of an animal, for you could not 
remain there, having human eyes. As much as 
we shall be elevated, you will be abased. No 
one, nevertheless, will reproach you openly ; 
they will give you to eat and to drink, but the 
reproaches that will follow your steps will be 
more painful than if they were made to your 
face. 

159. If you earned your bread by labor- 
ing with your hands, and not by buying it 
with money, your feast would be the more com- 
plete. We are now your inferiors. We would 
then be still lower, for we labor under compul- 
sion and pressed by want, while you would be 
laboring in obedience to the commandment. 
Your merit would be but the greater and more 
estimable. 

160. You occupy now, in spite of us, our 



Labor. 125 

place at the table ; and we remain standing so 
humbly before you that your conscience per- 
mits it. But then true justice will triumph. It 
may spare you, but it will no longer wrong us. 
You will not always have the place of honor, 
and we will not always take the foot of the 
table. 

161. The sluggards say to me: If you had 
found out how to be rich and happy without 
labor, all the world would have thanked you 
for it. But when you invite us to a painful, 
wearisome, and humiliating task, who will give 
your words any consideration? You would 
persuade the government that the primitive law 
is founded on labor for bread. But many well- 
educated people see the law only as through 
an obscure mist. Must we then deceive our- 
selves for bread ? What is the use of writing 
on a subject that is not worth the trouble ? Or 
of speaking, even, when for fifteen or twenty 
kopecks one may have a measure of grain ? 

In fine, if this labor leads to salvation, all ed- 
ucated persons, and above all the priests, should 
hasten to undertake it. But they disdain it, 
and like better a life of ease. Then there is notli- 
ing in it of value to salvation. The theory you 
maintain is but as a tale in the Arabian Nights. 

162. The principal scourge of our class, that 
which throws us in spite of ourselves into mis- 
ery, dejection, and all similar unhappiness, is 
the division of goods among brothers. It is 
impossible to speak of this evil in few words. 



|2б Labor. 

The сяи«е is always the same : f he у have hiddjeq 
from the world the law of labor. If this law wiv$ 
made known, a hundred men could live togethcr> 
He who should command need not be haughty^ 
and he who should obey need not be quick to 
take offence. If among this grcHip afather or 
mother should die, the children would rç3t in 
this centre of cordial harmony, and the bereaved 
spouse would feel the blow less keenly. The 
orphans would find among them fathers, mo- 
thers, brothers, and sisters, in a word, many 
protectors and defenders. 

Women are usually compassionate : they will 
care for orphans in preference to their own 
children. Thus this law carries with it all vir- 
tues and is opposed to all vices. It was not iii 
vain that God said in creating the world : ** Lef 
4:here be light, for that is good.'* * ^ You havc 
taken away this gift of God in the sight of me% 
and you say softly to each othar^ " What foojf 
these men are who nourish ц« and supply us 
with good clothes for nothing! We; give them 
orders, and they obey us J" ' . ::z--i 

163. If a man speaks of a crime b^fprjB anfr 
merpus society, he does not designate any one 
as its author, for he cannot look into the con- 
sciences of those present ; he speaks of the crime 
from a legal point of view, and touche^ no oue*s 

л 

— — I ■ ■ ■ <■ ^1 ■■■■■» 4 1—— .>, ■ ■ ■ ■ — ^^^ ■ ■■ ^ ^^^^^ .. .1, M^^.^H^IH Л Л^ш^ш^^^^ 

** Alluding to this passage in Genesis : ** God made the sun; 
he made the stars also. And God set them in the firmament 
of heaven to give light upon the earth. And God saw that it 
was good." 



Labor. 127 

eensitiveness. But if he speaks of the primitive 
law, " In the sweat of thy face shalt thou 
knead bread," he cannot conceal the name of 
the criminal, because he bears the mark of 
Cain. 

To disobey this commandment is the greatest 
of crimes ; and if it is committed by an inferior 
man it may not be noticed ; but as it is addressed 
to those who are elevated among the clouds, all 
the world sees their infringement of it 

I woilld rather praise men than criticise them, 
but here that would be impossible. In the pres- 
ence of the holiness of labor, would it become 
trie to disguise my thoughts in cowardly adula- 
tion ? 

164. God gave two commandments to our an- 
cestors Adam and Eve, The first is, " Be fruitful 
and multiply and replenish the earth ;'* the sec- 
ond, " In the sweat of thy face shalt thou knead 
bread." Why, I ask you, do you execute the first 
commandment of God with alacrity, and dis- 
dain the second, flying to conceal yourselves in 
different corners, while you say, I will employ 
a good workman to make my bread ? 

You ftilfil the first comrrliandment personally; 
why not th^ second ? ' 

It is inadmissible to labor for bread by the 
hand of another, and it can only be done in cer- 
tain permitted cases. Tell me why you disdain 
one commandment more than the other. What 
if your wives should say to you : " We have ful- 
filled our commandment ; we bring forth chil- 



1 28 Labor, 

I 

dren in sorrow, and in death : and you, why do 
you not keep the commandment which concerns 
you ? Give your children bread earned by your 
own labor.*'* In brief, you cannot reply to 
that, and you are left like a fish gasping on the 
sand. 

165, How blind you are, О wise man! You 
search the Holy Scriptures with all your eyes, 
but you cannot see there the way to relieve 
yourself and the flock that God has confided to 
your care from the burden of sin. You do not 
see the path that will conduct you to life 
eternal. You are like the inhabitants of Sodom 
who were struck with blindness when they 
sought for Lot's door.f But these were in- 

* Compare these reflections of Bondareff's with Tolstoi's 
ideas in the admirable chapter * ' To Women !" which completes 
the book What should be dont\ 

* ' This woman, who, with all the attraction of her personal 
charms, still evades her own duties under the law of mother- 
hood, becomes a fit companion for the man who has denied the 
obligations of his own law of labor; and they thus both lose 
the true meaning and intention of their existence. 

"From this proceeds the astonishing folly called the rights 
of women. These rights we here formulate. 

" ' Ah, you men,' says woman, ' you transgress your own 
law of labor, but you wish us to fulfil ours. Truly no ! As 
it is with you, it shall be with us. We will share your pre- 1 

tended labors at banks, univefsities, and academies ; and we 
will, like you, adopt the pretext of division of labor, and will 
have a hand in all the social and worldly occupations that we 
please.' " ( PVhat should be done, page 372.) 

t Alluding to Genesis xix. 10, 11: *' But the men put forth 
their hand, and pulled Lot into the house to them, and shut to 
the door. And they smote the men that were at the door of 



Labor. 129 

deed blinded ; while you, though sightless, 
believe that you see clearly, and that you know 
everything, and no one has the right to give 
you counsel. Your blindness is like that of 
Balaam, who did not see the angel of God that 
stood armed with a flaming sword in the path 
before him, while the ass that he was riding 
perceived it distinctly. I am the ass ; and you, 
who are Balaam, have ridden upon my back 
since my childhood. 

166. From all that has been said, we see, as in 
a mirror, that man learns to read, not that he 
may do good, but evil. The proverb is not 
without reason which says : " If educated people 
should lose their eyes [and I, Bondarefî, as well 
as they], and their horses should founder, we 
should then be the better.** 

I did not formerly believe in proverbs, but now 
I see that it is as though God himself had given 
them to us. 

167. The world has a thousand religions, 
while there should be but one faith, even as 
there is but one God. 

The first commandment, " In the sweat of 
thy face shalt thou knead bread," would unite 
all religions. When men shall have compre- 
hended all its import, and shall have it graven 
upon their hearts, then, in one century, perhaps 
even in less time, all the world, from east to west, 
from north to south, will be united in one 

the house with blindness, both small and great, so that they 
wearied themselves to find the door." 



130 Labor. 

faith, one church, and one love. (See article 

35.) 

168. Many people have asked me: Why do 

you regard those who avoid labor, not only 
without good will, but even with hatred? 
Whatever you feel in your heart, you should at 
least speak with gentleness and kindness. 

This is my answer: Where could I find pa- 
tience and hypocrisy enough to speak with 
gentleness and kindness? How many millions 
ot people there are at this moment, how many 
there have been since the beginning of the world, 
and will be yet in the future, who have been and 
will be ignominiously wronged by you who are 
the masters of the world ! In this state of affairs, 
I do not say a man, but an angel even, could 
not bear such offences, and the recital alone of 
our miseries would " set his teeth on edge." * 
And I, who am but a man, have endured this 
wrong for a long time. Many times I \vould 
have spoken gently, but the moment I commence 
to write, I am so inflamed with indignation that 
I forget all my resolutions. And I have said to 
myself, I can die but once; I have started upon 
the right way, and I will go forward. 

169. I address myself once more to you, О 
ye of the upper classes. I do not entreat, I do 
not ask, but I strongly require of you that you 
shall give us our due, that you shall teach us the 
primitive law that God himself gave to us la- 

* An expression often used in the Bible. 



Labor. 131 

borers when he created the world. You have 
taken it from us by fraud or by violence, and 
you have hidden it in the depths of the earth, 
like the slothful servant in the Gospel who hid 
his talent in the ground. Give it back to us 
now, without delay; give it back! We will take 
no excuse. 

Those who preceded you had some reason to 
keep this law to themselves, because no one 
asked them for it ; the welfare of others matters 
little to strangers. 

But, now, give us this law, or at least explain 
it to us. 

170. You all give us the same excuse. It is 
not I who am to blame, says one; nor I, says 
another; nor I, says a third: and the nor I will 
never finish : but who will say. It is If If we 
address the chief men of the State, they say also, 
we are not to blame. In a word, the universe 
has become, as it were, a perfect circle, where 
no one is on the circumference, and all the 
world are in the centre. . Ask this one or that, 
and he answers invariably. It is not If 

If the question were of boasting, of raising one- 
self to the clouds, or of riding on the backs of 
poor people, you will all cry, It is I! It is I/ 
But if we speak of holding out the hand to the 
millions who are perishing in misery. It is not /, 
you say at once. Who among you will say // // 
Though our emperor, Alexander Nicolaiewitch, 
has delivered us from slavery, that has nothing 



132 .Labor, 

to do, in my mind, with the question that occu- 
pies us ; it is quite another affair. 

171. We should, without doubt, persuade men 
by good advice, and by divers warnings, but 
never by force. Print these counsels in primers 
and prayer-books, charge the priests of all 
nations and of all religions, to preach this doc- 
trine unceasingly, by persuasion and not by force, 
and to recall to their flocks the qualities which 
distinguish before God and man him who care- 
fully executes the primitive law of God, and, on 
the contrary, to point out the faults that charac- 
terize him who shamefully avoids its execution. 
These are the means by Avhich, to my mind, we 
shall force men to labor, without employing 
violence. 

But excepting the government, who would 
have the power to do what I have said? No 
one. 

172. If all these counsels were inserted in the 
daily papers, and in other publications, under 
different forms, we might wait as many thou- 
sands of years as there are days in a century, 
and no profit would result. (See article 36.) 

173. Implore, my soul! (and by my soul I 
mean the souls of all laborers) implore the gov- 
ernment as much as you will, shed all your 
tears, multiply your groanings, bend your knees 
to whom you will, but no one will be touched 
by your supplications, or moved by your tears. 
I know my double demand has been made in 
vain. If they had but said yes or no, I would 



Labor. 133 

have been more content; but they have said noth- 
ing! nothing!* 

Ah ! deign, О Eternal Father, from the height 
of heaven to cast one look upon the earth ! 

Behold! there is but one man, who by one 
single word can oppress millions of men If 

* Compare these reflections of Bondareff*s with those of the 
celebrated sectary Soutalef. " If the Czar knew !" said Sou- 
talef to a throng of his followers. One day he departed for St. 
Petersburg ; he would inform the Czar, Vain task : they 
would not let him approach him. The unfortunate reformer 
was obliged to return to his own village, accusing himself of 
sin for failing in perseverance." (A. Leroy-Beaulieu, Revue 
des Deux-Mondes, Sept. 15, 1888, page 426.) 

f Probably alluding to the Czar. 



APPENDICES. 



XCo tbe /Demots of 3Bon&ateTf* 



LABOR AND ШУЕ. 

BONDAREFF'S WILL. 
I. 

Love of our neighbor is the principal com- 
mandment. It is the commandment of com- 
mandments, the law of laws, the virtue of virtues. 
There is no other virtue like it, neither in hea- 
ven nor on the earth. No other possesses the 
hundredth part of its perfection ; and in saying 
this, I do not mean to depreciate existing laws 
and commandments, but only to give love its 
full value. 

II. 

And now, I ask you, which is the most useful 
to man and the most agreeable to God, labor 
or love? Labor beyond a doubt. But there 
is only one labor that is more useful than love, 
and that is the labor that is done by virtue of 
the commandment, " In the sweat of thy face 
shalt thou knead bread." This is the only labor 
that is more useful to man and more agreeable 
to God than love. Without it all others are 
useless, and even hurtful. 

IIL 

But it has never happened that any one has 
labored by virtue of this commandment, that is, 

134 



Labor and Lave, 135 

not to satisfy his desire for food, but to obey 
the law (for it is thus that I, Bondareff, interpret 
this expression in Genesis) ; neither has any one 
ever known the joy this labor produces, and 
therefore there can be none among you, О my 
readers, that can disprove my words, when I 
claim that labor is more useful than the love of 
our neighbor. 

IV. 

And here is the proof. I have found at each 
instant, and in all books, praises in honor of love 
for others. They laud it, among all people, 
among savages even, in all languages and dia- 
lects. They honor it in proverbs and sayings, 
they make it the foundation of all civil and re- 
ligious law. Preachers are wearied in celebrat- 
ing its praises. But, I ask you, have these 
praises and sermons in honor of love for others 
borne any Iruit, or resulted in any virtuous ac- 
tions? Never! It is not only with love that 
we can feed the hungry, satisfy the thirsty, 
clothe the poor, give alms to mendicants, help 
the widow, or do good to the orphan, etc. 

V. 

If men would only help each other, and 
have compassion for the misfortunes of others ; 
bjut no, they will steal, kill, burn, pillage, 
and deceive one another, they will detest and 
wish each other all manner of evil; they will 
set traps and snares for each other, they will 
commit wilful murder; and, to sum up all, if they 
did not fear the authorities, and if there were no 
sermons in the world, they would eat each other 
alive. These are the results which the praises 
of love for others and the sermons in its honor 



1 36 Labor and Love. 

produce ; and if sometimes one does good to 
another, he is influenced by the instinct that 
binds us together and not by love. 

VI. 

Why do they not appreciate this love for 
others? My reply will be brief: Although love 
is an excellent virtue, it is narrow and secondary ; 
and besides that, labor, properly speaking, in- 
cludes love, while love does not include labor. 
We may add that labor was created by God in 
the terrestrial paradise, while this love came to 
the world four thousand years afterwards, with 
Moses. We see now clearly why labor is the 
first of all virtues, and the base of all laws. 
Love without labor is like a man without a head, 
it is dead. Love is therefore a narrow, secon- 
dary virtue. 

VIL 

To prove still further what I have advanced, 
I propose to you to make this essay : Suppress 
and erase all the passages in Holy Scripture 
which rest on love for our neighbor, and replace 
them by the explanation of this law, " In the 
sweat of thy face shalt thou knead bread.** 
Make known these modified passages, and soon, 
before the close of the day, all men Avill be led, 
in spite of themselves, to love their neighbor. 
It is in bread, in the labor of the fields, that 
we must seek for the love of others. It is 
to demonstrate the force of this law that the 
laborer should direct his endeavors, if he be 
not also a sluggard. Idleness and luxury are, 
on the contrary, the principal enemies of social 
love. But you who have never labored, have 
never tasted the joys which attend the accom- 



Labor and Love. 137 

plishment of the law and of the labor ît requires ; 
thus you cannot believe my words. It is my 
duty to speak them ; with you it rests to believe 
or to deny them. 

VIII. 

Then I pray you, my readers, to preserve 
these words, and to fix them in your hearts: 
Labor done according to the primitive law is the 
condition of love for others. Labor is strong 
without love; it can, by itself, win for man the 
highest prize he can attain before God, whilst 
love without the aid of labor can do nothing, 
because, as we have already said, true love 
freed from all hypocrisy, is concealed in labor ; 
but without labor, love is dead. Love your 
neighbor and esteem him, but above all, О you 
who preach love, do not eat the bread of his 
labor. Again, the preachers have exhausted 
their strength, worn out their throats, and 
fatigued their tongues in preaching love, and 
лvhat has been the result ? Love does not exist 
anywhere. 

IX. 

If love reigned in the world, would the present 
state of things exist ? In creating heaven and 
earth, God has given forever, to us laborers, 
and not to sluggards with white hands, this 
unchangeable law : ** In the sweat of thy brow 
shalt thou knead bread." God has based on 
this law both temporal and eternal happiness. 

The supreme lawgivers, from the commence- 
ment of the world, have taken from us bv fraud 
or by violence this precious treasure. Having 
stolen it, they have buried it deep in the earth, 
like the slothful servant in the Gospel who hid 



1 38 Labor and Love. 

his talent. During all these past ages, we, the 
laborers, have not perceived our loss. Amid 
the innumerable cares of life, we have over- 
looked it, and it is only to-day that wç think of 
it. The thief is now discovered ; we have found 
the guilty one, and have unveiled his crime be- 
fore the entire universe. What do you desire? 
they ask me. Give up the treasure that God 
has given thee ? No, I will guard it well ! The 
prey which the wolf holds in his teeth, says the 
proverb, was given him by Jégor (Georges). 
What ! you preach in every tone of love for 
others, and you commit like crimes yourself! 
And why ? My question is worth answering. 

X. 

If love reigned in the world, would twenty- 
four millions of men be placed under the author- 
ity of lords, as it is this day among us, and as it 
has been for a long time r If love reigned in 
the world, would "the fertile earth have been 
given forever to sluggards, whilst men, and 
still worse, infants, are each day in danger of 
dying for want of food ? But these lords, these 
masters of the earth which they have appropri- 
ated since the creation of the wojM (thence 
has come the word " property '*), sell it to others 
at a great price, and then throw away the money 
at cards, or spend it in unheard-of caprices. 
Such is the depth of their love for others ! 

XL 

The sixth day God said : " Behold, I have 
given you every herb bearing see-l, which is 
upon the face of the earth, and every tree, in 
the which is the fruit of a tree yielding seed ; 
*o you it shall be for meat.'' But the greater 



Labor and Love. 139 

part of mankind will not submit to the com- 
mand that they should till the earth ; they put 
this painful labor on the defenceless poor man, 
whilst they walk to and fro whistling and with 
their arms folded. If, at least, they had only 
given to the poor the labor for bread, it might 
be borne ; but they have heaped upon him all 
sorts of painful labors, and he even pays for the 
privileges of doing them ! I do not speak of 
taxes, but of rents, and the services of all sorts 
with which they overwhelm him. This is done in 
the name of the law. Not content with making 
him submit to these wrongs, they take from 
him the fertile earth. They have given that for- 
ever into the hands of those who evade labor, 
and they call that for which they have never 
labored, their property. 

This is the love for our neighbor which you 
preach but never practise ! 

XII. 

Many times I have resolved to speak to you 
more affectionately ; but when I behold your 
treachery, I forget all my resolves. 

We see clearly that between the primitive 
law of labor and the civil and religious laws 
which exist there comes the eternal enmity that 
separated the serpent and the woman. But be- 
tween these two classes of men, the laborers on 
the one side and those who evade labor on the 
other, there exists an enmity created by God 
himself and not by man. They say there is 
this difference between the primitive law and 
later laws, that the first was given to man by 
God as a penance lor his sins, and we know 
that God has not ordered us to atone for our 
crimes by any other virtue or merit. But if 



140 Labor and Lave, 

this be so, why is not labor prescribed by law 
and tradition as indispensable to salvation? 
Thus we are tempted to think that God's de- 
cree is not just; and for this reason I have said 
that there is enmity between these two sorts of 
law. Besides that, since the days of Adam, 
there have been millions of laborers; was there 
never among them one single man who was good 
and acceptable to God ? 

The question is of importance. But instead 
of solving it, writers who are more competent 
than I am, speak of the progress of labor and of 
idleness, without designating any one. Thus 
have they always neglected, and will do so till 
the end of the world, the discussion of idleness 
and labor. 

XIII. 

Here is a new argument to prove that labor, 
accomplished in conformity with the primitive 
law, is more useful than love for others. If you 
speak of this love to an ignorant nmn, or to one 
but slightly educated, he will not listen to you. 
You will see that in his eyes and in the expres- 
sion of his face: he puts on a dejected air, he is 
drowsy, he yawns, and is weary. He endeavors 
to lead the conversation to other subjects, or 
will tell you he is in haste; he prepares to de- 
part, ana what you have said he will not, or can- 
not, understand. It was useless to engage him 
in such a conversation. 

I have witnessed all that myself. I have not 

invented it. 

XIV. 

When, in reading passages of Genesis to a 
lan, you arrive at these words, " In the sweat 



Labor and Love. 141 

of thy face slialt thou knead bread," explain 
them to him b}^ saying that this penance was 
decreed by God for original as well as for actual 
sin. Ada that God, when creating heaxen and 
earth, has not given us any other way of atoning 
for our sins, etc. etc. Soon your interlocutor will 
look at you in amazement; he will no longer 
be drowsy, or weary, or dejected, he will even 
forget that they wait for him at home. Then he 
will look down, embarrassed by these truths of 
which he had never dreamed, and by the re- 
membrance of all his actions since his youth, for 
which he had not thought God reserved for him 
such penalties. 

1 know, reader, that you will not give any 
faith to my words. But I swear before God 
that they are true. 

XV. 

He will presently raise his eyes, and show that 
reason has awakened within him. Then he will 
ask questions, and return each instant to the sub- 
ject. Afterwards he will repeat to his friends 
what he has learned, and the story will go from 
one to another. Why, then, would he not listen 
when love for others was spoken of ? That seems 
mysterious. 

XVI. 

Observe always that only the laborers will 
approve of your words. As for those who avoid 
labor, — and they are numerous in the world, — 
they will dispute your argu ments, word for word ; 
and as a crowning refutation of them, under the 
painful circumstances in which they are placed, 
they will show you the money they have taken 



142 Labor and Love, 

from the poor laborers, which ihey pretend they 
will use in their aid. You know well, readers, 
that, whatever may be the subject under discus- 
sion, the rich always g^ain their point. It has 
always been so, and always will be to the end 
of the world, as says Sirach, the man who was 
inspired by God : ** When a rich man speaketh, 
every man holdeth his tongue, and look, what 
he saith they extol it to the clouds : but if the 
poor man speak, they say. What fellow is this ?" 



XVII. 

Have I not proved, beyond dispute, that love 
without labor is dead, and that labor, accom^ 
plished according to the commandment, can live 
alone without the aid of love? Love is hidden 
in labor: labor is the home in which love dwells. 
Love without labor is as the body without soul. 
The law lives only when its power is used for 
man's profit ; otherwise it is dead. Besides that, 
the law lives only for those who accomplish it 
willingly, and not for those who refuse to sub- 
mit to labor with all their heart. And in fine, 
the sluggards — who are truly criminal — are 
dead to the law as it is dead to them. 

As for love to others, we will not speak of it 
here. 

It is impossible for me to explain to the world 
the law of labor, that I have only learned by 
myself, and that no one has taught me. I have 
comprehended its truth with my whole soul. 
You denv, and you will deny forever, that it is 
gifted with a force that will, one day, unite all 
men in one faith, one church, and one love, be- 
cause it is the chief of all virtues. You would 



Labor and Love. 143 

g^in, О you of the upper classes, by holding in 
your hands the head of all virtue, whereas you 
now hold only its tail — and by tail 1 mean love. 
Love itself creates your words, but not your 
actions. And why? Because your money has 
so blinded you that you cannot discern the head 
from the tail. 

XVIII. 

Could you believe, readers, that he who shall 
have welcomed the law of labor with the eager- 
ness that I have described would do to others 
what he w^uld not have them do to him ? 
Would he take, by any means whatever, the 
goods of another ? Can we suppose that, having 
resolved to eat the bread for which he has la- 
bored with his own hands, and to live an honest 
life, he will retain whatever he may have ac- 
quired dishonestly? No, we cannot imagine 
such inconsistency. 

Could aman, whose conscience is so pure, re- 
frain from holding out a helping hand to his 
neighbor, or, in other words, could he behold 
one who is an hungered and not feed him, or one 
who is dying of thirst and not give him to drink, 
or a wearv traveller and not give him rest in 
his own fiouse, etc., etc. ? A pure conscience 
has the eyes not of a man, but of an angel. 
Nothing can escape them. 

XIX. 

For him who has not tasted the joy ot labor 
that is accomplished conformably with the prim- 
itive law that God himself has given us when 
creating the heavens and the earth, it is difficult, 
very difficult in fact, to believe what I have been 



1 



144 Labor and Love. 

saying. But in claiming that labor, blessed by 
God, is a hundred times more useful than love. 
I but use a right that belongs to me. You may 
approve or disapprove of my opinions. But to 
juage which of us is right or wrong, God and 
the Czar only have the right. 



XX. 

My readers will say, or at least think to them- 
selves. How is that? All the universe and the 
highest authority are founded on love for others^ 
as a mountain rests upon the rocks, for there is 
not in the eyes of the world a more elevated 
virtue than love for our neighbor. But alas! 
behold how this edifice suddenly falls down, for 
they have here and there undermined its base ; 
in short, love for others is dead. Lov^ is the 
least, and not the greatest of these virtues. If 
we eat without good reason the bread of others, 
and thus disobey the primitive law, love is then 
a virtue without any value. But, some readers 
will say, we have centred our hopes in money, 
as on God, believing that we will secure both 
temporal and eternal happiness ; now this Bon- 
dareff does not esteem money, and he exacts 
personal labor. Must we tell him he lies? But 
we cannot base our opinions on legitimate rea- 
sons. Man's inconstant fortune rests always on 
a tottering throne, and he does not know when, 
or from what side, it will be4)verthrown. When 
the moment comes in which their fortune shall 
perish, my readers will say and think that the 
proverb is true which says : " The thunder does 
not always come from the clouds, but often from 
я heap ol dust." 



Labor and Love, 145 

XXL 

Even as the universe could not live without 
God, it also cannot live without bread, and 
therefore not without laborers. It is evident 
that after God and bread the laborer comes in 
the third rank, for on this triple foundation rests 
all the world, as we will show clearly in the 
following articles. 

XXII. 

God is a Spirit who is present everywhere, in 
heaven, on earth, and beneath the earth. But 
which is his usual habitation? This is a question 
not yet resolved at this day. But it is evident to 
any reasonable man that, without doubt, God*s 

[)rincipal habitation is with bread and with the 
aborer. Suppress one of these three existences, 
God, or bread, or the laborer, and soon the uni- 
verse will disappear. 

XXIII. 

Can we not now affirm that tne second one of 
this trinity will truly save our souls from death ? 
We would not commit a sin in calling it the first 
trinity, for that which is formed of the Father, 
the Son, and the Holy Ghost is not universally 
accepted. One half of the world believes it, 
and the other half does not, making of God but 
one person. If all the world recognized the 
trinity of which I speak, which is composed of 
God, bread, and the laborer, they would with- 
out doubt admit that these three are contained 
in one God. 

XXIV. 

And now what do you think, readers, would 
happen if all the laborers understood my words "i 



146 Labor and Love, 

They would not fly beyond the clouds, nor 
hasten to seek other labors, or other virtues. By 
cultivating the earth, they will enrich themselves, 
and they will heap up gold for you also, O, ye 
rich ones ! You cannot deny that all your joys 
depend on our labor: without it you could not 
be happy. But what will you do to restrict all 
these men to cultivating the earth ? It is im- 
possible to do so. Ah ! pity and deplore the 
misfortune of a laborer who sows gooa seed in 
a sterile soil, and gathers no harvest ! It is I 
who am this laborer; the good seed is the first 
commandment of God, with its consequences ; 
the sterile soil, those hearts of yours, that amid 
all the comforts of the world, turn with disgust 
from the labor that God has imposed on all. 



XXV. 

I return once more to what I said just now. 
If God is, above all, present with bread and 
with the laborer, it seems to me reasonable that 
we should revere bread as we do God himself, 
and honor the laborer as the most precious of 
his creatures in heaven or on the earth. (I do 
not speak of myself, already so old, who could 
only join in honoring the others.) To-day the 
price of bread is fixed at one rouble and forty 
Kopecks the measure, while its real value cannot 
be understood by the human mind. Once 
more, it must never be sold, and only in extra- 
ordinary cases can it be given away. Bread is 
estim ited at one rouble and forty kopecks, and 
the laborer is quoted at a still lower price. He 
standi at zero. And yet he is one of the three 
persons in this one and indivisible trinity which 
^ves us from death. 



Labor and Love. 147 

XXVI. 

God could, I grant, nourish man without 
having need of bread or of the laborer; but to 
do that, he would be obliged to change all the 
plan of the world, and to withdraw the decree 
he pronounced when creating the heavens and 
the earth. He must destroy his creation, be- 
cause its laws would no longer have an\^ value. 
But for whom should he do this? For the 
sluggards ? No, no ! I repeat, God, bread, and 
the laborer form the true and indivisible trinity 
which saves us from death. 

XXVII. 

It is for me to ask whether or no a thing is 
useful for the common good ; and it is for you 
to answer me or not, as you will. Why, then, 
I ask you, do you treat the laborer as an im- 
becile^ an idiot, or a fool, and scorn the great- 
ness of his merits who eats the bread of his own 
labor, and preserves from famishing other men 
as well as the animals ? We are fools, I admit, 
fools in all the force of the term. But it is this: 
the more we are instructed, so much the more we 
make progress ; but we cannot attain the limit of 
progress which is perfection. During this life 
man -cannot reach the limit of science, but after 
death he will at once attain perfection. 

XXVIII. 

And further, the more a man is educated, the 
better he perceives his intellectual defects. 
Since, then, you look down upon the man who 
•nourishes himself by his labor, as well as his fel- 
low-creatures, and also the animals, what, I pray 
you, will you call him who, far from nourishing 



148 Labor and Love. 

any one else, lives in idleness, on the labor of 
otberSi and who, as it were, turns the blood of the 
poor into money ? Will you call him a brigand ? 
No; a brigand falls by the sentence of the law, 
whilst this man is esteemed and elevated to su- 
reme greatness. You have bestowed on us all 
umiliating epithets; what have you reserved 
for the sluggard? But why do 1 thus interro- 
gate you? A stone might answer me, but you, 
my readers, will not. 



I 



XXIX. 

If a great famine were inflicted upon Russia 
during one year only, every one would die 
of hunger. But where is' the wheat of which 
there was an excess in the preceding years, and 
which they (the imbeciles) have stored up? 
The intelligent ones have eaten it, is the reply. 
Can we beHeve an intelligent man would com- 
mit such a crime? To eat the bread of the 
inçnorant, to trample under foot the love of our 
neighbor, and the primitive law — it is almost 
incredible ! 

XXX. 

Desire for food is man's strongest inclination, 
yet what he most disdains is labor for bread. 
There are actually in Russia millions of children 
whom they teach to read, that they may be free 
from this labor, and that they may eat bread for 
nothing; that is to say, to ride on the backs of 
poor laborers. If that were not their intention, 
they would never consent to be instructed, and 
their parents would not let them ga to school. 
Not to be willing to live without doing any- 
thing would seem to them as a crime, a 



Labor and Love. 149 

suicide! So they do not labor: that condition 
is too shameful. 

Whence comes this state of things^ From 
their not explaining the divine law " In the sweat 
of thy face shalt thou knead bread," to young 
and intelligent minds, and from its not being 
placed in books of science. For by this means 
men would have comprehended from their 
youth, that they must compel themselves to eat 
the bread of their own labor, and to live honestly. 

XXXI. 

They do not speak of labor, that virtue of 
virtues, in the primers or in the books of high 
science. The masters make no allusion to it, 
because they themselves live in idleness. Thus 
the child can learn nothing that is good, in the 
schools. He will be like the earthen vessel, 
which retains always the odor of the first liquid 
it has contained. Many examples prove this. 
Historians relate that the Koman emperor 
Caligula was so cruel that, not content with 
taking the life of those who displeased him, he 
even drank the blood of his victims. The 
daughterof Darius could find no more exquisite 
article of food than the serpent. How will you 
explain these facts? Must it not have been that 
Caligula was brought up by a cruel луотап, 
and that the daughter of Darius had a nurse to 
whom the serpent's flesh was the daintiest of 
food? 

ХХХП. 

Theologians claim that God offered the milk 
of wisdom as nourishment for a child, but that 
the devil offered him the milk of impiety. If, 
by fault of the parents, the child drank the 



1 50 Labor and Love. 

Hevil's milk, no other food could thenceforth 
please him. Even as Caligula loved to drink 
blood, and the daughter of Darius preferred 
the serpent's flesh, so the child would ever like 
the devil's food only. 

Thence, what hope can the laborers have? 
We still must expect the worst. But if all 
men learn to read and write, who will nourish 
them ? That is an important problem that no 
one is willing to solve. 

xxxiri. 

I pray you, readers, not to forçat that I 
speak to you humbly, * standing with bowed 
head and sad aspect at the threshold of your 
door. But you are occupying the place of 
honor at the table where they serve the pro- 
ducts of our labor. You will not reply. Is 
it because you feel that you are in every way 
culpable in the sight of God and man, and 
even before your own conscience ? If you try to 
justify yourself, you will fall still more deeply 
into sin; if you try to contradict me, your 
infatuation will be an outrage, not against me, 
but against God, against bread, and against 
your conscience. 

XXXIV. 

You see now, you of the upper classes, that 
the laborer is your second father; we may even 
say, without fear of sinning^, that he is your 
first father. Remember that all the dishes 
of which you eat at your table are the pro- 

* I mean that I speak in the name of all our class, men, 
women, children, and old persons. I do not speak personally, 
but in the name of my companions. 



Labor and Love. 151 

ducts of our labor. In short, we nourish you 
as a father nourishes his children. 

Nothing can be more contrary to the law 
than the excuse you present in saying, "I pay 
for my bread." Where did you get your 
money ? Is not this money that you keep at 
home with you, the fruit of our labor? You 
cannot obtain our pardon unless you agree with 
all your heart to eat the bread of your own 
labor. — Impossible! you reply again ; how could 
all men do the same work ? 



XXXV. 

The law of labor may be incomprehensible if 
we compare it to that of' love, because this word 
love alone suffices to show all its nature, while we 
need numerous developments to make clear the 
meaning of the primitive law. I have written 
already nearly three hundred articles* in com- 
ment upon it, and I doubt if I have completely 
Sersuaaed my readers of the necessity of labor, 
low can I present in few words all the 
mysterious virtue which belongs to the law 
which God gave in creating the heavens and 
the earth ? Besides, it encounters the greatest 
of obstacles in the influence of money which de- 
prives this law of so much of its force. It is 
money which renders men blind and insensible. 
Hear them answer simply : ** ^ Р^У ^^^ ^ 
bread ! I pay tor my bread." That is their 
only reply. How, then, can I dispute with 
them? 



* Labor according to the Bible contained originally 263 
articles or verses. We have modified the numeration, so that 
the text of Bondareff now contains only 173 paragraphs. 



1 52 Labor and Love. 

XXXVL 

It is time to finish my discourse, or rather my 
sermon. 

At the moment in which I write, the govern- 
ment has not yet considered the law of labor. 
It has not explained its force by any edict: 
nor has it preached to its subjects the love 
of labor, notwithstanding the urgent requests 
that I have addressed to it, and of which it 
takes no notice. I pity its blindness, God 
is my witness that I speak only the truth. 
An individual is pardonable if he is ignorant 
of some things ; but is it admissible that the 
government should hide from the people's 
eyes the greatest happiness that can be in 
heaven or on the earth? I can never be- 
lieve it. 

XXXVII. 

I have just been told that I will not be per- 
mitted to publish my sermon. Why ? ist. Be- 
cause the administrative authority also seeks to 
escape this horrible labor tor bread. 2d. Be- 
cause they hate us who nourish them. ** Let 
these sixty millions of laborers suffer with 
hunger and cold, so long as we and ours may 
be happy !" And if you speak to them of love 
for our neighbor, they will respond by preach- 
ing philanthropy : but always in word, never 
in deed ! 

XXXVIII. 

For five years, now, this state of affairs of 
which I speak has existed. In the presence of 



Labor and Love, 153 

one among you* we are as so many tomtits 
before an eagle. 

By one word, one stroke of his pen, he can 
crush us, and he has truly crushed and annihi- 
lated us. What millions of men he has op- 
pressed ! I said but now, that, thanks to the 
government, idleness would flourish and increase 
everywhere : that labor and bread would be 
scorned and debased. It is done. You see now 
the truth of my predictions, and the exactness 
of my words. 

XXXIX. 

The blood and the tears of men have attested 
the truth of all the laws, and all the command- 
ments of the Old and the New Testament. But 
in favor of the primitive commandment, Avhich 
is the chief of all the others, and of love to our 
neighbor, no one has shed one tear or one drop 
of blood : no one has borne witness to its truth. 
This is why it has been reputed as false ; this 
is the reason that it has been unknown in the 
universe, and that it has now been angrily 
rejected. Did Jesus Christ affirm it by his 
death ? No, he said in the Gospel: ** Behold 
the fowls of the air, etc." We see ^Christ did 
not give precedence to the law of labor, be- 
cause from his infancy he saw in it little 
virtue, and considered it to be a great mis- 
fortune. 

XL. 

We see from the preceding articles that 
Heaven has designed that I should bear witness 

* An evident allusion to the Czar. It is to be noticed 
that Bondareff often speaks of the Czar without openly nam- 
ing him. 



1 54 ТмЬог and Lave, 

to this law, and should seal its truth with m y 
blood and my tears. My blood is dried up in my 
veins at the spectacle of the world's corruption ; 
as to my tears, they do not fall from my eyes 
(my strong constitution forbids me to weep), but 
they sink within my heart. 

XU. 

I ask myself why I am so ardently impressed 
with the meaning of the primitive command- 
ment, amid all the cares and troubles that sur- 
round my life. Will the world give me credit 
for all the griefs that I endure ? Will I receive, 
for this discovery which is of interest to all the 
world, a reward such as they give to inventors 
of trifles? It is useless to think of such a thing. 
My greatest recompense will consist in escap- 
ing punishment ; for their attacks upon me are 
vigorous. But against whom are they directed ? 
Reflect on this important question. Why should 
these menaces disquiet me, when I am guided 
by an invisible and mysterious hand, which im- 
pels me to act as I do, so that it is, as it were, 
against my will that I labor. 

XLII. 

Formerly I hoped to obtain from God in a 
future life, some reward for this work, although 
I have not accomplished it perfectly. And 
now well-educated men, understanding the ob- 
ject I sought, say to me : " You have not labored 
for love of your neighbor, but for love of your- 
self. To love your neighbor and at the same 
time to love yourself is to offend God and to 
hate your neighbor.** Their arguments seem te 
me pure and simple truth; one would think 
God had inspired their words. 



Labor and Love, 155 

XLIIL 

I see but one means to avoid these difficulties. 
If they will divide my work into ten parts, and 
only hold me accountable for the tenth part of 
it, I will be satisfied. If they take from me 
even this benefit, I shall not be wronged, because 
I am convinced that I need not wait to be 
judged by God in the life beyond the grave. 
My conscience will be my judge; and it will 
not torture me with remorse, for I believe that 
I have always applied myself to do right. And 
yet if there is any doubtful case, I will resign 
myself to the decision of God. 

XLIV. 

My readers desire perhaps to know what are 
the griefs that have dried up my blood. They 
are these : 

I St. I have not the habit of writing, as you 
may see. I have been obliged to re-write the 
same article several times. You will see from 
that, the imperative need I have felt of doing 
my work. 

2d. I have composed this work in the midst 
of painful labors in the field. I go to my labors 
in the daytime, and at night I write, and with 
much difficulty, because I do not see well, even 
with spectacles. 

3d. If I had been rich, I would have had 
teachers, counsellors, and literary aid. But 
while I am not entirely poor, my possessions 
are very modest. Ana I have also not been 
well received where I have spoken of my proj- 
ect. 

4th. Is my family numerous ? In other words. 



1 56 Labor and Love, 

how many are there of us who labor ? We are 
seven: myself, my wife, our oldest son and his 
wile, and their three young children. We are 
far from being all of us able to work. 

Our fortune does not permit us to employ 
laborers ; and besides that, as I have shown, 
we must not eat the bread of another's labor. 

5th. It is four years (we are now in De- 
cember 1886) since I addressed the govern- 
ment on this subject that I have at heart. 
I have asked permission to publish my sermon. 
What is the result? It is as though I had had 
to do with the deaf and blind ; they do not an- 
swer me. At least they might say /^^ or no, 

6th. But that which most of all dries up my 
blood is that sixty millions of Russians are suf- 
fering in ignorance and misery because the law 
of labor is hidden from them. Why? That 
some persons may live in comfort and idleness, 
and enjoy all the earthly pleasures that for 
very shame's sake I will not enumerate before 
honest people. 

Have I told you all the sorrows, the evils, the 
weariness, and the pain from which I suffer? 
No ; for it is impossible to express it all. 



XLV. 

Nothing is more true. Heaven has designed 
that I should seal Avith my blood and bathe with 
my tears the truth that I have taught. I have 
sealed it with my blood, and bathed it with my 
tears. Perhaps after my death the command- 
ment I have proclaimed will flourish. I can- 
not believe otherwise. What obstacle could 
stand in the Avay ? I have told but the truth ; 
my prophecy cannot vanish without leaving 



Labor and Love, 157 

some traces. Do I seek to gain glory? No. 
I am old ; of what use would glory be to me? 
To-day or to-morrow I will descend into the 
tomb, where the light of the sun will not enter ; 
why, then, should I seek glory ? 

XLVI. 

My task is now finished. I have withdrawn 
the primitive law from the hell into Avhich men 
have cast it since the beginning of the ages. 
I have bedewed it with my tears, and sealed it 
with my blood, as I have said, and I have re- 
signed it into the hands of the government, or 
rather into those of the most powerful man in 
the world ; I have given it to the czar of czars, 
the monarch of monarchs, the king of kings — 
to the Emperor. 

Let what will happen, I have done my duty. 
It is for you, О Czar, to act according to your 
power and your will! 

XLVII. 

One more word, and I have done. During 
the last days that are left of my life, I will con- 
sign myself to the sepulchre, and I will raise 
above it a monument in conformity with the 
primitive law, " In the sweat of thy face shalt 
thou knead bread." I will raise, I say, a mon- 
ument worthy of this precept, which is more 
precious than all earthly treasures. I will show 
you my design in the following articles. 

XLVIIL 

I, Bondareff, will make a written rather than 
a verbal will, in which 1 will say to \х\у son 
Daniel : At my death, when you place me in the 



