Contents







Introduction










1948










1949










1950










1951










1952










1953










1954










1955










1956










1957










Photo Insert










Appendix










Acknowledgments










Index










A Note About the Author

Love, work and knowledge are the well-springs of our life. They should also govern it.




—Wilhelm Reich

Introduction










This book is the story of one of the most heinous acts of censorship in the history of the United States. In 1956 and again in 1960, an agency of the U.S. government burned the books and journals, including the scientific books, of Wilhelm Reich, M.D. Through that same agency, the Food and Drug Administration, the government ordered the destruction of scientific technology invented by Reich to accumulate and concentrate the physical energy he had discovered and called “orgone.” These orgone energy accumulators were being used by Reich and other physicians for research and experimental medical treatment.




Previously, Reich had fled the Nazis, who also had burned his books, moving in 1939 to the United States, where he hoped to find respite from such dictatorial abuse of government power. But after fighting a protracted legal battle with the FDA, Reich was imprisoned for contempt of court in March 1957. He died in prison eight months later.




Where’s the Truth?

 is the final volume in a four-part autobiographical series composed of excerpts from Reich’s diaries, letters, and laboratory notebooks. The preceding books, 

Passion of Youth

, 

Beyond Psychology

, and 

American Odyssey

, relate Reich’s story from its beginnings on a large farm in the easternmost part of the Austro-Hungarian Empire through his experiences in World War I and the Medical School of the University of Vienna. They continue with his life as a student of Freud and a prominent research physician in the early psychoanalytic movement, his clinical findings about energy functions in the living organism, the development of new therapeutic techniques, the laboratory experiments that provide insight into the origin of the cancer cell and lead ultimately to the discovery of orgone energy and to its ongoing investigation and the invention of tools for its practical application.




Where’s the Truth?

 continues Reich’s story from January 1948, shortly after the FDA started harassing him, until his death in 1957. It not only illuminates Reich’s determined struggle to protect his work, but also reveals the pattern of his focus on the investigation of varying manifestations of orgone energy and shares his personal life, his loves and needs, joys and sorrows, the hopes and anguish of a proud, passionate man.




Not surprisingly, throughout this period Reich feels increasingly persecuted, interfered with in his revolutionary scientific work, and gradually abandoned by most of his students, who could not follow developments in his work. His sense of deepening loneliness is the poignant backdrop to the entire period covered in this book, which gives a remarkable human portrait of a pioneering scientist suffering isolation, like so many great minds before him.




Reich’s loneliness, however, sprang as much from the rapidly developing discoveries in his research as it did from the government persecution. His studies of orgone energy in the atmosphere, including research on hurricanes and the aurora borealis and on lumination in high vacuum tubes charged in an accumulator (VACOR tubes, as Reich called them), suggested that orgone energy functions on the scale of the galaxy and the cosmos, not only in Earth’s atmosphere. Reich’s ideas were revolutionary (in Thomas Kuhn’s sense), clashing with successively larger existing paradigms as his work progressed. Most of his students, as physicians, felt overwhelmed at having to follow him into the cosmos. After a 1951 experiment to find whether orgone energy can serve as an antidote to radiation sickness unexpectedly produced illness in many workers, very few wanted to continue. But more than that, they resented Reich for moving into this new, frightening territory. Trained in biology or medicine and stretched in their efforts to utilize Reich’s work therapeutically, they did not feel comfortable learning physics and astronomy as Reich did.




On top of the frustration over his students’ inability to follow his developing work, Reich suffered treachery and violation of professional ethics by the lawyer of the Wilhelm Reich Foundation, Peter Mills. Mills had been a friend who had participated in meetings where FDA activities had been discussed, and he had documented discoveries by Reich, including the discovery of a motor force in orgone energy during experiments using a Geiger-Müller counter. Once the federal case against Reich developed into a legal action, Mills, having risen to the position of state attorney, rather than recuse himself from the case for an obvious conflict of interest, represented the government claim that “orgone energy does not exist” and participated actively in the attack on Reich.




During the case, it was also revealed that the American Medical Association, the American Psychiatric Association, one of his own employees and even one of his own students, Allan Cott, M.D., were colluding with the FDA to destroy Reich. While the entire premise of the FDA injunction was the claim that the accumulator was a fraud and thus a danger to the public, the government’s actions belied its concern for the public. When fifteen of Reich’s physician students undertook a legal action to set aside the injunction, arguing that it interfered with their ability to practice medicine as they saw fit, a federal judge denied their appeal, ruling that the injunction applied only to Reich. The decision said, in essence, “you fellows use the accumulator all you like; it’s 

him

 we’re after.”




From the outset, Reich saw through the FDA. He insisted that the agency was not acting with bona fide intent but as an agent of the atomic and pharmaceutical industries. Since a 1947 magazine article by freelance journalist Mildred Edie Brady (who was, along with her husband, well connected in communist circles) instigated the FDA attack on Reich, he was also convinced that the Communist Party was a primary moving force behind the scene, still out to bring him down because of his powerful critique of Stalinism and party functionaries in the 1930s.




Amid the difficulties in his personal life wrought by such immense stress (a severe heart attack, a divorce, etc.), perhaps the most extraordinary part of this story is how Reich still manages to keep going as a scientist, breaking through into amazing new areas of research—from radiation effects, to cloud formation and, reciprocally, desertification, to the study of UFOs. One can only be struck by what an astute observer of nature Reich is. He notices what others don’t; he realizes its larger implications; he is driven by the sheer logic of observations and experiments. His laboratory notebooks offer glimpses into those small initial observations that set in motion major new lines of research and reveal their relevance for today’s world.




In a time when the science of global climate change has broken through to public consciousness, it is remarkable how Reich’s work made him aware almost sixty years ago of the frightening scale of desertification and the increasing frequency and severity of storms and hurricanes. He tries again and again to alert government agencies to take climate change seriously. Even if Reich’s theory of orgone energy turns out to be wrong, it’s telling that it directed his attention to problems still relevant today, far ahead of when mainstream researchers began to see the scale of those problems.




Reich also keeps going as a human being, as a father, as one seeking expression through painting and sculpture. He picks himself up, again and again—from increasing isolation, from personal tragedies, and from overwhelming new scientific insights—and he keeps going. And in the end, when his enemies and the legal system finally drag him down to prison and death, he still manages to protect his work by his refusal to go to court in response to the initial FDA complaint, thus denying his opponents the ability to use the legal system to pronounce upon scientific questions.




By the time of his death, a final measure of his aloneness was evident when none of those around him, neither his students nor his own daughter, were willing to be his trustee and protect his scientific legacy. That responsibility was assumed by a total stranger, Mary Boyd Higgins, who is the editor of the autobiographical series.




Many might look upon this story as a lamentable tale of government excess from the past, the incredibly sweeping FDA injunction a witch hunt and incursion upon civil rights that would be laughed out of court in our more enlightened day. But Reich’s knowledge of history and human character, and his understanding of the motives and actions he had identified and subsumed under the term 

emotional plague

 would have made him the first to caution against such ideas. 

Where’s the Truth?

 makes clear that anyone, including a renowned physician-scientist, may be subject to such abuse of power at any time, and in any place.




A word about the title of this book: During a discussion with a lawyer on court procedures involved in defending his work against the attack by the FDA, Reich was told that the success of a case often depends on the skill of the litigating attorney. “Where’s the truth?” Reich asked. His central guiding principle in the struggles with the courts and the FDA from 1947 to 1957 was to keep the truth front and center—he insisted that a court of law was not the venue to judge the validity of scientific research.




—James E. Strick, Ph.D.

 Department of Earth and Environment

 Franklin and Marshall College

1948
















7 January 1948




In the beginning of one’s task one is enthusiastic about helping mankind. At the end of the same task one is worn out and has lost most or all of the enthusiasm. Humanity, for whose benefit one believed to fight, has put too many dangerous obstacles in one’s path. One had to risk breaking one’s neck in overcoming these obstacles. Disillusionment has overcome the searcher and helper. Humanity itself through its pestilent sergeants has obstructed its own benefits. Therefore the inventor or searcher acquires that definite expression of suffering and sorrow in his face (Beethoven, Galileo, Freud), which indicates that the enthusiasm to help has been replaced by ardent adherence to truth beyond any immediate practical interests.




17 January 1948




Cancer book printed—published. It is an honest book.

*




Investigation by Food and Drug still going on.




24 January 1948




No legal action against FDA possible. Advice from Hays office

†




To Physician Students




26 January 1948




Dear Dr.




I have been informed that the investigators of the Food and Drug Administration are trying now to question patients whom you treat psychiatrically. It is my duty to inform you that the patients must be protected from 

irresponsible inquiries into their private lives

. Would you be kind enough to instruct all your patients that they should restrict the investigators to matters pertaining to the accumulator and definitely refuse to answer any questions such as: “How much they pay the doctor,” or “Why they went to the doctor,” or “With whom they associate,” “Where they were born and brought up,” etc., etc. 

Such questions

 by the inspectors of the F.D.A. 

are illegal

; they have nothing to do with the object of the investigation. Protect medical secrecy.




27 January 1948




Stop of all investigation through FDA by refusing to answer any questions at all. With the FDA the mechanistic world view tried to kill the functional attitude.




The development of materialistic philosophy proceeded from fundamental questions not of a mechanical nature but, strangely enough, of a psychological nature. 

What is sensation? How can matter experience itself? To what is sensation bound?

 It was on these questions, and not on purely material questions, that scientific minds parted company with metaphysical and mystical minds, and that every dispute flared up about the correct view of the world and the events occurring in it. Because it was clear right from the start that it is only our 

sensation

 of events and things that holds the key to the deep mysteries of understanding nature. Sensation is the sieve through which the self is in contact with the world within and outside itself. All our perceptions and our judgments about the world and ourselves depend on the nature of this sieve. The sieve is the outermost limit that delineates the living orgonotic system in the orgone ocean; through the holes in the sieve, the experiencing organism communicates with the cosmic orgone ocean.

*




To Dr. Werner Kemper




30 January 1948




Dear Dr. Kemper,




I have received your letter of 29 December and was very pleased to hear that the parcels have finally reached you. We sent you a fourth food parcel last week and likewise a parcel of books was sent to you via Willi Brandt

*

 in Berlin. These books also include one called “The Cancer Biopathy” which covers the work done over the last 14 years on organic biopathies. I hope that you will embrace the discovery of orgone.

†

 It sounds incredible, but it is quite obvious that what psychoanalysts once called the libidinous cell energy has now actually been shown to exist in a physical and demonstrable form.




Are you in contact with Aenne Morseth (Heimburgstrasse 4, Hamburg Klein—Flottbeck)? Please keep in touch now and again, and I would be glad to be of help to you in any way that I can. We are also in contact with other people in Europe.




16 February 1948




Eva

‡

 in distress. The following happened: She was in class with several students and a professor of heart physiology. They spoke of literature to be read. He said, “

Don’t read literature like that of the paranoic who believes there is a pulsation in the body and in the atmosphere.”

—clearly WR. She did not say anything. But felt terrible.




She did not dare to look at the 

Cancer Biopathy

 I had sent to her. She did not go to work with Cott

§

 as arranged. She “gave herself another two years.”




23 February 1948




Refutal of the ionization theory

*

. Facts and experiment:







G M [Geiger Müller] tubes give G.M reaction without voltage to orgonotic excitation.




Electrons from secondary coil produce no ionization. The leaves in the charged electroscope do not come together.




The energy field between two plates, fed by the IInd coil, does 

not

 influence the electroscope.




Single-pole electroscope can be charged.




Lumination in complete vacuum 2-pole and single-pole.







I photograph the ether!!! No doubt. The more literature I read on the ether, the clearer the following become:







The requirements of the ether are important, but the description of the ether is not important.




The understanding of ether became nonsense in order to take account of certain mechanical processes, which are in themselves questionable: for example, quantum 6.5 × 10

-27

 erg sec.




The orgone is the true ether.




The high-ranking physicists and mathematicians have puffed themselves up unduly, They provide proof of arbitrary assumptions in a stringent way.







6 March 1948




Today, between 8 and 9 p.m. the entire world came crashing down, and a new one came into being.




Experiment

: A vacuum tube produced 10,000 pulses per minute (32 scaler), with a 

blue glow

, up to 1,000 volts 

without

 gas, without ions.




12 March 1948




The ether requires a restructuring of physics and astronomy in their entirety. This requires courage, method, loneliness, and very little publicity. And this load cannot be easily carried.




13 March 1948




The rolling snowball: Karl Menninger, incoming president of the American Psych. Society, has approvingly published Brady’s

*

 insulting article. Orgonomy

†

 has pulled the rug out from under his psychoanalysis.




22 March 1948




I must not allow myself to be captured by current things and forms. My work is part of the distant future.




I need helpers, but the helpers belong to the present. This is a tragedy. And only he who carries his own load can make my burden lighter.




To Armin Beregi




2 April 1948




Dear Mr. Beregi:




I have received your letter of 12 March, via Dr. Hoppe.

‡

 Many of the questions that you raise, such as those relating to heart action currents, etc., cannot be answered at present because we still know too little about the relationship of orgone to electromagnetism. As regards your methods of approaching orgone phenomena, I must in principle repeat what I have already indicated to you: Over the course of about 16 years, packed full with experimentation and theorizing, it has become quite clear that we 

cannot

 understand orgone energy in the context of the methods and theories of classical physics, because these methods are simply not suitable and do not take us any further forward. It has already been discovered, through experiment, that we must separate the electromagnetic excitation of light from the radiation of light itself; i.e. the phenomenon of light consists of two different functions. This has been confirmed.




Similarly, it is likely that the orgone theory will make it possible to explain Planck’s quanta, which so far have not been understood, rather than—vice versa—Planck’s quanta providing an explanation of the functions of orgone energy. This follows clearly from the fact that orgone is primordial and is obviously the source of all known energy phenomena. It you ever succeed in establishing relationships between the action currents and orgone energy phenomena, you will have made a contribution to science the value of which cannot be overestimated. You are also certainly correct in stating that all manner of so-called miracle cures are based on body-orgone effects. Naturally, in the final analysis, such questions can be answered only by the outcome of experiments.




My Planck number is slightly higher than the one that is generally known because I was forced to extend the minute by 4 seconds.




My orgonometric numbers on astrophysics were deliberately formulated in such a way that nobody can understand them. They will be published in a way that everyone can follow, once the work has been completed.




2 April 1948




I succeeded in:







Reducing the ion theory of the GM tube to 0; orgone works in a vacuum.




Reducing the energizing voltage to 250 V at 3000 [pulses] per minute.




[Obtaining] 7–8000 pulses per minute at 350 V.







An orgone-motor is becoming a reality.




6 April 1948




I have once more ended in a heavenly waste land. This time because of the discovery of the orgone phenomena in a vacuum.




Like other people, I could enjoy children. but I need rest in order to think, and children do not allow that.




I could exert a fascination more easily than other people in gatherings.

*

 But I had to recognize that this enthusiasm achieves nothing. They continue to defame as before.




I have discovered the ether

.




This will cause me a terrible amount of trouble. Einstein stands squarely in the way with his empty space, supported by human fear of the truth. But I must put Einstein out of action as far as the ether question is concerned. By presenting the 

facts

.




10 April 1948




Ilse

†

 called Dr. Wolfe of the Med. Dept. of the Atomic Energy Commission NY.




She wanted to talk to him about the GM reaction as a social problem. He promised to call back but did not do so on the same day.




We are still afraid of the great responsibility that has been visited upon us. That is why we are running to “authorities” for help. We are running to the enemy or to the corpse of passing time.




30 April 1948




Meeting of Ilse Ollendorff and Dr. James Willie

*

 with the US Atomic Energy Commission in New York (Columbus Circle). They will give a letter to the effect that they realize their responsibility in case an “enemy” nation gets hold of destructive possibilities of the orgone energy. They also acknowledged the basic scientific character of the orgone work. They think a commission could come down if the pulses were already driving a motor. This attitude does not seem honest or good willed. The rate of 25,000 per minute from energy out of air is quite an event in itself, worthy of a great monetary effort. What they apparently want is the MOTOR ready made for them, in order to save money.




7 May 1948




We are back at Orgonon.

†

 Dead tired.




8 May 1948




Start of installation in the laboratory at Orgonon.




9 May 1948




Light is dawning in my life. Things become less important when they are small. The cardinal points still stand out clearly and sharply as before. It is as if only high mountain peaks protrude from the wall of small mountains, above the morning mist. The view into the distance—and peacefulness—remain.




14 May 1948

 10–12 h




New discovery—




The old experience that body energy generates rotation leads to rotation through energy from 

vacuum tubes

 (

Vacor tubes

)

*

 

without any voltage

 on the CMB—3A GM apparatus:







at the listening apparatus




at the listening apparatus embedded in the pulse counter?




at the pulse measuring apparatus (1600 per minute)




at the voltmeter (approx. 30 volts)







Parallel connection of several tubes increases the rotation.




This means:







New proof that biological and atmospheric orgone are identical.




The existence of a motor force.




The possibility of a motor.







23 May 1948




After 18 years, Eva completed all her studies—no more schools. On 4 June 1948 she will graduate as an MD.




She has still not got over her malicious mother.

†

 She will have to do so in the future.




People should be 

very

 careful when choosing the future fathers and mothers of their children. For that reason alone, it is extremely mean to demand a marriage certificate for life, just for one night of embracement.




26 May 1948




Construction of the observatory on the hill at Orgonon is gradually getting under way. Collins

*

 is doing the building.




1 June 1948




Eva left us yesterday after eight wonderful days of pleasant togetherness. She said that her mother had told her that the project I am working on could not be correct because I had not received any money for research.




6 June 1948




Breaking away from the Little Man in myself is terrible. If I cannot, or should not, or may not tell Tom Ross

†

 about orgone, I am 

unhappy

. I suffer at the thought of spending the last 30–40 years of my life as a scientific hermit.




In short, I shudder at my “greatness.” When people look at me with shy respect, they appear comical to me.




Is this narrow-mindedness or generosity?




Could I go mad? Perhaps, in absolute loneliness.




Or have I not overcome the suffering of being on the move when I was 14 years old?




I have lived in the century of major wars and mass migrations. But I was a traveler of the ether already in 1908.




How that sounds, 1908 (and how it once sounded, 1908!) compared with the 1948, 40 years, how long, how not.




7 June 1948




To stay sane in an insane world as a creative man or woman he or she must:







Keep one’s life financially independent.




Continue unabated to exercise one’s power of creativity in concrete, strenuous tasks, always seeking perfection as near as possible.




Carefully cherish LOVE of a partner with full gratification, of the total emotional being if possible, of the body in a clean way if necessary.




Keep out of the trap of confusion by the average man and woman, helping others to keep out of the trap too as best they can.




Keep one’s structure clean like brook water through knowing and correcting every mistake, making the corrected mistake the guiding lines to new truth.




Never yield to the expediencies of life except where it is basically harmless or where the main line of development is not impeded for the duration of one’s life.







24 June 1948

 1:40 pm




The org motor works

.













       Witnesses:










   Tom Ross













 










   Ilse Ollendorff













       

Finally










   
















After 1 year of hard work since 9 August 1947 the wheel is turning, driven by the cosmic orgone energy discovered by me!!!!!




To Arthur Garfield Hays

*




25 June 1948




My dear Mr. Hays:




This letter is dealing with an extremely serious and urgent matter. I would, therefore, appreciate it very much if you would handle this affair personally.




You will remember that I informed you in August, 1947 of the discovery of a motor force in cosmic orgone energy by means of the Geiger-Müller counter. At that time, the possibility of using this motor force in a practical matter was already at hand, but still far removed from concrete fulfillment.




After 10 months of strenuous and hard work, I finally succeeded yesterday, on June 24th, 1948, at 1:10 p.m., to set a motor in motion by means of the rotary forces contained in cosmic orgone energy. It will take some time until this function will be “cleaned,” but in the meantime it will be necessary:







To secure my legal priority




To secure a patent




To inform the responsible authorities of the U.S. Government of this accomplishment and to take all other necessary steps to develop the orgone energy motor.







I would like to outline its basic functions:




The universe, and with it the orgone envelope

*

 of the earth planet, contains very powerful energy impulses, due to cosmic orgone energy. These impulses are caught by certain devices and are transmitted through an electronic system, without the use of any high voltage, to a motor which transforms the rapidly successive cosmic energy impulses into an electro-magnetic motor reaction. The motor can, of course, be connected with a dynemeter or some other device which could do work.




Would you be kind enough to let me know whether it would be possible that a New York, young, skilled, and courageous patent lawyer would come up to Orgonon, to see the whole thing and to prepare the necessary papers? I would let you know when the setup will be clean enough for this procedure.




I would appreciate strict discretion in this matter. The general consequences of the discovery cannot be evaluated as yet, and that has a bearing on the present social situation.




To the A. N. Marquis Company




24 August 1948




Gentlemen:




Re: Who Knows—And What




I am returning your questionnaire filled out as best I could. A type-written copy of my answers is attached for better reading. You will also find enclosed information on my background and development, a list of my main publications and of the more important publications on my work. I gathered from your instructions that you aim at as complete and accurate information as possible.




During almost 30 years of strenuous work, much material has accumulated. Since there is very much talk about my work and theories, friendly and unfriendly, I thought it advisable to send you the main data for your file. I must leave it to your discretion how much of it you deem right for use in the compilation.




Since it might appear unusual that a bio-psychiatrist should work as an expert in the realm of non-living nature, I believe it will be helpful to give the following summary:




My present work began in the realm of psychiatry and psychoanalysis, with 

natural scientific

 investigations of the 

energy

 at work 

in human emotions

. This led to the discovery of the BIO-ENERGY in the living organism, termed ORGANISMIC 

ORGONE

 ENERGY; and further to the discovery of the same type of a basically 

PHYSICAL

 ORGONE ENERGY in the atmosphere. 

ORGONOMY

 is 

not

 psychiatry, but the science of BIOPHYSICS OF THE EMOTIONS, thus also including psychiatry, and PHYSICS in the REALM OF BASIC COSMIC ORGONE ENERGY. It is NOT mysticism, but natural scientific, experimental investigation, 

also

 of mystical emotions and experiences. ORGONE ENERGY is ENERGY 

BEFORE

 MATTER (not 

after

 matter as is atomic energy). It is studied by means of Geiger-Müller Counters and other physical instruments. It follows entirely new, hitherto unknown 

functional

 laws of nature, and not the well-known mechanical laws of electricity, heat, or mechanics.




The new scientific discipline, called ORGONOMY, including orgone physics, orgone biophysics and orgonometry, is much more inclusive than its historical core, the ORGASM THEORY, from which it developed during the past 25 years: the latter was the first functional, energetic formulation of Bio-Psychiatry (1923–1927), concerning the all-important biophysical function of the ORGASM. It differs from the later investigations on the subject, such as the KINSEY report, in that it demonstrates the inability of the majority of human animals to discharge their BIO-ENERGY in a satisfactory manner due to “ARMORING”

*

 of the organism. The armoring prevents the natural function of total body convulsions at the peak of biophysical excitation. Accordingly, the orgasm is not a local function of the genital organs, as is generally assumed, but a 

basic total

 function of the organism in the realm of living nature.




The discovery of the atmospheric (cosmic) orgone energy resulted from the merely 

physical

 investigation of these bio-energetic, basic functions.




What has been indicated under “Other Specialisms,” such as Medical Orgone Therapy, Sex-Economy, Orgasm Theory: what has been, furthermore, summed up under “other than specialization” such as Mass Psychology, Character Analysis, Genital Rights of Children and Adolescents, etc., is, in fact, not outside of, but 

within

 the framework of the total work, currently termed “ORGONOMY.” This last term is, therefore, to be regarded as the appropriate name for my special discovery and the related new knowledge, including the special fields of scientific endeavor. All special applications of ORGONOMY follow the one common principle: 

the bio-energetic functioning in the human animal

.




To Lawrence Barth




8 September 1948




Dear Mr. Barth:




Your inquiry of August 29th was forwarded to me.




I suggest that you discuss all your problems with Dr. Gold

†

 who is perfectly equipped theoretically as well as practically to give you all  information possible on the orgone biophysical view of life and society.




I assume that you read my books carefully. In this case you will have realized that I must disagree with you 100% on your attitude toward the Sowjet Union which today is the most reactionary country in the world and holds no hope at all for mankind. If there is any hope left, it is only that of getting at the reactionary forces and inclinations in the average mass individual; a task which is completely obliterated and even prevented by firing squads on the part of the C.P.s of the world.




To Dr. S. V. Pearson




13 September 1948




Dear Dr. Pearson:




I received your letter of August 12th. I agree with you that the 

Masspsychology of Fascism

 could be issued now in a better form. But I do not agree with you in regard to your criticism of the concept of living working power. I believe that the derivation of economic values from living working power is the only truly and basically scientific accomplishment of Karl Marx which will last. But I agree again with you that the present day so-called marxist parties not only have no idea of Marx’s accomplishment, but on the contrary, have messed up whatever his teachings brought to mankind, in a horrible way. They have as much to do with Marx’s teachings as the splendor of the church has to do with the teachings of Jesus.




I shall study the pamphlets you sent me, but from a first survey I can already see they do not touch upon the most burning problem of the century, that of the abysmal irrationalism and brutality of man, and its core, the sexual frustration. To mention “the conditioning of habits of thoughts” is not good enough any more. We must begin to understand why people yield so easily to wrong ideas and to trends of thought which are contrary to their own life interests.




21 September 1948




It is becoming late in my life; just as in the construction of my “castle” at Orgonon.

*

 Late autumn’s storming winds proclaim approach of ending. The world of man is sad. Life found no place in it. Esteem was given to the brass. What am I? A searcher of nature’s secret? Nature does not care to be found out. An animal that is whining over pain of life? Life is like nature. It does not care who carries it. It is being carried. There are good and bad carriers of Life.




To the Medical Directors:

 Dr. James A. Willie, Dr. Simeon J. Tropp, Dr. A. Allan Cott




5 October 1948




Dear Dr. Willie,




This letter has the purpose to clarify some vital points in our current dealings with the Atomic Energy Commission. I have studied the report on your meeting with Dr. Beckerley carefully, in order to obtain clarity in regard to the whole complicated relationship of orgone energy to atomic energy. It concerns not only basic problems of natural science, but also practical everyday handling of administrative affairs, such as priorities for research during the war years, permits, electronic apparatus, etc. I would like to summarize the issues according to their importance.




1. It became clear, since the discovery of the orgone energy in bionous matter in 1936,

†

 and especially since the discovery of the atmospheric orgone in 1940, that we are dealing with a universal, primordial, hitherto unknown type of ENERGY. Experiment XX

‡

 has shown beyond the shadow of a doubt, that it is energy before matter, i.e., energy from which matter arises. “atomic energy,” on the other hand, is energy derived from matter through splitting of the unit of matter, called “atom.” It is clear from our definition of “orgone energy,” as well as from the definition of “atomic energy,” that orgone is not atomic energy, and that, therefore, our activities do not fall under the Atomic Energy Act of Congress. So far, the attitude of the Atomic Energy Commission seems correct.




But this conclusion stands only as long as the term Atomic Energy is restricted to those energy processes which depend on splitting the atoms. This definition postulates that the primary units in the universe consist of energy particles which possess mass. As long as this view remains valid, we are 

not

 handling “atomic energy,” and the AEC is not obliged or even interested in supporting our work.




There are, however, considerations which would change this whole outlook:




2. Logically, our basic assumption cannot be valid, namely that orgone energy represents primordial, 

massfree

 energy from which matter arises, 

if

 the theoretical foundation of the work in atomic energy is valid, that mass is a primordial, cosmic function. These two theoretical foundations are mutually exclusive, merely logically, before any fact. The question can only be decided experimentally. But it appears clear already at this phase of our discussion that we would have a just claim for financial support by the AEC if the term atomic energy would not be restricted to “atoms,” but would include 

all

 primordial functions of nature.




This would require major changes in the theoretical foundation of present day physics and cosmology. We cannot expect such changes to take place easily, painlessly or quickly. It will take decades to coordinate the orgonomic with the atomic view of nature. The question now is: Should the present state of affairs be allowed to continue until basic natural research will have done its job of coordination and clarification? 

Is it not clear that such coordination will require cooperation rather than formalistic legalistic restriction of realms of competence?

 I believe that flexibility in legal and formal procedures will have to 

precede

 the final accomplishment.




3. One argument which must be added to the legalistic is the practical one. You know that I succeeded in activating a motor system by means of cosmic orgone energy impulses. I needed several units of the type of motor with which I was experimenting. The administrative director wrote to the Office of the Technical Advisors of the AEC for help. We received the following answer:




“Reference is made to your letter of September 9th. In our discussion last spring I pointed out that while the U.S. Atomic Energy Commission has an interest in fundamental studies such as those you are conducting it is not proper for the USAEC to lend direct assistance to you inasmuch as we are charged (Atomic Energy Act of 1946, Sec. 1 (b)) with fostering private research only when such research is related to atomic energy.




“Although your experiments, as I understand them, have demonstrated some Geiger counter activity, I do not believe that the relation between the effect you have observed and the phenomena associated with “atomic energy” has been demonstrated. When you can show that your experiments are directly allied to atomic energy phenomena we will be willing to encourage your work and assist you in your efforts to locate sources of equipment.




“Until that time I feel that we are not justified in spending our time and thereby spending money derived ultimately from Federal taxes in activities not clearly within the scope of the Atomic Energy Act. I am certain you can appreciate the fact that we must band all our efforts to doing the job requested by the Congress.”




This attitude spotlighted the whole situation: We are working with Geiger Müller Counters, as the atomic physicist does. Our counting rates are much higher than the rates in AE research, approximately 12,000 impulses per second, 

without

 fission of matter and without high voltage application. We have obtained a result in the technical use of the cosmic energy impulses which could not be obtained by atomic energy research. We are advised that Congress authorized taxpayers money for “atomic energy” only. This is legally true, but 

factually

 Congress and the American people are not interested in the legal definition, but in 

practical achievements

. In this case, not the achievement should be neglected, but the legal term should be adjusted to the facts rather than the facts to the legal terms.




This one example may suffice to show the inadvisability of legalistic thinking. There are dozens of such examples which could be mentioned to prove the same point.




4. When Miss Ollendorf and Dr. Willie visited the AEC on April 30th, 1948, they were told, according to a report which I received, that “the interest of the AEC would be much greater if the phenomena obtained in the vacuum tubes could be transmitted into a continuous flow of measurable energy.”




This goal has been achieved during the summer months of 1948, and a report on the fact was sent to the AEC and to the National Academy of Science. Now, after this has been done, we are requested to show that our “experiments are directly allied to Atomic Energy phenomena,” and that 

then

 the AEC would encourage our work and assist us in locating sources of equipment.




I don’t have to tell you who have seen the phenomena and are well acquainted with the total process of our work, that all these requirements have long been fulfilled. Our work is allied with the atomic energy phenomena by the mere fact that we operate cosmic energy by means of Geiger Müller counters, and that we are able to turn a motor with this energy; an accomplishment, not reached so far in atomic research.




May I be permitted to say that these things are not a play with pebbles. 

What we want, are entitled to request. is MONEY, taxpayers money, from the many billion dollar grants for atomic research

, to finish our job.




Some 8 years ago, I was promised economic support if my claim of the existence of a continuous temperature difference at the orgone accumulator would prove to be true. I demonstrated the fact, it was corroborated, but the promise was not fulfilled. Support was promised when an even flow of energy and its technical use would show up. This happened, but we received no money, and now another achievement is required.




Our work, with its $15,000 a year budget, appears rather negligible as compared with the billion dollars a year spent in atomic research. A handful of eager workers in our field appear, I admit, negligible as compared with thousands of physicists and hundred thousands of workers in the AEC enterprises. It seems, therefore, incredible that a motor began turning in our negligible set-up and not in the big enterprises. Yet, this fact is true and can be demonstrated at any moment.




What our small outfit could accomplish if it had only $500,000 would seem incalculable on the basis of what has been achieved so far. Physicians in many countries are at work practically with experimentation on human diseases by use of the orgone accumulator, with great medical success.




Let me tell you about some prospects which have not yet been published and which I have not communicated to you as yet:







a. A bridge from the functions of primordial orgone energy to some atomic numbers has been found.




b. A bridge has been established between the functional equations pertaining to orgone energy functions and Planck’s quantum number.




c. A very important, basic link has been found between our orgone energy formula and Kepler’s Law of Harmony.







This may suffice to demonstrate very clearly our justified claim, to request support by the powerful and rich AEC of our work, in the interest of the people of the U.S. To neglect further the great potentialities of orgone research on account of merely formalistic, legalistic or prestige reasons, could not be justified before the public. We aim at cooperation, and not competition between Atomic Energy Research and Orgone Energy Research. I am willing to reveal all unpublished facts and existent work hypothesis, to the representatives of the people of the U.S.A. But the representatives of the people of the U.S.A. would have to give us firmer guarantees of support than mere promises as hitherto. It is unnecessary to show here in detail how many human lives depend on the correct settlement of this issue.




You are free to send a copy of this letter to the proper authority in the AEC, in case you deem it right to do so.




25 November 1948




Thanksgiving Day of the American people, to give thanks to the founders of America and their God for the simple freedom to live and to function happily. This freedom, simple as it is, given as it is naturally to all the living, has become the most challenged and the most difficult thing to obtain in this world. WHY?




It is quiet in my home. All have gone to see some parade. I have spent two hours correcting my book on ORGONOMIC FUNCTIONALISM.




26 November 1948




Everything was perfectly quiet again last night after 10 o’clock. Peter

*

 had finally gone asleep. He had urged me to tell him how plastic is made while I was burning to get to my desk to work out certain orgonometric equations. It took me half an hour to start in on it. I worked until 1:30 a.m. and finally I had it.




I had previously assumed, on the basis of the Geiger action with Vacor tubes, that it was pulses (p) which gave rise to waves (w). But then it had happened that my motor turned also when it was influenced by oscillations, that is, by waves. Therefore the direction p

w worked also the other way around: w

p. A new problem stood before me: What is now, according to the laws of orgonomic functionalism, the common functioning principle of p 

and

 w? I knew that I was dealing here with problems at the basis of all true knowledge, i.e. with a 

most decisive

 question. I went down to the lab and let the setups work again. No doubt, there it was: p induced w but also w induced p. Until then I had assumed that waves or pulses belonged to the 

basic

 principle of natural functions. Finally the fog cleared away: Pulses and waves were influencing each other (not “causing” each other). It was the function of PULSATION again which constituted the common functioning principle of both, pulses 

and

 waves:







I had thus corrected a dangerous error in my thinking; I had thought that pulsation 

consists

 of pulses. Now I knew: Pulsation functions in the variations, pulses and waves, SIMULTANEOUSLY.




 




Reich’s deepening focus on orgone physics did not lessen his concern about the human condition. Over the years, he had experienced and studied the malevolence of man and found it to be so widespread in social relationships and institutions he likened it to a plague—an emotional plague. He referred to it as







an endemic illness, like schizophrenia or cancer, with one notable difference, i.e., it is essentially manifested in social life. Schizophrenia and cancer are biopathies which we can look upon as the results of the ravages of the emotional plague in social life. The effects of the emotional plague can be seen in the human organism as well as in the life of society. Every so often, the emotional plague develops into an epidemic just like any other contagious disease, such as the bubonic plague or cholera. Epidemic outbreaks of the emotional plague become manifest in widespread and violent breakthroughs of sadism and criminology, on a small and large scale. One such epidemic outbreak was the Catholic Inquisition of the Middle Ages; the international fascism of the twentieth century is another.







The actions taken against Reich by the FDA and its adherents show many of the characteristics of this disease as Reich has described them:







“The motive given for the action never coincides with the real motive which is hidden.




There is total belief in the ostensible goal.




Conclusions are not the results of thinking but are predetermined. Thinking serves to confirm and rationalize the predetermined conclusion.




Use of defamation (generally sexual, moralistic)”







28 November 1948




This is the story I just have heard:




One of my doctor students, from Boston, had given birth to a boy. He was a happy, rosy, smiling baby. The next day they brought him in to her. He was pale, quiet, and looked like an old man. 

The surgeons had circumcised him without informing the mother

. And there is no law in the country, or in the world for that matter, which would according to the law of the boomerang entitle us, the physicians against the emotional plague, to have this surgeon punished. Why wasn’t this horrible story written down? I asked. No answer. This is a part of the misery: The surgeons castrate infants, the plague holds the reins of public opinion, and those who know and suffer keep silent. HOW CAN THIS SILENCE BE EVER BROKEN?




29 November 1948




I have learned to understand how the Emotional Plague works; but I have not discovered yet the medicine which would extinguish this plague as the black plague, which is transmitted by rats, has been extinguished.




Such a frustrated neurotic as Brady for instance was able to set a snowball rolling, easily and speedily, as no truth in the world till now could. The pestilent gossip had publicity in several magazines and newspapers which it was impossible to obtain for the truth of orgone energy and its healing properties. The pestilent gossip was able to mobilize several government agencies 

against

 the truth, whereas our hard toiling was unable to mobilize one single government agency 

for

 the healing truth up till now.




The pestilent gossip was able to infest many centers of a whole continent with the idea that the orgone accumulator is a kind of masturbation device. This includes the University of the State of New York, which read Brady but did not read the 

Function of the Orgasm

 or the 

Cancer Biopathy

.




The pestilent gossip was able to keep the leading workers of this institute busy with administrative affairs for a whole year to such an extent that other, essential work in science, medicine and education had to be postponed. Besides we had expenses of several thousand dollars in this connection.




The pestilent gossip of Brady and psychoanalytic consorts was able to make an industrialist run away who had already decided to put 50,000 dollars into the manufacturing of orgone accumulators for the good of the sick, of children who are pale, and the cancerous who are agonized in pain.




The pestilent gossip enjoyed avidly listening ears while the truth had to fight an exhausting struggle uphill under the threat of investigation, arrests, and final disaster.




The gossip was easily accepted while the truth that this pestilent attack was a typical red fascist

*

 maneuver to eliminate a dangerous enemy of dictatorship, was not believed to be true. When I told my friends in 1947 that the appearance of the pestilent article filled with many lies and distortions in a magazine

†

 which was at that time under the editorship of Henry Wallace, was the indication of a communist attack, nobody wanted to believe it. One year later, at the presidential election of 1948, nobody had any doubt as to Wallace’s loyalty to the Russian dictator.




Our medical problem is this:




WHAT IS RESPONSIBLE FOR THE FACT THAT GOSSIP AND LIE CAN SO EASILY PREVAIL AND RUIN HUMAN LIVES AND HARD ENDEAVORS, WHEREAS THE TRUTH HAS ALWAYS TO FIGHT UPHILL WITH THE TONGUE OUT, SO TO SPEAK, FROM EXHAUSTION IN ORDER MERELY TO SURVIVE AND SO OFTEN ONLY TO DIE?




This is a strict MEDICAL PROBLEM, and I was the first physician and psychiatrist to put it straight before the public in Europe already in academic terms (1928–1939), and here, in the USA in very practical and simple terms since 1939. It is because I have found and set this problem straight up in front of everybody, that the plague has centered its attack upon me for such a long time and in such a dangerous manner.




I found a preliminary and insufficient answer to the problem as formulated above: THE EMOTIONAL PLAGUE PREVAILS AND THE TRUTH SUCCUMBS SO EASILY BECAUSE NO ONE KNOWS THAT THERE IS SUCH A THING AS THE EMOTIONAL PLAGUE, AS AN ORGANIZED INSTITUTION OF THE BODY SOCIAL, AND NOBODY UNDERSTANDS HOW IT WORKS IF EVER ANYBODY FEELS THAT SOMETHING IS 

BASICALLY WRONG

 WITH THE HUMAN, SOCIAL, AND EMOTIONAL EXISTENCE.




This answer can be only a preliminary one. It does not say anything, really. And as long as we are unable to answer this question in a truly scientific and medical way, the mass killing will go on, and the truth, which saves lives and gives happiness, will stand before the palaces of the people on this earth, in dirty torn clothes, with grime and ashes on its face, smeared into it by the gossipers and the evil ones; and it will carry its holy cross with lungs heavily panting, the sweat of hard labor, and fear and desolation wetting its limbs, up to Calvary where it will forever be nailed to the cross together with the thieves, so that everybody may believe that it was a thief and a liar, a traitor and an enemy of mankind. Basically, this is the real problem of the legend of the crucification of Jesus. Somehow and somewhere deep down the people KNOW all this and they worship Jesus because this great simple soul was crucified together with the thieves in a ghastly manner. But no praying and no hypocritical churchgoing will ever solve the 

medical

 problem in such a practical fashion that the Bradys and consorts go to the jail where they belong and tried hard to imprison an important piece of truth. It is one of the most ghastly and most horrible attitudes in life to hang the truth 

first

 together with the thieves and to adore it 

after the killing

 as the “savior of mankind” and as the “redeemer from sins.” 

Why don’t you carry the cross of your sins yourselves, you good citizen of this earth

? Why does 

somebody else

 have to hang for your sins together with the thieves? Is not this a very easy and cowardly way out of your pestilent sinning?




Why does a psychoanalyst like Mr. Karl Menninger gang up with a gossiper like Brady to kill the truth, to defame my name, to tell physicians who want to study with me that I am crazy, to publish a dirty piece of base journalism in his medical bulletin? Why does he do this in the face of plain simple facts which are demonstrated and handled every single day in a practical manner with many hundreds of patients by dozens of duly licensed medical doctors? Is he foolish, or flabbergasted, or, maybe, afraid?




At the bottom of this stupid misbehavior is the guilty feeling and bad conscience which many of the psychoanalysts of the early part of this century have in regard to Orgonomy.




In the Twenties they could have had it all. At that time I fought hard and desperately and honestly to put my teachings across WITHIN the Association of the Psychoanalysts of which I was a very prominent and responsibly active member. They did not want the ORGASM THEORY then.

*

 It was some 20 years too early. Now the orgasm theory conquers the world of psychiatry and some parts already of organic medicine too. Then, they did not want me and tried hard to get rid of me. This happened by way of slander and gossip and defamation, AND NOT BY WAY OF ARGUMENT, at the Congress in Lucerne in 1934. They thought I was dead or killed, definitely. But I was not dead. I came back with more 

medicine against the plague

 than ever before. Now they began to play a new game of distortion. Since I was now understood and acclaimed all over the psychiatric world as the originator of the theory and technic of character analysis they said: “Well, Reich was great as a psychoanalyst up till character analysis, which is a ‘CLASSIC.’ But since then he went completely haywire, became schizophrenic, crazy.” And they did all they possibly could to spread this defamation “from ear to ear.”




They lied

. It is not true that they recognized the importance and truth of CHARACTER ANALYSIS when it was born 1928–1939. They defamed it then. They gossiped then to the effect that I seduced my children, let them watch sexual intercourse, that I took adolescent girls into the woods, that I was insane, or that I put up my tent in the lobby of a big hotel. (I put it up at the shore of the beautiful lake in Lucerne to take a swim in the early mornings while their kind sat as stuffed shirts in the hotel lobbies gossiping and forgetting about the sexuality of children.) They began to acclaim character analysis when they could not help doing so anymore; when the professional public at large read it by the thousands; when it was stolen from the university libraries because it could not be bought, thousands of copies having been sold in a few months. Then and only then did they acclaim me as a “FORMER BRILLIANT” psychoanalyst. Now, Orgonomy tries hard to get rid of being a sort of psychoanalysis which it isn’t. But the KNOWERS, the ones who are with me and for me, kept mostly silent; and the pestilent gossip held the scene of the public eye.




WHY DO THOSE 

WHO KNOW

 KEEP SILENT? WHY DON’T THEY SPEAK UP? WHY DON’T THEY COME TO THE RESCUE OF THE ONE WHO TELLS THE TRUTH? WHY DO THEY WAIT UNTIL HE IS KILLED IN ONE WAY OR OTHER? WHY DO THEY CRAWL OUT OF THEIR HOLES SO RELUCTANTLY, SO TIMIDLY, SO AWFULLY SLOWLY, SO LATE, ALWAYS TOO LATE? DON’T THEY HEAR THE AGONIES OF CHILDREN AND ADOLESCENTS?




We Americans have proclaimed our right and ability to protect truth and to put it into effect across the world, to lift all Iron Curtains that may be. But here is the problem: HOW SHOULD IT BE POSSIBLE TO PUT THE TRUTH ACROSS EVERYWHERE IF WE DO NOT UNDERSTAND YET WHY PEOPLE WHO KNOW THE TRUTH DO NOT TELL IT?




To James Willie, M.D.




18 December 1948




Dear Dr. Willie:




It becomes more clear as the weeks pass by that the reluctance or even fear to touch the core of our teachings, that is, the function of genitality, including orgonotic streamings

*

 in the pelvis, has taken possession of very many if not most of our medical therapists. This, of course, constitutes a great danger, not only to the future of the work, but particularly to the relationship of the medical practitioners to the Orgone Institute.

*

 Since Orgone Research and Orgonomy as a natural science cannot budge in the emphasis of this most important bioenergetic function of man, the conclusion is inevitable that the split which is already there, will increase irreparably in due time if we do not do something about it right now and here.




I would appreciate it very much if you would care to help me in overcoming this major obstacle. We have discussed the necessity that medical practitioners should lecture at least twice on clinical cases before they are recognized and listed. I would like to add now that we should not admit anybody to practice who is not perfectly trained in handling and discussing the orgonotic streamings in the biosystem, 

including the pelvis and the genital organs

. This essential point should, one way or another, also be included in the formulation of the bylaws of the Medical Association.




I would like to point out specifically the future danger as I see it: The patients are streaming into the offices of our medical doctors because they feel that orgone biophysics has answered their biosexual problems basically. They seek help in that respect first of all. Now, if this essential problem is, as it appears, eschewed systematically, disillusionment and disappointment will inevitably follow, and the whole medical work will fall into disrepute. Our strength lies not in avoiding this issue but, on the contrary, in having it put straight and clear in front of the widest public.




I suggest to discuss this most important problem in one of our coming meetings. In the meantime, I shall appreciate your suggestions.




25 December 1948




I love Christmas. I love the Christmas chorales. They are going to the roots of human emotional existence. They bring forth the purest form of cosmic longing and awareness. They unite man with his origin.




Sometime, I shall have to revise my earlier statements about religion which I had made under the influence of a misinterpreted materialism and mechanism, before I had discovered the cosmic orgone energy. This discovery has changed so much in my life. I began to understand why man longs so much to grow beyond his own limitations, to expand, to master the universe: He feels imprisoned in a jail, as it were, and he strives desperately to get out of it, to merge with his origin in the cosmic orgone ocean, whether he calls it uniting with Jesus or the great father, does not matter. What matters is his terror to “touch” Jesus; to feel out problems; to try many kinds of solutions; to reach his innermost existence; to be strict with himself; to like to give and to teach.




But—keep aloof of the church business—

1949
















1 January 1949




It was a very peaceful New Year’s Eve last night. I drank a bottle of champagne with Ilse, and we listened to the cheering in Times Square. Looking back over 1948 we became quite sentimental. We had done so amazingly much with so few helpers. And we wondered what the new year would bring. I am all for being sentimental at such occasions. In years gone by I used to dress up for the occasion and to invite friends. I liked to put on my dinner suit, even during the period of my rebellion against Europe an capitalism. The evening dress has nothing to do with capitalism. It is simply a suit which pleases the eye. One looked well in it. And it did not prevent me from overturning some of the capitalistic ideas. On the other hand, those who thought an evening suit against the honor of the “revolutionary spirit,” later landed in the uniform of the “Marshal of the Order” of the Devil when they celebrated the honor of the FATHERLAND. Therefore, I should not worry.




Why did mankind establish the time of Christmas as the celebration of a new birth? Why not some other time? It has little to do with Christ’s birth. Christ is a result of human emotions, and not vice versa. Why does the snowing in our region set in around Christmas? What is WATER? How does it come about? I ask idiotic questions. But it is wise to ask such idiotic questions. I do not believe that all the tremendous amounts of water pouring down on us for weeks on end in spring or cold autumn are due to water raised into the sky by “evaporation.” What is “evaporation?” How does it work? What keeps the mass of water floating in the air against the pull of gravity? Why does it pour down on us at certain periods only, and not at others? It is clear that evaporation is due to the attraction exerted on water by the atmospheric orgone energy. It is also clear that it rains when the mass of water becomes too heavy for the energy which carries it in a suspended fashion. But where do these amounts of water originate? Could it be that water (H

2

O) is newly formed from Org units? How? By 

superposition

. But why is the superposition so numerous in certain regions and not in others; why, furthermore, is it prevalent only at certain periods and not at others?




I do not have to answer all these questions, but I must ask them.




My pulse reaction in the Vacor tube is constant and independent of weather, unlike orgone in the air. But the rate dropped considerably during December, from ca. 8000 per second to ca. 5000 per second one day, when an 

earthquake

 occurred on the west coast shortly before the new year. I shall see whether the rate increases again toward Spring. This would indicate, if corroborated by many identical observations, a functional identity between pulse rate in the vacuum and the earth’s position in space. What a prospect, to do astrophysical research in the laboratory—It will take years to be sure.




12 January 1949




The Journal of the American Medical Association has published among reports on “cancer frauds” a short, ghastly, base piece on the Orgone Accumulator. At first I was flabbergasted, similarly to my amazement in Norway:

*

 A Medical Association, in whose hands the health of the population rests, can let people write that way. The writer is a chemist or pharmacist, i.e. a man least equipped to judge orgonomic functions. The written words are of the stuff that can kill a man. It is unworthy of an answer. But something must be done, though one can do little against the plague. I could not work yesterday. Ilse remained quiet and confident. Wolfe began to write a special pamphlet against the ignoramus which was to be distributed among all doctors. But the idea was abandoned. That would not help if our publications over a period of seven years do not help to convince the people that we have found the mechanism of the cancer biopathy and an approach to its prevention. Now all depends on one single question:




WILL THOSE 

WHO KNOW

 THE TRUTH FINALLY BEGIN TO SPEAK UP? OR WILL THE CRACKPOT AND THE PUBLIC CRANK HOLD THE SCENE STILL FURTHER?




I hope in the name of the sick that the first will be the case. But I shall write a letter to Hays to ask for legal protection of the workers in our field against vile defamation. However, matters of research cannot be decided in court.




To Arthur Garfield Hays




17 January 1949




My dear Mr. Hays:




The continuous attacks by emotionally sick people on our work constitutes quite a problem. I confess that, though I understand a great deal of the characterological mechanisms which lead to such attacks, I feel utterly helpless in how to fight them. One cannot fight such attacks with reason since they are unaccessible to reason and argument. I agree with you that court actions are not the basic answer, though we may be forced to resort to court action here and there.




While thinking hard to find a solution, I hit upon the following idea and I submit it to you for your kind deliberation:




Is there any law in the statutes which would make it possible to sue for obstruction of public health

, or for intention of such obstruction? Should such a law exist, it would be possible to bunch all the attackers together and to sue them for 

impeding public health

. This is exactly what they are doing. The Brady crowd could have different motives than the pharmaceutic peddlers, but the effect is the same.




Would you be kind enough to advise me on this issue?

*




6 February 1949




I answered the C. P. Brady smear with







a. a discovery: the motor




b. books: 

Cancer Biopathy

      Listen, Little Man




c. a medical organization




d. an observatory




e. a Wilhelm Reich Foundation







But: As truth stands in this world, they can still kill me or hang me together with thieves.




14 February 1949




I fear loud and broad influence of my teachings for two reasons







It could not change people en masse at once, would, therefore, be misrepresented and distorted.




It would mean more and more dangerous enemies out to kill.







16 February 1949




I just finished a new book on “Einstein and the Universe.”

*

 What an empty world!! What a hopelessness; what a decay in human structure.




18 February 1949




Very bad days, indeed, are 

these

 days. There seems to be no way to keep my work from decaying in the hands of Homo Normalis. With the best intentions, they will destroy it.




1:45 a.m.




I had my second heart acceleration in one week. Will my heart stand the strain? Worries are million.




19 March 1949




For weeks now I was desperate, tired, worn out. They think it is because I worked too hard. No! It is because my struggle to find an answer to man’s killing of truth is in vain—I can find no answer.




1 April 1949




Everything seems to rush to its logical conclusion:




The medical work is in the hand of doctors. I hope they won’t forget its essence.




I began to publish the first of some 40 separate papers on orgone physics. The next 10–15 years are taken care of. No worry about lack of material.




I shall publish the astrophysical results bit by bit, over many years. This will help to acquaint people with the unusually self-evident material. It will also help me to develop the linking-up thoughts, to fill existent gaps, to make the statement fuller and safer.




Whether or not I shall succeed to formulate the Orgonomic Natural Law is highly uncertain. I will not rush it. The foundations are more important than the roof or the gallery from which to look over the whole terrain. I shall carry the parts together, each well established; others may then write the final symphony. There is great peace in me. As if the summit had been reached, and only a rocky plateau were stretching out into the far distance before me. The work is on its way in this world, performing on its own, even without my guidance. Of course, a landslide into some abyss is 

still

 possible. But my friends say we are 

over the hump

. I hope so, in the children’s name for whom all this was meant to do its job. We begin very slowly and with great astonishment, to see the HEALTHY CHILD, its problem and its conflict with this world. It will make the change to a better world. They are only a very few, but they betray the future. It is a bright one.




The bloody conflicts of several millennia will be solved from outside the vicious circle between nature and morals. And there will be no necessity to write books like “Little Man.”

*




To William Washington

*




7 May 1949




Dear Mr. Washington: I would appreciate it if you would let me know when I can expect you at Orgonon. Would it be possible for you to send off the two motors which you built, together with the coils, well packed, at the earliest possible date. I would like to start experimenting.




May I also ask you to find out for me whether there is anything known in the literature on the Aurora Borealis about a luminating ring appearing a few degrees South of the zenith of the observer at about 40 degrees northern latitude.




Furthermore, I would appreciate it if you could provide for this laboratory a good sextant. I know that there are some war surplus sextants to be had rather cheaply. I would also need a small scale model of the planetary system, if such models exist. Write soon.




30 May–2 June 1949




I observed on May 30, 11:40 p.m., an aurora ring as the cupola of an aurora band extend only West

East. Then, I succeeded, for the first time, in deriving the observed position 32° for an astrophysical interpretation.




Galactic 

f

†

 equatorial orgone.







To William Steig

*




15 June 1949




Dear Mr. Steig:




I assume that you will be interested to help in the following matter:




The roof of the observatory is being put up this week and I intend to put up a globe, which would represent the galactic and equatorial system, on one corner of the roof. Do you know of an artist, a copper-smith, who would be willing to build such a globe? The sketch enclosed in this letter will give you an approximate idea of what is wanted. The exact design with angles and position would follow. The globe should be built of heavy copper bands in circles of approximately 4–6 feet in diameter, the bands about 3–4 inches wide. The globe would rest on a heavy iron bar, which would be anchored in the roof and, in addition to that, 4 heavy wires would hold it to protect it against storms. A sphere of about 1 foot diameter should be situated in the center of the globe.




Would you be kind enough to make inquiries about this and thus help the observatory? Please inform me about any results and also about the costs of such a globe.




I hope you are doing well and I would like to have an extensive letter from you, also personally, especially on the developments on your plans.




8 July 1949




First light luminated at Orgonon Observatory tonight at full moon.




9 July 1949




I am enjoying my Observatory. These are its main characteristics so far:







It is located in a mountainous region 1650–1700 feet above sea level among pines and birches and hills 3–4,000 feet high.




Thus, it reminds me of beloved Bukovina, Austria-Vienna, Norway, Rex, Schneeberg, Mamaû Wiese, where I loved to dwell.




The Observatory terrace surveys all hills up to White Mountains some 90 miles away, 3 lakes, meadows, pastures.




The wind blows my music there.




Excellent observation of sky, clouds, stars, aurora, sun, planets




A building of fieldstones, fitting the environment, nature, the motto: 

Build your life on rock

.




Roominess, airiness, height, breadth, width




Four separate working places:










a. Observatory




b. Mathematics




c. Physical Laboratory




d. Study










9. A final home after 28 years of wandering around.




10. My most probable place of aging




11. A population that loves me and regards my work highly




12. Marvelous air; dry, sunny




13. A foundation of rock




14. 280 acres to expand my work in future buildings. A possible factory???







11 July 1949




My life is just now beginning—after so many important errors.




13 August 1949




I am sitting and writing in the large room in the observatory at my table for the first time. I found a home, I hope after years of wandering around in the world. I also hope, from the depth of my heart, that this will never make me forget the children who suffer, the negro who sat 26 years in jail for 

un

committed rape, the worker who knows not what he creates, the youth who yearns for life, the gossip who murders.




I hope to remain independent and decent. I hope to carry through to the end the fight for the future’s child, to find the ways and means to put all the Ivan the Horribles out of function.




I hope that my work will be of service to mankind even if I do not yield to it. I hope to find the clarity of thought, the firmness of decision to toil for the child and to protect it against the evil human creature.




16 August 1949




I asked Tom Ross who stained a high window standing on a ladder, what was more dangerous: this or standing alone against public opinion with a certain conviction. He said: “Standing on this ladder is safer.”




9 September 1949




I am alone, again alone, in this huge observatory: Ilse and Peter a mile down [the road] in the lower cabin. Still no perfect home for my family and myself. How much longer all this personal sacrifice?




To the American Association of Medical Orgonomy




22 September 1949




My dear Colleagues:




I ask you to take this letter in the spirit in which it was written: that of friendship and deep concern over the future of our common work. To make it short, the plan gains momentum that I stay here at Orgonon and do not return to New York.




This, of course, is a major decision. I could easily explain it in such terms as that neither Mrs. Reich nor I had a day of complete rest from receiving and answering letters; from managing the affairs of the Institute and with that of your background and continuous maintenance of our background for some 8 years; that we are thoroughly tired out and need a six months rest; that to return to New York for 6 months in order to continue training two or three hours daily, would mean an additional $10,000 a year to be earned for the staying in New York alone, before any income beyond it could be secured. All this is important, however, it does not represent the true issue. This issue is much deeper and more complicated, also more far-reaching.




As you well know, my work during the past few years has shifted more and more toward Biophysics and Physics, away from individual Psychiatry. Also, the training of physicians and educators had to shift more and more in the same direction. We realized, and could not fail to realize, that we had entered new, basic, 

physical

 territory. Orgone 

physics

 is the new basis of our whole, including our psychiatric existence. Man to us is today an energy system, not merely mind. You know all this. You also know that during the past three years, I had to divide my activities between New York and Orgonon, doing Psychiatry in New York and orgone physics in Maine. This division of activities has entailed major monetary sacrifices. Not only could I not earn full time in New York as you do; I could and did not earn anything at all from May to October. I spent most of the money which I earned in New York during the winter, during the summer at Orgonon. One of the major results was the Observatory building which is so essential for scientific, representative and moral reasons. “Here is my background,” said one of the physicians upon entering the building this summer. But there is more involved:




The whole biophysical and physical laboratory has been transferred to Orgonon. No work in this field can be done any longer in New York, except already established routine work such as blood tests in Dr. Tropp’s office.




I must concentrate all efforts on physical orgonomic observations. Nobody can do that for me. My remaining years for productive work are beginning to be few. I must begin to use every minute of it.




When Dr. Raphael

*

 brought up the idea of a hospital at Orgonon, it became clear that, in order to execute this plan, Orgonon has to be built up as the future University of Orgonomy, as a home and center of our scientific and medical work for all the world.




It became, furthermore, quite clear in many discussions I had with some of our medical workers that the only way to push through the orgone therapy of the cancer biopathy is to realize finally that we cannot expect anybody else to do it for us. Nobody except the radio scientists and technicians built up the international radio network. Nobody but the railway people built the railway systems. And nobody but we can build our future universities, clinics, research stations, etc.




Last but not least, I must begin to devote all my time to the complicated theoretical, astrophysical problems which are arising from the fact that we are dealing with COSMIC ORGONE ENERGY. We must, by all means, root our educational and medical endeavors in the firm ground of cosmic functions. We must describe man in this context primarily. That entails the religious as well as the schizophrenic, the scientific as well as the social sphere of thought. This is a tremendous task which overshadows by far the minor task of training a few physicians for professional activities, highly important and gratifying as such task is in itself. I do not believe that we can convince humanity of our sincerety, unless we ourselves have the courage to look at the problem as a WHOLE discerning the proper mutual relations of the different functions.




There is much more that would have to be said. But I wish to make it as brief as possible.




You will ask where you come in in this story. You come in, all of you who were trained at this Institute, in the following manner:




The building up of the university at Orgonon cannot be done by me alone. It needs the full personal, scientific and economic devotion of all of you. It needs pitching in in this high task, full concentration of all available forces in our movement. Drs. Tropp and Raphael will tell you more about the details. I would only like to say this: You have one of two ways to follow.




First

: You decide, a few or all of you, that you want your peace, that you want to make a living only with orgone therapy on individual patients, that you do not care about the further development of the total task, the preventive medicine, the scientific research so badly needed, the Hospital for biopathies, etc. In this case, while remaining good friends, I hope, our ways would part anyhow, just as a medical student parts with his medical school when he obtains his degree. This is possible, of course. But I firmly believe that the time has not yet come for such conditions. I fear that anybody who would separate from the University of Orgonomy after two or three years training, would slowly but surely lose his standing as a medical doctor as far as his work in ORGONOMY is concerned. The total work would march onward and he would be left far behind. This has happened on many occasions. As I told many of you so often, making money alone is important, but it is not the real issue. I am very proud that my discovery can provide a good income, and I like it that so many could improve the economic situation so easily and swiftly by means of this work. However, not to look beyond this point would be disastrous. Your position in the world as the first pioneers in medical orgonomy, the great authority which you obtained by having been trained at the Orgone Institute are obliging. Every single one of you will need contact and continuous further training for many years to come, lest he drop by the wayside as an unimportant man. Permit me to say this. I say it out of three decades filled with rich, positive as well as horrible experiences. Should the majority of you decide to choose this way, my stay at Orgonon would be a withdrawal from you, possibly with disappointment. In a few years we would speak different languages. There would be a sharp contradiction between the sole interest in making money, and the great interest in applying orgone energy in diseases of all kinds, such as infantile paralysis, heart diseases, etc.




You are, of course, free to choose your own way, but I advise you to know fully the issues involved.




Second

: The majority, or all of you, decide to cooperate, to pitch in, to build up our university. In this case, my staying here would not be a withdrawal from you, but a part of the total task to be fulfilled.




What now would then be your job?







You would have to take full and heavy responsibility for the work in the New York area. This means much more than you had to carry up till now. You would have to learn to rely on your own experience, and though I could easily be reached by a night’s train travel or a two-hours plane flight, you would be on your own. This would have the good consequence that work would replace many a personal quibble; heavy responsibility would replace the attitude that “Reich is handy, he will do it for us.”




You would have to take full responsibility for building up the planned hospital at Orgonon. (We have already enough doctors, nurses and other workers to fill it with professionals.)




The building up of the hospital would inevitably entail that you invest some of your earnings into your own background; an indispensable thing that was done by me largely up till now, but which can not and will not go on to the same extent. The building up of your own professional background would no doubt root your activities deeply within the total work. You would stop looking for authorities “to confirm” my work. You would do it 

yourself

, since the hospital would be your own pride as well as your worry. A most wholesome situation for all of us. You would have something to fight for, to worry about, to be proud of as your own when the job will be done. First of all, you will realize, fully and practically, that you are physicians of the human organism, building a new preventive medicine, and not merely psychiatrists.




You would help to build up the farm here which would provide food for the hospital. You would be greatly concerned with the woods where the lumber for your hospital will come from. You will have to worry for the money to be raised for your life work and you will not only be better physicians, organizers, fighters, but you will justly feel IMPORTANT.




You would continue your training in orgone physics and biophysics, a learning which is the weakest spot in your set-up now. You will earn enough to spend 6–8 weeks, and not one week, here, as other specialists have to spend years in places where they cannot earn.




It will be necessary that you come in groups of 3 or 4 to Orgonon from twice to three times a month for a few days work in the laboratory, to study orgone energy which you are handling in your patients, to discuss pathology. Arrangements for speedy transportation and cheap living here could easily be made.







My decision whether to stay here this winter or to go back to New York will 

not

 depend on your decision, but solely on the requirements of the total situation. I shall make my decision within the next four weeks and shall let you know the result. However, it would be essential to have your answer and the decision of your meeting beginning in October.




Please, say frankly how you feel. As long as everything is kept in the open, no wrong can come of it.




Special arrangements will have to be made in regard to new physicians who will come to study orgonomy. Let this not worry you. Your own task now will be to decide whether or not you are ready to pitch in as a team in this great task of having within the next 5 to 15 years the UNIVERSITY OF ORGONOMY functioning here at Orgonon. There is no doubt whatsoever that the University of Orgonomy is our main task for the next years to come. There can be little doubt that this University will come about.




I hope from the depth of my heart that it will be you as a group who will do the job.




9 November 1949




Why was not the change of the position of the stars used to realize the rotation and travel of the earth in space.




I am preparing for return to New York. I hate to go back: Bad air, noise, no forest; my diminishing interest in people and their worries, my quiet at Orgonon. My need for lonesomeness. However, I must fulfill some of my obligations.




18 November 1949




For more than 8 years now I have sweated under the impact of the logic of numbers. They turn up within the kr

x

 system,

*

 again and again. Here as times seconds, there as arc seconds, there as oscillations, they turn up again and again in the dynamics of the planetary system, in the distances, in the period of rotation and revolution, in the number of months in the arc seconds, travel through space.




There is some basic LAW OF NATURE. Yet, I can’t put my finger on it. It is like a dense network made out of the same patterns, ever returning, ever puzzling, like little kobolds [gobins] playing a dirty game with me.




1 December 1949

 12 a.m.




I should publish “From my Workshop.” It is the most valid, human expression of this total work. It would explain so much that otherwise would not be understood. If I only could speak just as it is felt and lived: The creation, the birth, the attention, elaboration, deeper penetration, the love, the worry, the feeling caress, that went into everything, into every tiny shift and twist.




I am transcending at present a certain plane of my being, but I walk into the unknown. When I attend to orgonometry I fear to lose contact with my fellow man, and I rush back to bio-psychiatry. Then I love the scoundrel again.




6 December 1949

 5:20 a.m.




Birth of a Plan




It seems as if ideas had a life of their own: growing, multiplying, propagating endlessly. It seems as if a way has been found to emerge from the complaining about the State of Man to 

changing

 it.




It all began with the idea to call some 30–40 social workers together to discuss the establishment of a Social Service Center as a department of the Institute. Already, after a discussion with Greta Sharaf,

*

 a meeting was scheduled to take place on December 16, 1949 with some 16 people chosen from a list of 40. During the night it slowly dawned that such a meeting would not accomplish much. The overall plan grew to start a long range program of a Children’s Research Center with the objective to:







Prevent armoring right from the uterine life.




To apply orgone energy to mother and child from the beginning.




To establish a Preventive Social Service Center which would take care of these tasks.




To let the rest grow naturally out of points 1–3.







12 December 1949




Establish THE LIVING as sole criterion, not state, church, culture, etc. Turn to health.

*




16 December 1949




I am at it. The meeting with some 30 professional workers went well. 

This time

, if I can help it, no political scoundrel shall destroy it. And the world will probably adopt it.




19 December 1949




I am happy and full of life. The project of the Infant Research Center carries me beyond anything I have accomplished hitherto.




21 December 1949




The concentration of ALL my knowledge and guts upon the newborn infant is the logical result of all that went before:




The entanglement in nuisance psychiatry




The emergence of chaos from the sick human structures




The discovery of some laws of bioenergy




The rooting of religion and man in cosmic functions




My hope to help bettering the human lot




My theory of self-regulation.

1950
















1 January 1950

 1:00 a.m.




With Ilse at home, Peter asleep. Accomplishment behind me. Great plans and hopes before me.




To Dr. Prescott D. Crout




3 January 1950




Dr. Prescott D. Crout




Mass. Institute of Technology




Cambridge, Mass.




 




Dear Dr. Crout:




I just received your letter of December 31st, and the check for $30.00. I feel it would be unfair for me to accept this payment. First, because I do not derive any economic benefits from the contributions for the orgone accumulator; second, because I do not feel that you should be responsible for the services rendered for the deceased Mr. Tofani. I am, therefore, returning the check and would appreciate it very much if you would accept this return.




I was very pleased about your information regarding mathematical work on functionalism in nature. I was afraid that no work had been done and that the burden of formulating the mathematical laws of functional processes would fall upon me. The first paper on the general form of functional equations will be published in the course of this year in the Orgone Energy Bulletin.




The reaction of routine pathology and routine biophysics to the new field of orgonomy should in no way, I feel, be taken personally. It is quite understandable that we meet with such emotional reactions as you report them. It is a thrilling, as well as the most difficult quality of my discovery that entirely new laws of nature and a corresponding way of thinking has to be developed in order to grasp the phenomena in the interrelations. It requires a great deal of emotionally upsetting changes in the personality to approach orgonotic phenomena in nature.




The list of references which you enclosed was most helpful to clarify the nature of the work which was done until now and I wish to thank you for it.




5 January 1950




Practically now: How am I going to convince the social workers, educators, physicians in my Child Seminar that we are standing OUTSIDE, must remain standing outside, in order to study the healthy child? They are entirely unaware.




16 January 1950




It is necessary to have the reasons for this last attempt of an Infant Research Center clear

*

:







Mental hygiene measures en masse on grown-ups have failed 1928–1933 in Vienna and Berlin, and they fail now in USA. Both doers as well as people are too much within the mess.




One cannot cope with the mass of bad laws and bad human reactions.




The infant offers unspoiled protoplasm.




The infant is everybody’s great concern. Its importance for future development is well known.







14 February 1950




The Cottel Press, in 

American Men of Science

 (1949 edition) has omitted my name. It was listed in 1944. This is the following up of the C.P. lead, smearer Brady.




For no good reason I feel deeply hurt by the insult, though it is of no importance whether or not I am listed. It is the way it came about, the power of the plague that hurts, the TRUTH ON THE RUN, ALWAYS.




To the National Association of Authors and Journalists




17 February 1950




Gentlemen:




I deeply regret to inform you of the following:




Certain underhanded methods used by pressure groups in the service of economically powerful pharmaceutical and similar private business interests against the discovery of the cosmic orgone energy make it necessary for me to renounce all memberships I am holding in American scientific and literary societies.




The exhausting and continuous struggle to protect my discovery against forces of evil in human society make it imperative for me to be free from all associations. Naturally, every type of pioneer work has to prove itself in practice by overcoming the obstacles in its way, just as a player in a football game has to overcome his adversaries. Unfortunately, my research in the application of orgone energy in human biopathies is not protected by the simple rules of fair play which are granted in football games. In every sport there are certain rules to be obeyed, and no opponent is permitted to throw sticks between the legs of the player carrying the ball; neither is the audience permitted to do so. These simple rules of fair play are not obeyed by certain circles who control research in cancer and other branches of medicine.




Most reluctantly I must ask you to remove my name from your list of honorary memberships. You bestowed this honor upon me the year 1943.




15 March 1950




I am worried about the present American trend of moralism and Catholicism: The persecution of Ingrid Bergman, the act against Margaret Sanger’s work in over populated Japan.

*

 I am worried about the lack of structural understanding of Life in many of the physicians.




I told today Dr. Raphael of my conviction that the orgasm theory will not survive. The pressure of society against it is too strong.




18 March 1950




I have to withdraw, always, again and again, in order to save my line of thought, my science.







In order to save the energy principle of psychoanalysis, I had to withdraw from the psychoanalysts.




In order to proceed in natural science, I had to withdraw from the technicians of natural science.




In order to save the good family life, I had to withdraw twice from my own family.




In order to fight my way through in the cancer problem, I had to keep off the cancer researchers.







Outside, always, and yet within

—




Always—What a life!!!




 




In the spring of 1950, Reich withdrew once again. He moved from New York City to Rangeley, Maine, where the 280 acres of farmland he had purchased in 1942 and called Orgonon provided rich possibilities for the future of his work. Set in an area of mountains and lakes, forest and open sky, with the low humidity important for his research, it was a perfect laboratory in which to study manifestations of the energy he had found to exist in the atmosphere as well as the living organism.




The Orgone Energy Observatory and the students’ laboratory were already usable, and two cabins secured living arrangements for Reich’s family and that of caretaker Tom Ross. The location for a hospital had been chosen, the construction of a facility in which to build accumulators considered, and there was adequate space for a children’s center, which Reich hoped would be directed by his friend A. S. Neill.




Although Reich had spent most of his adult life in cities, he was not really a city person. His life had begun on a farm, and he felt it appropriate it should end on one.




10 April 1950




I am at Orgonon once more. I left NY at 8 in the morning and am at the observatory at 8:30 in the evening. 420 miles. It was like a flight from nothingness into, what? It is good to be HOME AGAIN. Will I, can I make it? The hospital cannot be built unless the accumulators provide the money. First, I must rest awhile. My tiredness creeps up to the surface like frost from the ground after a long winter into the Springy sunlight.




How to save my good work from early decay at the hand of this queer human animal—This is the biggest question, the greatest worry.




4 May 1950




Once more I find myself in a breaking over; once more my whole existence changing: From 30 years work on the human animal to work on and in NATURE.




I have not given up man or the child or the sick—My work has driven deeper to their roots in the origins of being.




At times I feel fear. It’s frightening to have to carry this loneliness.




I am, at present, floating between a (preparatory) past and a future which will be no more than a bridge for other workers to pass: The bridge from an old, dying to a new, better world.




Many are starving, many are dying on the way.




2 June 1950




What we need are people with fists in their heads, people who aren’t afraid to fight.




12 June 1950




Policy to put through healthier life:







We must do our work regardless of any opinion well and faithfully.




We must not yield to those who cannot stand adverse public opinion and would like to “adjust” by way of publicity.




The people must be adjusted to defending truth, and not the truth to please the people.




If it is true that only the people are responsible, then they will have to do a lot of proving that they can change the present situation.




In performing big, responsible job, it is so 

very

 difficult to keep one’s respect for the people at large. They rarely give a damn.







To Judge Peter Mills

*




12 June 1950




My dear Judge Mills,




Things are happening rather fast in this vicinity, and since it would be too burdensome for you to come up at each occasion where entries in the minute book are of importance, I suggest that I write to you on such events which should be recorded. This can be done in the form of a special file of letters.




The first major thing to be recorded is the fact that the first committee which was formed in the town of Rangeley to cope with the accumulator production, has failed. Mr. McLafferty from the drug store who acted as secretary of this committee and had arranged the business meeting, did not show up himself at the meeting. With this failure, the hospital project and the contemplated preparatory measures, such as buying a truck, etc. came into jeopardy.




I hope to be able to pull the cart out of the mud again.




To Dr. Alberto Tallaferro

*




12 June 1950




Dear Dr. Tallaferro:




Your letter of June 7th, was transmitted to me. The experiences we have made until now over the years with various specialists who attempted to repeat the orgonomic experiments were these:




They usually undertook far advanced experimentation in orgone energy, without being carefully prepared for these experiments by preliminary thorough study. It is like trying to perform an operation without having learned anything about the location of blood vessels and nerves.




I do not advise to do any work with cancer mice, without preparatory work and thorough study of grass infusions, earth bions and Experiment XX, and study of the darkroom phenomena. There must be the firm conviction that the orgone energy really exists inside and outside the organism, before any advanced experimentation can be fruitful and valid.




I am at your disposal for whatever help you may need in the future.




15 June 1950




I am writing 

Children of the Future.

 A great pleasure and delight—




It seems to develop force—




Press

†

 reports State Department has ordered 60 

Character Analysis

 and 15 

Mass Psychology of Fascism

 for its foreign consulates.




I behave badly, very badly with Ilse, the good soul. At times she goes dead, and then I cannot stand it. She then is insensitive, “green.”




16 June 1950




Listening to Beethoven piano concerto—what simple greatness—aeons compressed into a few simple time sequences—in touch with the universe—as I am with my numbers.




18 June 1950




The atom physicists are in a mess. They created a bomb and nothing else. No peacetime uses!! They are finished—orgone provides the answer: Protection against atomic energy.




28 June 1950




The Russian fascists are marching in Korea. World War III?




8 August 1950




I am pushing hard the issue of microscopes in psychiatry. We detected today a clear cancer of uterus in a case of Wolfe.




We 

must

 get away from psychiatry. Biology is the point. No psychiatrist will be let through without microscopy.




22 August 1950




Second Orgonomic Convention with 50 professional people runs smoothly, perfectly well.




Eva is growing into it, with several crashes with me. She is very good.




25 August 1950




Today was the child’s day at the convention—a great and a first day, according to many. Only one social worker quit before the second lecture. He told me that it had been too much for him.




We discussed the plague danger. There is always this painful feeling of impending disaster around; either caused by the wrong kind of work or by a directly acting plague individual.




26 August 1950




Today I told them about the function of superimposition, aurora ring and hurricane formation.

*

 Many were in tears; Raknes

†

 said he had been afraid of my forcing him to move on again but that now, after this lecture, he felt happy to have to move onward.




31 August 1950




Everything is quiet again now. I am returning to my solitude; to my quiet silent friends.




To Judge Peter Mills




6 September 1950




My dear Judge Mills.




I am referring to the discussion we had at the last annual meeting on August 30th, 1950, concerning the responsibility involved in conveying the importance of our knowledge about the medical effects of orgone energy in case of a renewed strenuous war effort. It is, especially, the great danger of damage by nuclear radiation which constitutes the main worry in the United States. It has been known to me and some of our physicians for a long time that orgone energy counteracts nuclear radiation. I would like to summarize the hope which is entailed in the medical efficiency of the orgone energy in the following points which are especially concerned with possible application against nuclear radiation effects:




1. 

Blood System

. It is to be expected that a bio-energetically strongly charged organism will resist the damage inflicted by nuclear radiation much better than a bio-energetically weak organism. The bio-energetic strength of an organism is, according to observations over a period of about 15 years now, especially reflected in the behavior of the blood system, particularly the red blood cell system. It has been established beyond any doubt that by way of the orgone accumulator, the blood system can be charged bio-energetically to a very high degree. Thus, the bio-energetic strength and resistance of the organism is heightened. Many physicians working with orgone energy have found invariably that such chronic conditions as chills, colds and so-called low resistance are alleviated if orgone energy is applied over long periods of time and regularly. Thus, understandably, also the disposition to pneumonia could be reduced. I omit here more details which can be submitted at any time.




2. 

Tissues

. It has been established that orgone energy as applied by the orgone accumulator has a strong vagotonic effect, that means, that blood supply and turgor of the tissues are greatly increased. From well-known medical principles it follows that well charged tissues and organs will resist damage to a much greater extent than weak tissues.




3. 

Wound Healing

. One of the most important effects of orgone energy application is a quick and nearly perfect healing of even severe wounds and burns by way of direct irradiation of the damaged region. For instance, severe damage due to 2nd and 3rd degree burns is alleviated, and the worst effects are prevented if the severely burned region is irradiated with orgone energy immediately after the accident occurred. Blisters do not occur and the pain is reduced after a few minutes. Wounds due to cuts are healing quickly and cleanly. Old resilient ulcers are healing under the influence of direct orgone radiation by way of an acute inflammation which sets in in the degenerating region and replaces dead tissue by new granulating tissue. This may suffice to indicate the direction in wound healing.




4. 

Alleviation of Pain

. Orgone energy, if applied directly to the aching region, has the effect of at least greatly reducing acute pain. These effects have been studied in such cases as acute pain in cancer, rheumatism, migraine, neuritis, cuts, and similar conditions. It is therefore to be expected that immediate application of direct orgone irradiation would greatly help to alleviate pains in cases of severe wounds due to shell, bullets, fractures, etc.




5. 

Shock

. It has been established that due to the strongly vagotonic effect of orgone energy, shock reactions are at least diminished, and recovery is speeded up by total irradiation of the organism with orgone energy, since shock is mainly due to a sudden severe sympathicotonic contraction of the organism.




The above mentioned points are far from giving a complete picture. However, they may suffice to indicate what tremendous benefits could be derived from a general application of orgone energy in cases of emergencies such as atomic warfare, epidemics, etc. Last, but not least, I would like to mention a point which, at present, is no more than a prospect, but a very hopeful one. Lack of appropriate financial means has hitherto made it impossible to follow up on the following line of research: Nuclear radiation, for instance radium, is being changed under the influence of concentrated orgone energy. The kind and the extent of such change is still mostly in the dark. However, it can be conscientiously stated that these effects of orgone energy upon nuclear radiation could be elaborated in a short time with the appropriate means. Here it may suffice to state that orgone energy represents cosmic energy 

BEFORE MATTER

, in contradiction to nuclear radiation which is radiation 

after matter

 as handled by the Atomic Energy Project. It is understandable why I restrict the communication concerning this point to a mere indication.




Would you be kind enough, as our legal adviser, to transmit this communication to the appropriate authorities of the Atomic Energy Commission.

*

 I felt it as my duty in these trying times to press toward awakening not only interest but also medical conscience regarding these matters in the responsible military and government circles. It would not take much money to elaborate the above mentioned effects to the satisfaction of medicine and for the safety of our country. I would therefore appreciate it highly if you were kind enough to exert your influence and your position as our legal adviser to carry these suggestions to their full realization.




20 September 1950




A lot of people, 8, are settling down in Rangeley. McDonald, Wyvell, S. Tropp, Wylie, Sharaf, Eva Reich, Ilse Ollendorff, W Reich.




The AAMO

†

 pledged an emergency fund contribution of $15,000.00 per year (hitherto $3,000.00) to secure existence here of research.




3 October 1950




Crisis again! I do not understand WHY the hatred of the Living exists at all. These things happen all at once within the span of ten days.







The Tax Department wants to see my return and expenses of 1948. Everything is in proper order, but—?




Bradyism continued in a book by a neurologist Checkly,

*

 or similar, mentioning my work among description of psychopathic behavior.




Bradyism again continued in a play New York Greenwich Village red actors prepared 

The Bed of Neurosis

 where the orgone is defamed.




Eva stated yesterday in a mood of hate that the C.P. law applies to me which it obviously does 

not

. Why does she hate me?







7 October 1950




Lila Quimby

†

 reported:




Mrs. Milford Dunham, husband works on the road for State; not known as gossip, low income, asked, “How do you dare to work for Dr. Reich?”




Why? “The stories they are telling around town.”




What stories? “She would not tell.”




Bea’s

‡

 mother Bell Raymond age 70 also told that “Stories are going around town that make your hair stand up straight.”




Miss Lila Quimby would be ready to testify about these things.




4 November 1950

 2:30 a.m.




I’m deeply worried as rarely before. Everything seems in transition, shaky, dangerously in upheaval.







The crisis with the rumor monger Bill Fowler

§

 in town, ending in our letter to prominent citizens.




The Willie scandal

¶




The weakness and goodiness of Baker

*




The weakling’s potential treachery in Wolfe whose life has been an empty sack yet to be filled, decency and skill with no practical object or accomplishment.




Economic loss of roots with 

no new

 roots yet developed.




The general crisis in the world: The Chinese now in the fight in Korea.




The great depth of my discovery and its tremendous consequences.




My deep inner conviction that a new “Murder of Christ” is at hand.

†







13 November 1950




I am at present at the point of despair—Ilse has let down nearly completely; I sunk to the level of a police dog at Orgonon about such things as whether windows are washed or whether the plumbers try to cheat out 50 cents. I shall either become a true dictator or give up Orgonon. People misled me into believing that they would build up Orgonon, would provide for a hospital, etc. They were not able to do it—and I am in the lurch—




The Socialists and Communists were led into statism exactly by this false belief in people’s ability to build socialism. There is only one way—to tell the truth or shut up about people.




There is the terrible gap between ability to hope and to want and the actual ability to do.




The hate of the living is 

rational

 from this point of view. People are torn by living ideas or developments out of their sitting and emotional security. They, rightly, from their point of situation, hate the disturber.




The disturber marches onward or he yields to the drag of the people as Freud did.




Or he destroys what he himself has built up, as Marx did or has happened with the AAMO.




To Elsworth F. Baker, M. D.




4 December 1950




Dear Dr. Baker,




We had a meeting here a few days ago in which we discussed the mobilization of Orgonon for medical anti-nuclear radiation work. Among many other things to be done, it occurred to us that you through your connection with the senator in Washington could possibly find an efficient way to reach the President or the Office of National Defense directly, in order to impress on them the tremendous urgency of putting orgone energy to national medical use.




I am aware of the fact that monstrous obstacles are in the way, first of all the financial interests of the bio-chemical pharmaceutic industry. However, in trying times as these, one should discard any—and everything and push through what one thinks is of life importance to the people. 

THERE IS NO OTHER REMEDY AGAINST NUCLEAR RADIATION EFFECTS AT THE PRESENT TIMES BESIDES ATMOSPHERIC ORGONE ENERGY

.




In a careful survey of what we have and what we don’t have, we find that most of the preliminary experiments have long been done to ascertain the efficiency of the orgone energy.




What remains to be done in experimentation is to obtain a small amount of nuclear radiation material and to determine the specific effects of orgone energy on direct radiation lesions, as compared with its effect on other types of degenerative processes.




I strongly suggest to become fully aware of our tremendous medical responsibility in the case of an atomic war which seems closer than ever. I also suggest to take a firm stand in Washington and to put all the responsibility for future neglect in this matter squarely upon the shoulders of those who commit the neglect, and that is not ourselves.




Would you kindly let me know whether or not you would care to carry through the above plan.

*




To the Isotopes Division, United States Atomic Energy Commission




4 December 1950




PLEASE SEND BY RETURN MAIL THREE SETS APPLICATION BLANKS AEC-313 FOR PURCHASE RADIO ISOTOPES FOR ANIMAL EXPERIMENTATION IN ANTINUCLEAR RADIATION RESEARCH STOP MATTER URGENT PLEASE DON’T DELAY.




ORGONE INSTITUTE RESEARCH LABORATORIES

 ORGONON RANGELEY MAINE

 EVA REICH ASSISTANT RESEARCH PHYSICIAN













15 December 1950




All we are interested in now is finding the common functioning principle of all lethal radiation and the common functioning principle of what counteracts it.




To President Harry S. Truman




18 December 1950




Dear Mr. President:




This foundation has, since the emergency became acute in November, 1950, centered its research activities upon the elaboration of the anti-nuclear radiation effects of the cosmic orgone energy (ORANUR

*

 project). We are preparing to join the national effort in this emergency and to pitch in with all the knowledge and authority at our disposal. The enclosed first number of 

Orgone Energy Emergency Bulletin

†

 will provide information as to the layout of the ORANUR project. We have already applied to the AEC for procurement of radioactive material for experimentation. We shall keep your office and the AEC informed on the progress of our experimental work and of the results which, so we hope, will turn out to be of importance to the general effort of the USA.




We shall be happy to answer any question you or your office may wish to ask and to give any information you may wish to obtain.




It is our sincere belief, based on many years of work with cosmic orgone energy, that at the present time this energy constitutes the only available measure containing some hope for coping with the damaging nuclear radiation effects in atomic bombing. This we say in full responsibility and awareness for the implications. We are scientists and physicians who wish to help make the USA ready should a disaster strike.




26 December 1950




Are we equipped to handle all this?




29 December 1950

 0.35 a.m.




Incredible

!! The newly arrived R-Cobalt was put, for shielding, in lead, long soaked with orgone. [in an accumulator]. At 20 p.m. 

before

 shielding, ionization was complete and 

instant

; at 25:30 NO IONIZATION EFFECT—




C P M 

increased

 to 100–150




Strong flimmering of closed package in dark, posited in funnel of small shooter.

*




My eyes and hands burned, were inflamed.




Orgone irradiation removed pain in eyes.

1951
















To S. Allan Lough




2 January 1951




Radioisotope Branch




Isotopes Division




United States Atomic Energy Commission




Oak Ridge, Tennessee




Subject: Application No. 8226




 




Dear Sir:




This is to answer your letter of December 27th, 1950. My personal experience with radio activity has been rather extensive and basic over the past eleven years, but far off routine procedures. These experiences have not been published and cannot be divulged except, if necessary, to the President’s Office or a most responsible delegate of the President of the United States. I shall direct the total procedure and the orgone energy part of it. I suggest to handle our project as if it were an entirely new beginning in handling of radioisotopes where physicians start in with learning the techniques of health measures, and of injection and disposal of injected animals.




The actual injection of the animals will be handled by one or two physicians who will be trained to handle radioisotopes in a course given by the Institute of Nuclear Studies at Oak Ridge. Both physicians will, in due time, communicate directly with you in these matters and inform you on all detailed procedures and precautions.




There will be many difficult questions which will arise in the process of the preparation of this crucial experiment, and I am pleased to note that we can count on your kind cooperation.




We shall also contact the Advisory Field service Branch of the AEC for a survey of our research facilities with respect to our specific problem.




I am enclosing a few printed copies of the ORANUR project for your file.







5 January, 1951




I received through Silvert from Canadian Uranium Corp. two mg. radium (8.3R/h.)




No. I was, after testing, left in garage on hill.

*




No. II was put into 10x charger

*

 (rolled soft Or.) 

front free

 without lead container into 20x Acc. Orgone metal room.

†




At 4:30 p.m. I came into the student lab. The survey meter had given high (80–90) background. 20,000 at sink.




The air in Or room was sticky, heavy, “hot,” the walls “glowed.” We sent people working [in the building] out of region. The GM meter “jammed,” got stuck.




Recovered in fresh air—promptly

. Wylie

‡

 argued “it’s the battery” [of the GM survey meter]. It wasn’t.




We took radium out of OR room into lower garage, 

in charger

.




7 January 1951




First Impressions







Excitation of OR by NR




Tremendous field action—50 feet distance




The subjective sensations

 Pain in head (Reich, Tropp, Sharaf)

 Pain in diaphragm (Reich, Tropp, Sharaf, Eva)

 Pressure in air (Reich, Tropp, Sharaf, Eva)




High count in beginning of OR irradiation: 40,000

 Lower count at end of orgone irradiation: 25,000




Loss of power of ionization? (repeat)







Repeat all observations




Why were the OR mice

§

 stronger affected by NR than the CA[ncer] strain mice?




Probably because strong OR-systems are more sensitive, 

swing

 stronger 

up and down

.




10 January 1951

 23:45




First result of ORANUR







We are forced to take apart the orgone room and to build the “charger” somewhere outside, far away.

 Reasons:










a. Reaction of Orgone to RA[dium] is terrific. Everyone present (Eva, Tropp, Sharaf, WR, Wylie) felt pressure in head, diaphragm, salty taste on tongue, severe nausea in one case; blood of WR was over irradiated according to today’s blood test.




b. People are working in the room (hall) Wyvell complained of pressure.




c. It is not determined whether the reaction is due to 

 or 

 orgone irradiation.










2. 

Terrific Reaction

:

 OR in hall severely excited; flashing; blue through window; field even outside up to 40 feet sensitive, can be felt.




3. NR picks up Orgone, changes somehow. benign? malign? impossible to say.




4. NR (RA) irradiated mice (4) are sick

 one was killed, autopsy:

 fibrinous exudate

 Bleeding

 Contracted and twisted intestines.

!! Twitchings of peritoneum!!!??? severe

 Cyanosis of tail, nose, lips




5. Since OR is excited, protection is questionable.




6. 

Assumption

: NR excites OR; OR reacts wildly against NR







Will accordingly OR become malignant like NR?!




To the Oak Ridge Institute of Nuclear Studies




12 January 1951




Gentlemen:




One of our physicians, Dr. H. Lee Wylie, has already sent application for enrollment in your four-weeks course on the handling of radioisotopes.




Please do not act on this application. It has become obsolete with the first results we obtained in the prosecution of the ORANUR Project. The reaction of orgone energy to nuclear energy (1 mg radium) was so extreme and penetrating that any kind of attempt at protection in the usual routine sense became meaningless. Healthy mice became sick at 50 feet distance from 1 mg. radium which was shielded by ½” lead and deposited in a 20 fold accumulator

*

 within a metal-lined orgone room. Three experimenting observers developed nausea, dizziness, cramps in diaphragm, parasthesias and conjunctivitis 50 to 200 feet 

outside

 the experimental hall in the free fresh air. 

The entire laboratory building has become unusable with no radium in it

. We omit other most peculiar reactions.




It is the orgone energy which penetrates everything, including lead and cement walls. It is the orgone energy which reacted so violently to the radium. Therefore, no protection by lead bricks, long handling tongs, lead aprons or masks and similar measures can be taken in our type of work. We are proceeding with our experiments for further results. We are informing you on the results so far in order to explain why it became meaningless to send physicians for training in protective health measures until we have learned more about the new phenomena. Furthermore, we wish to have these facts on record with the AEC.




We do not know where we are going but we are definitely on our way at a breathtaking tempo.




Sincerely yours,

 (signed) Simeon J. Tropp, M.D.

 for THE WILHELM REICH FOUNDATION

 Wilhelm Reich,

 President and Research Director




Application for Radioisotopes Number 8226




cc:




Atomic Energy Commission, Washington, D.C.




Atomic Energy Commission, Oak Ridge, Ten.




AEC, Isotopes Division, Oak Ridge, Ten.




1951




For 3,000 years all philosophy, all science, all education, all living has been centered around the atomic theory, the division between matter and spirit. Now, through orgonomy, all that is toppling.




14 January 1951




Theoretical harvest of turmoil is very rich




The physical orgone reacts to the poison of nuclear radiation exactly as a healthy living organism reacts to the Emotional Plague: It fights the plague off with withdrawal and death or with rage, 

consuming itself

; It conquers only if it is 

strong

 enough to cope with the evil.




26 January 1951

 3 a.m.




The possibilities as well as responsibilities of ORANUR are tremendous, quite apart from the medical aspects. We could meet with the AEC if they only would accede to one single assumption: that the universe is filled with a 

mass free energy,

 before electrons. It would band us together with the 

Indian people

, against the Russian mechanists. It would open the world of the CHILD. It would make it possible to TAP THE UNIVERSE.




I began to 

paint

 yesterday. The form and color streams right out of my fingers onto the canvas.




To the Radioisotopes Division, Atomic Energy Commission




19 January 1951




Gentlemen:




Subject: Application No. 8226




The scientific workers at Orgonon have all fully recovered from the blow which was reported in our letter of January 12, 1951, to judge from the positive changes in the blood pictures and general wellbeing. We are continuing with our experiments.




The stormy events of the past two weeks have overthrown our whole plan of experimentation as outlined in our application No. 8226. We are forced by the results to rearrange our procedures. The severe reaction of orgone energy to nuclear energy, observed in the use of only 1 milligram radium, has, of course, precluded the use of from 4 to 20 millicuries of P-32. Still, it is of crucial importance to test the OR energy in reaction to radioisotope 

solutions

. This, we believe, must now be done on a much smaller scale in order to avoid a repetition of the fierceness of the OR energy reactions. We believe that about 10 

microcuries

 of P-32 would suffice to obtain unequivocal results.




As we reported before, any attempt at protection against OR energy reaction is completely out of the question. Since OR energy experimentation is far outside all routine measures, we are forced to take the risks involved. During this week, our laboratory building was still unusable, but it too has calmed down considerably. The few microcuries of P-32 would not be used as previously planned for the injection of mice; we would only put it into our 20 fold orgone energy charger which is located within a strong orgone energy room. P-32 would only be exposed to OR energy for about ½ hour daily for a period of three days, as we have done formerly with one milligram radium.




Would it now be possible to change our application No. 8226 to the procurement of only 10 microcuries of P-32 solution? Please advise us as to this possibility. We shall keep you regularly informed on all major developments and would appreciate your further kind cooperation.




We are sill planning on obtaining the help of the field service of the AEC at a later date. We cannot yet foresee in what manner this service could assist us at the present stage of NR plus OR experimentation.




We are preparing a complete report on the results obtained so far which will be sent to you in due time.




Sincerely yours,

 Simeon J. Tropp, M.D.

 Medical Co-Director for

 THE WILHELM REICH FOUNDATION




cc:




Atomic Energy Commission, Oak Ridge, Tennessee




Atomic Energy Commission, Washington, D.C.




Charles L. Dunham, M.D., Medical Branch, AEC, Washington, D.C.




30 January 1951




I discovered through Eva PAINTING

*

—What a way of expressing oneself. I painted in a few days:







Worship




Tulip




Storm




Eager Ancestors




A self-portrait




Dawn or “Me Too”







1 February 1951




I continue painting. This is a very great experience. The pleasure to let color composition stream out of one’s fingers is something very exciting. There is usually only a core of an idea. Around this core the colors and forms group themselves 

quite on their own

. This is true self-regulation.




Last night, from 1 to 5 a.m., I painted very slowly, pleasantly and carefully a young girl resting on a meadow under a tree. It was very great and deep.




Perspective comes about by itself as it were. Depths and shading, too. There is an 

urge

 to paint, even against distractions or intentions to the contrary.




I found a new way of expression. I have no one to talk to. I do not express myself, as I did twenty years ago, in lectures. I no longer enjoy the acclaim of an audience. Writing of books and articles, good as they may be, are more duty than pleasure. I do not have any social stimulation. Most people around me are helpers, often nuisance admirers whom I have to train into being workers. Mickey

*

 comes closest to being up to my level of thinking. Thus I live in lonesomeness.




8 February 1951




Once again I am turning to my diary, my old, good friend, patient and taking it all. I am being discovered by the public at large, with respect and humbleness. Inquiries for lectures, papers, contributions to discussions are coming in at an increasing rate. My books are flowing out into all corners of the world. They still cling to “psychology” of 1930—but they cling. They have not yet discovered the infant, but they soon will. They still call it “personality.”




I am painting one picture after another. I discovered a new way of expression, a good way, a way of 

seeing

. I paint from memory, from what I have seen over the years. The Orgone did not yet come through fully. It will, in due time.




I am waiting for SPRING.




11 February 1951

 4 a.m.




I am busy correcting some spots in pictures of a few weeks ago. Here are some of the things important enough to be written down.







Painting came upon me, or, rather, began to pour out of myself, quite unexpectedly but also quite logically: I am a 

“visual”

 type. Everything goes into me and out of me through the eyes. My girls used to tell me that my eyes were “dangerous.” My discoveries of the formal expression is essentially an eye problem. I love to look at things, to let them sink in, as it were.




Eyes and hands, especially fingers, unite and “it pours” from them when I paint. Somehow, memories of landscapes seen and traveled through long ago, are still alive without special sharpness. These images emerge with formation of shapes and harmonic integration of color. I am of course no learned artist but I feel I 

can

 do it. The formation of the “ancestors” for instance was nearly quite without participation of thought. I let the forms just stream out. It is what MacDonald

*

 the other day called “

my charm—

” Charm, bewitchment; great human powers, killed in every child at birth.




I discovered some days ago the 

Spectral display

 with Vacor flashes. Now, LIGHT has come to mean so much. The old quarrel between the Newtonians and the Goethe admirers about the function of light. The urge to study colors and light, as it arises from dawn and sinks into dusk, is great. Daylight is clearly a function of high pulse frequency and rapid birth and death of OR units. The scale develops 

upwards

 from the night blue over purple (in shades) toward blue (dark), blue (light) to all shades of “white” light. Light is not really white. There is no proper name for the color of white light. The appearance of a rainbow is a riddle. The grating by rain is only the mechanics of it. It has something to do with discharges, since discharges go with spectral breakup.




Emotionally, painting became a major experience. I am discovering my “seeing,” so to speak. I can find out now what I see 

true

 and what 

false

, and whether I see things correctly at all. And I love to paint. It is something so visible.




I must inevitably, think of Leonardo da Vinci. It occurred to me today that he too had combined art and science. He too tried so many things.




Somehow, Eva has repaid me for my long suffering for her by having given me the painting outfit.




Painting of Orgone phenomena will, if I acquire the technical skill, save me a lot of writing.







Happenings Today:







Ilse came from lower laboratory with 2½ dozen mice who had died; ORANUR, leukemia, and some Ca. mice.




More than a dozen were dissected. The autopsy revealed:










a. All had the same symptoms, without exception:










Pneumonia,




fibrinous exudates in subcutis of pleura, pelvis, abdomen,




T-discoloration of skin

*




Dilation and blood stasis in veins, ( ) auricles, carotid







19 February 1951




Eva nearly passed away today noon after having put arms and head into a 1x accumulator

†

 in Org Laboratory. I experienced the profoundest fright of my life. I fought for her life for more than two hours. She had nearly no pulse, only 44 beat, was livid in lips, felt paralyzed in arms. I kept her going with coffee, cognac, cold rubbing, and mainly with human contact, encouragement.




She had put her head and arms into an ORANUR effected 1x accumulator and on the basis of her old bulbar affliction (diphtheria five years old) suffered near suffocation.




To Dr. Hoppe




28 February 1951




Dear Dr. Hoppe:




The results of the first Oranur experiment are overwhelming. A few weeks ago we discontinued the experiment in order to restore our health again, because we had all fallen ill to varying degrees. One of the many lessons derived from this experiment, and this will interest you in particular, is the fact that under certain conditions the orgone can kill. Furthermore, my original procedure, according to which the number of layers in the accumulator should only be increased step by step and work should not start straight away with excessively powerful accumulators, has proved to be absolutely correct. Please make it known that applying orgone energy without being thoroughly trained in its physical and medical properties is quackery and should not be allowed. My daughter Eva, who works as a doctor in the laboratory, almost died one day when she came in contact with a certain Oranur arrangement. We had to work desperately for two hours in order to keep her alive.




2 March 1951




Two days ago my personal accumulator was reassembled and brought back to the observatory. After a few hours the air was heavy again and the CPM went up from 20–30 to about 50. Our (my and Eva) blood was bad again

*

: pale, bad disintegration, direction leukemia, dryness in throat. We removed the accumulator again (before the entrance) to a garage and the CPM went down to 25 today. No dryness in throat last night.




10 March 1951




Oppenheimer, physicist at Institute of Advanced Study, calls Oranur in a letter to E. Roosevelt “

a hoax

.”




I sent copies of letters to Cott about Oppenheimer, to Princeton, Oppenheimer, AEC.




Letter to [Eleanor] Roosevelt

:




In order to put Oppenheimer opinion into the proper light we are enclosing a few copies of letters written to AEC during the past two months.




Oppenheimer belongs to the school of relativists who believe that space is empty, the universe only a mathematical formula, and that all observations should be excluded from science. They therefore cannot imagine that such a thing as Orgone exists.




To Allan Cott, M. D.




10 March 1951




Orgone Energy Clinic




Dear Dr. Cott:




We just received the letter sent to Mrs. Eleanor Roosevelt by Robert Oppenheimer. His letter, especially the sentence: “I am afraid that the evidence of the paper makes me suspect that this undertaking is a hoax: I have been unable to find out anything about it that is reassuring” is a perfect impertinence. To judge our work from an outline of an experiment which follows 20 years of experimental work and thousands of pages of published material, and not to feel the urge even to see whether or not any literature appeared about it, is despicable and quite in keeping with our disintegrating times.




We should like to emphasize the fact that Robert Oppenheimer is not an authority whatsoever on orgone energy since he knows nothing about it. In addition, while we are risking our lives here at Orgonon with Oranur experimentation, such behavior on the part of a physicist in high office in the United States is damaging to the interest of the people and deserves only deep contempt, since it is violation of trust invested in this person.




 




cc: Mrs. Eleanor Roosevelt




Mr. Gordon Dean, Chairman, Atomic Energy Commission, Washington, D.C.




Atomic Energy Commission, Oak Ridge, Tennessee




President, Princeton University, Princeton, New Jersey




Robert Oppenheimer, The Institute of Advanced Study, Princeton, New Jersey




To Judge Peter Mills




3 April 1951




Dear Judge Mills:




Enclosed you will find the galley proof of the Accumulator pamphlet

*

 which describes it extensively. Would you kindly transmit this document to Mr. Hildreth.

†

 The word “Orgone Energy” was first used in the Spring of 1939, when the life energy was discovered in certain bion preparations in Oslo, Norway. It was used in connection with the accumulator right away in December 1940 when the first accumulator was built, and it has remained in use ever since. The Orgone Energy Accumulator itself was shipped in Interstate Commerce sometime at the end of 1941. I think this satisfies the request.




You will receive in due time all the papers pertaining to the application for tax exemption.




With regard to your functioning as the Clerk of our Foundation, may I say the following: At our last Board of Trustee’s meeting in January, 1951, someone, I think it was you if I am not mistaken, made the suggestion that a minimum of a guaranteed fee of $600.00 per year be paid to you and that you adjust it upward in case your work transcends this minimum. You were very helpful and kind in your cooperation, and I think I express the wish of all of us if I ask you to continue as our legal adviser. Please let me know whether the arrangement mentioned above would be suitable to you. I think it would serve all interests concerned.




I am still thinking about details of my testament, but cannot reach any final conclusions in some respects. I shall send it to you as soon as I feel that it is ready.




Would you kindly transmit to us the deed of Wilhelm Reich to the Wilhelm Reich Foundation of the 23 acres?




Encls.




To H. E. Macdonald




9 April 1951




Dear Dr. MacDonald,




I have just read the letter you received from Dr. Adams of Bryn Mawr College. It is good that scientists sit down and start doing experiments instead of merely talking about it. However, I am obliged to prevent possible disaster, and to do some preventative medicine. The following points are essential to rational scientific conduct in matters of biogenesis. It has been our policy for more than a decade now, to adhere to the following rules set down and to be followed by anyone who attempts to form an opinion on orgonomic biogenetic problems:







We are not out for any confirmation of any of our experiments; we do not care whether anyone confirms our experiments or not. We do not recognize any authorities whatsoever in the realm of orgonomic research, except those who have proven to our satisfaction that they have studied the subject carefully and have submitted to the full scrutiny of their emotional, structural and scientific ability to form valid opinions in our realm of work.




Every single experiment that is being repeated by any one must under no circumstances be separated or isolated from the total experiential, experimental, and methodical as well as theoretical framework within which the single experiment has grown and can find its proper evaluation. For example, Experiment XX cannot be done without knowledge of the physical orgone energy functions in the living organism and in the atmosphere. It is completely useless to look at a single screw from an airplane and to strut around with opinions about that screw without knowing exactly 

that

 it belongs to an airplane and 

where

 it belongs.




Every experiment must be done according to the description and the rules of orgonomy. In experiment XX, for example, freezing, continuous observation over a period of 5 to 10 years in sterile condition, and comparative studies with other biogenetic phenomena such as disintegration and decay of organic tissue, etc., are of crucial importance. Exact reports on the procedures followed, must be submitted for any discussion of the results.




Since there are no authorities whatsoever in this new realm of natural science, it is required that the one who does the experiment proves to our satisfaction that he has studied the total subject carefully. No experiment makes sense without having used an orgone energy accumulator, having seen the orgone energy in the dark in the orgone energy room, and having observed the many manifestations which have been published in our literature.




Most essential of all, perhaps, is careful observation of the emotional involvements which go with any work connected with life energy. It isn’t true that our scientists are objective, on the contrary, they are mostly gravely prejudiced or steeped in mechanistic, chemistic, atomistic and other ideas which are, by mere logic, secondary to the orgone energy functions which are of a primordial nature and 

BASIC

 to any understanding of all other functions. 

One cannot judge orgonomy from the standpoint of bacteriological functions, just as one cannot judge an airplane from an isolated screw. It is the other way around, A staphylococcus must be judged from the standpoint of orgone energy vesicles

. One cannot judge cosmic orgone energy from the standpoint of static electricity. One cannot judge the problem of bio-energy from the standpoint of a single love affair, but the other way around. And last, but not least, one must be well acquainted with the emotional, religious prejudices and the structural anxieties which have so far and so successfully prevented a rational approach to the problem of biogenesis. It is out of the question that a repetition take place of the Bastian—Pasteur misery.

*

 Catholic inspired and religiously prescribed ideas are blocking the way to any such inquiry, and they must be acknowledged and removed first.







Since no air germs of any protozoa have ever been found and demonstrated in the air, and since, furthermore, the whole air germ theory is pure myth, kept up ad hoc in order to prevent the knowledge of biogenesis, the proof as to the existence of air germs of cancer cells, colpidia, protozoa of any kind rests squarely on the shoulders of those who adhere to it. Our proofs of biogenesis are abundant. We shall not partake in any discussion whatsoever on air infection unless its representatives demonstrate the origin of protozoa in the air.




Such grave matters cannot be decided by debate Pro and Con. They can only be decided by practical observation and experience. i.e. by using orgone energy accumulators, by looking into microscopes for years on end and by doing all the things empirically which are crucial to the formation of any valid scientific opinion.




This is the scope of the discovery of the orgone energy. And it requires full adjustment of anyone who tries to form a valid opinion about it. The responsibilities involved are grave and concern life and death of millions of people. Please, do not forget this for a single moment and convey this idea if you can to everyone who comes near orgonomy.




23 April 1951




I am 

alone

 (though not lonesome) again. 

All on my own

. Ilse away, pulling out.

*

 Peter on his own. Eva on her own. Everybody on his or her own.




29 April 1951




I am just passing another deep crisis of my whole existence: Oranur experimentation has practically touched the very 

bottom

 of the universe. It has found and brought to the foreground the weakest spot in every single individual. It has torn off all masks, the best made. It has disrupted our work here completely.




It has elicited the specific biopathic traits in every worker and other person who were in contact with it.




In Eva the running away




In Ilse the spite, the desert




In Peter scarlet fever




It has thrown everything helter skelter




They are all gone—I am left behind 

collecting the pieces

.




7 May 1951




How could Oranur bring out everything in everybody, the true nature, the very true person?




It could not possibly have done so on the basis of any theory which does not rest on the energy concept of the psychic apparatus. No amount of theorizing could possibly explain it. Orgonomically, the Oranur effects on emotional behavior can be easily explained:




It is the bio-energy which feeds all emotions. Oranur has caused an instant increase in all energy functions and with it in all emotional behavior, in a most 

specific

 manner. Everybody reacted according to his specific character, including myself (lonely fighting wolf). These sharpened, otherwise hidden structures, clashed in the turmoil.




16 May 1951




I want Ilse to come back, to live in peace, to work less, to serve less, to rest out these 12 years, to have more peace from 

my

 troubles which obviously are too much for her.

*




I am through with her somewhere, but this does not mean that I hate her. Hate developed from her beginning to possess me. Oranur has brought out in her the little woman of 1890, as it has brought out in me the selfish, 

reckless

 artist and discoverer, who doesn’t give a damn for anybody if his work is at stake. In this complete breakdown of all my relationships to people, also Oranur was at work: It has revealed the truth wherever it has moved.




3 August 1951




Functionalism means seeing the common factor in everything.




To Wesley Knapp




August 9

th

, 1951




Dear Mr. Knapp:




I received your letter of July 23rd. It interested me rather much since it posed some of the same problems which I met head-on when I started out, 24 years ago, with mental hygiene work in Austria. There can be no doubt about the necessity of having orgonomic knowledge spread among the people in an easily understandable manner. It would be a matter of course to do so. However, the dangers of such a procedure are enormous and perilous as everyone, including myself, has learned the hard way, who followed the basically logical line of thinking. What one is apt to overlook is the deep fear of the living and the severe biopathic structure in the majority of people which makes it impossible for them to follow up what appears to their reason logical and self-evident. Pornographic degeneration and distortion of sex-economy

*

 is the first grave threat to be mastered. There would be no greater danger to a future efficiency of orgonomic knowledge in a new type of education in infants and adolescents, than to proceed without having full control over the inclination to distort sex-economic knowledge into pornographic channels. The other danger is, according to past experiences, that the factual, medical and educational tasks are not tackled practically step by step in a skilled way, but that an ideology is build, according to other political ideologies which make a lot of noise, promise heaven on earth, overlook the tremendous disease which harasses the human race and is bound to fail at the first real obstacle to be overcome.




The severity of the task is not of my making, but is given in the circumstances under which the masses of people have lived for such a long time. You can rest assured that no day passes by without uttermost efforts to cope with the problem you have posed in your letter.




There would be no greater disaster for humanity than a distorted sex-economy, in the vein of past distortions of crucial teachings. The lesson learned in Russia should be a warning to anyone who feels that new ideas should be put on a mass basis.




May I have your permission to possibly publish your letter in one of the coming Orgone Energy Bulletins, together with my answer on an enlarged basis?




26 August 1951




Summary:







The blood of all workers working in the Student’s Laboratory is in good shape.




Bad weather, fog, mist, rain etc. especially hurricane weather makes working in lab unbearable. No accumulators.




Oranur goes on at hill road; reaction still strong.

*




Vegetation







Trees around Oranur, in close vicinity (5–50 feet) look strong, healthy green, intense, after 4 month effect.




Impression: Some trees look sick, prematurely autumnal. Other trees are dying. On hill opposite Orgonon 1 and ½ miles away many trees gone red and yellow 6 weeks early, at the same spot where in January–February marshy smell was preeminent.




It is as if what is sick gets sicker, what is healthy gets healthier, stronger.




Some trees died at Orgonon.







5. All buildings still radiate

†

 with no accumulator around.




6. Living in observatory and lower cabin impossible if windows closed for a quarter to a half hour. 

Worry what will happen in winter

!!




7. Observed blue jays hovering in vicinity of Oranur in droves.




8. Myself: feel strong, vigorous, young, miserable when no discharge




9. Ilse Ollendorff is fine, much better.




10. The GM counter reacts peculiarly. 

For months it acts upon air alone

; stronger the worse the weather; field action with hands strongly but opposed to air action, extinguishing the latter.




11. Electroscope (gold leaf) very fast during summer. Hurricane reaction still 

positive

.







26 September 1951




The riches of orgonomic science, both scientific and economic, are spread out before everybody. Nobody dares touch them. Nobody does anything at Orgonon scientifically, only bookkeeping, Press. Sharaf does not do a thing.




I am bad for people. Ilse, the formerly independent woman, became dependent. She says she cannot separate from Orgonon.




I am at a loss whether or not to go on building at Orgonon.




I did not play the organ, or paint, or write for more than 8 weeks. I am troubled, morose, don’t know where to turn. Feel somehow done for, surrounded by and dependent on a few people here who are not scientifically interested.




Am waiting [for] what USA government will respond to Oranur. Probably the old silly stuff.




27 September 1951




US government through AEC Dr. Dunham wrote material of Oranur is 

not classified

. I am glad we are in the clear.




I believe that I found a powerful weapon to strengthen life energy in plants and animals.




Now I feel “empty,” hanging once more in the clouds, useless, after having delivered in 

one

 year







Cosmic Superimposition




The Oranur Experiment: First Report (1947–1951)




and 

The Murder of Christ







The basic problem however is not more writing, but making already written stuff practically effective in people. How to get people moving.




The psychoanalytic world assumes the spite is due to unconscious repressed wishes. It believes that the remedy is to make the repressed conscious. This, of course, fails since the spite (“I won’t”) is a symptom and expression of structure (“I can’t”), unapproachable by ideas alone.




The orgonomic view holds the lethargy to be an expression of the immobilization of the organism due to chronic armoring. No conscious drill, nor making ideas conscious can move the massive blocking of will and action. It is, to this view, necessary to break the biological blocking to get life energy, and, with it, will and action streaming again. However, the basic structure, so tells us our medical experience, is unchangeable. The focus of attention therefore must be centered upon the new generations yet to be born, and prevention of emotional blocking right from the beginning.




There orgonomy is the most revolutionary approach to the nature of man. It reaches deepest, beyond the conscious and unconscious into man’s biological existence.




21 October 1951




WR in exhaustive state




Heart pain.




22 October 1951




WR nearly died from heart anorgonia

*




25 October 1951




Am I dying




I was and still am very ill: 

“Heart break”—“Heart anogonia”




It is 

deadly

 serious. My heart can stop any minute. I am somehow giving up. There is no point in going on. 

For what

?




After another rapid heart attack on Friday the 19th, a pain set in the heart. To cure the pain, I used Oranur funnel

*

—this knocked me out




My temperature fell to 96° F or 35.5°C




My pulse became slow and low




A pain over the middle of the base [of the heart]—on rising and bending forward—




No coronary symptom, or angina




A systolic murmur at base and at apex. Never heard before—




I feel weak, as if giving up, 

nothing to live for




 




My first anorgonia heart attack will most likely repeat itself until it will kill me one day—When

?




I am dying because I realized and gave up:




My belief in people




Their “sin,” 

f

 emotional plague, is boundless, not to be managed with books or courses on sex.




There is no one doing anything in Orgonomy, basically, besides myself.




Between the conviction that man is at fault himself, and no tyrant, on the one hand, and the utter inability to do anything about it, there is DEATH if one remains alive and emotionally involved in human fate.




With 

The Murder of Christ

 written, I reached rock bottom of human sociology.




One must, under all events, be for the American way and against the Russian because of the great aliveness which is in the American way, bad and ugly as it so often is.




7 November 1951




Felt stronger since yesterday




Pulse strong, nearly as WR usual




OR field back to some extent




New urge to do things again




Plans about Oranur II spontaneous




In the evening, depression over overall social situation, personal as well, worsening of heart beat.




13 November 1951




The 4th week in bed with “heartbreak” What a smash up!!




15 November 1951

 5,000 Amer. prisoners of war shot dead in Korea, according to radio message last night.




I was restless. DO OR DIE!! Either find practical answer to the problem of human inertia, 

or die

. It is not possible to live on with a full contact and to know the answer basically without being able to transform it into practice.




I have truly discovered God, and have lost contact with Man, without losing my sanity.




I understand now perfectly well why I’ve always refused to acknowledge my genius, my being so very different from others: I feared the utter loneliness.




They all always told me that I’m not aware of what I was doing, how much I had accomplished. I had only walked naively into the forbidden garden of Eden like a dreamer in the moonshine. And I woke up suddenly, finding myself alone, forsaken by all who remained far behind.




And here my heart began to break, 

months ago

, long before I put the Oranur funnel on my heart.




Remember my poem in 1919 about the broken heart? How I knew!! Incredible.




My hardness was to cover softness of heart.




19 November 1951




I am on my feet again after 4 weeks heart anorgonia.




The mess goes on—There is no answer to the dilemma:







Give up my way of life

 and die the slow death of attrition of the soul.




Continue

 my way of life, and die from frustration of expectation that man will act.







It is the little man and 

nobody else

 who is at fault.




I must go on—

somehow

—if my heart permits.




16 December 1951




Pulse is very 

strong, regular

.




17 December 1951

 6 a.m.




Slept only 6 hours, feel rested, strong, interested in my painting (“Stormy Harbor”) I began several days ago.




22 December 1951




“Sweetish” pain, like healing, itching pain in back of heart, left ventricle close to apex. Systolic murmur 

barely hearable today

.

1952
















14 January 1952




I feel Life pulsing again fully, strongly, unbeatably. Things are happening fast:




While I was preparing the Listings of the archive material for the WR-History of Orgonomy Biography, an ad appeared in the 

Psychiatric Quarterly

 calling all who knew Freud to contribute letters, reports, works to his Archives to be established in the Library of Congress. I have plenty to give here, alright, but will they want it, really?




They wrote very nice, friendly, humble letters, expressing satisfaction over my, our, collaboration. But will they like it.




Involved are peoples’ highly private affairs, love affairs, cheat affairs, and other affairs; Freud’s personal tragedy, scientific tragedy, historic tragedy, his hopes in me and his later disappointment since my work made a turn he feared. Involved are, too, the fates of future generations of newborn infants, whether they should grow the 

sublimating way

 or the way of 

natural self-regulation

. Great, responsible things. Do the heirs of Freud know it? Are they ready to take what is in store for them? I know 25 out of about 30 directors and officers of the Freud Archive Inc. of 22 years ago. I moved onward. Did they? Can I trust them better than I did 1934 when they all took me for a ride at Luzern,

*

 nobody being aware at all of what was going on. We shall see. But careful procedure is essential and perfect frankness as usual, my “devastating” bluntness. What a wonderful weapon 

if

 you know how to use it well and to the benefit of people.

†




Oranur is still going on. Some people suffer much, but it works its way through the organism, breaking blockings, causing movements, driving evil latent symptoms to the surface, then healing them. What a possibility! To use Oranur against emotional, bioenergetic diseases—successfully.




I know I must keep several of my basic life lines going if I am to proceed further:




First, I must not ever permit my bioenergetic system to go stale or sluggish or filled with DOR

*

 from stasis of Life Energy, out of false considerations which don’t mean a thing and are obsolete in a few months. I must live my love the right way, not the wrong way as I did most of the time.




Second, I must further sharpen my weapon of using the truth wisely and bluntly, sharpen it by further experience in practical use, by making not too big mistakes or irreparable ones, as for instance keeping my light too long under the bushel.




Third, I must not ever abandon Peter who needs me. I would suffer from it more than he would, but to guide this boy through puberty, through all the pitfalls of a crazy world is crucial to me and to him.




Fourth, I must let myself go freely in the new contacts which will come my way over the coming years, freely, honestly, without lament or false aspirations. I just must keep my old good ways going through all of it. My way proved usually the right one even if after years only. Why not repay some of the confidence my way of life had in me. The hardest thing, though, is to keep one’s way going by not permitting every day petty human affairs to slowly infringe on it, undermine it invisibly, rendering me helpless without awareness. Keep other ways in respect but at some distance.




24 January 1952




The most crucial asset of human society is in the hands of moral experts. It is the health of infants and adolescents; it is their “Love of God in the limbs.” Every neurotic and biopathic or pervert owner of a drugstore or a hardware store can play act being an expert on adolescent health. As long as this is so there is no hope of ever putting an end to the emotional misery of man. We need experts in mental hygiene and specifically in the handling of the sexual living of the multitudes who are still more carefully experienced and trained than fliers or engineers. It’s a professional job. The fact that the emotional problem of human living was some thousands of years ago entangled with religion must not obfuscate its true nature, which is, truly, engineering of the human character structure.




Peter put his head yesterday to my shoulder while I worked in the Lab and complained bitterly that he can scarcely think of anything but girls. I told him, it will become worse still in the coming years, until he will find a girl he can love.




Greta Hoff just told me they are wrestling desperately in Maine social agencies with the genitality problem in adolescents.




11 February 1952




Today I had Tom Ross remove RA III from the bend of the observatory road to the location of the future administration building.




And this is the incredible story:







The observatory was highly active all through the time since RA III was deposited at road bend.










a. pressure in body




b. High GM counts




c. Strong heart beat, little relief with airing.




d. constant pressure, vomiting, nausea










2. After removal of RA III some ¾ mile farther away all pressure systems in me disappeared; my heart was not beating fast.







27 February 1952




A new heart speed beat forced me to leave observatory—16 hour long 

160–180 pulse

—was exhausted—Observatory seems to be caught in secondary radiation from rock at fireplace and Oranur atmosphere.




22 March 1952




Orgonon atmosphere begins to go haywire.




24 March 1952




My 55th birthday I am sick with Oranur.




29 March 1952




Oranur continues—blackening of rocks

*




1 April 1952




Tom Ross removed 3 mg. of RA and little other material to 11 miles on the road Oquossoc to Rumford, route 17, 100 feet away, in gravel pit, marked “Keep out” and “Danger.”




25 April 1952




Pressure unbearable, took lab watch with radium painted dial out of metal container in student lab where Wyvell

†

 deposited it 5 days ago.




Effects:




Nearly immediate relief from pressure in T Ross and myself.




Idea on weather




Facts:







Farmer on other side of lake told of never having experienced snow going off so quietly, without flooding land




All say “Early Spring,” budding of trees, in spite of frosty night




“Weather has changed” to better, warmer.







Ideas







Oranur creates CO

2

 which is absorbed by trees, more oxygen to be expected 

f

 richer O

2

—CO

2

 metabolism in atmosphere.







Through years of observation and experimentation, Reich had identified specific characteristics of orgone energy:







Charges organic matter.




Is capable of autogenous lumination.




Pulsates, as seen in living cells and organisms, and in the orgasm.




Is a blue color.




Bions, protozoa, cancer cells, frames of red blood cells, lumination of evacuated tubes charged with orgone, sky, lakes, ocean, thunderclouds.




Reversed orgonomic potential.




In contrast to known facts of electromagnetic energy, it is a basic law of orgone physics that the stronger orgone system attracts the weaker system and draws energy from it.




Is absorbed by water.




Is mass-free.




Is present everywhere, differing only in density or concentration.







In the spring of 1952, knowledge that in orgone energy the stronger system attracts and draws energy from the weaker system (the reversed orgonomic potential), and that orgone is absorbed by water, played a critical role in Reich’s development of a new experimental tool: the cloudbuster. Designed initially in an effort to remove or weaken heavy dark clouds that hovered over Orgonon during the Oranur experiment, hollow metal pipes mounted on a heavy metal base and grounded through empty BX cables in a well or lake were elevated to draw energy slowly and in small amounts from the atmosphere and to the more highly charged earth. Affecting changes in orgone energy concentrations in the atmosphere made it possible to influence weather and other atmospheric phenomena.




Draft of a Letter to the Surgeon General of the United States




29 April 1952




Dear Sir:




I am referring to the First Report on the Oranur Experiment which was sent to you sometime in October 1951. This letter is being written after an inspection tour which I undertook on April 22nd and 23rd, 1952 in a circle of about 250 miles around this region. The purpose of this inspection was to see how far the Oranur effects have spread.




It was found that high counts (up to 600 CPM) and down to normal again were prevalent in a region of a diameter of about 40 to 50 miles, reaching West to Berlin, New Hampshire and East to some 10 miles west of Farmington, Maine.




The functions and phenomena involved are too complicated and also too new to be comprehensibly presented at this point. However, the following may not require elaborate proof.




As reported in the first Oranur Report, Oranur effects manifest themselves first in an elicitation of latent or past diseases. Several hundred mice died among other things with signs of asphyxiation. There is little danger involved, as long as people who are under Oranur effect follow certain rules, such as much fresh air through ventilation, being outdoors, frequent baths, and, if possible, from time to time removal to a region where the atmospheric orgone energy is normal, in cases of severe over irradiation.




This institution has no apparatus to inform the population in this vicinity, and should the Oranur effects spread further, to inform the population farther away of the necessary measures to avoid hardships and danger to health. We therefore request the cooperation of the United States Health Agencies, to give to the public well in advance the proper information regarding the means of countering ill effects of atmospheric Oranur pressure. This can easily be done and should not be postponed unnecessarily, since it is still highly uncertain what an extended, severe atmospheric Oranur pressure can do. Continuous tests are being conducted at Orgonon, where several buildings have become uninhabitable and cannot be used for work. I have exposed myself to the fullest possible dose of Oranur to test a possible borderline towards severe impairment to health.




We expect your answer with eagerness.




To David H. Stevens




4 June 1952




State of Maine Health and Welfare Department




Dear Mr. Stevens:




I wish to inform you that I am succeeding in removing the dangerous DOR effects over the Rangeley region (see 

The Oranur Experiment: First Report

) by way of influencing the formation and movements of clouds. The results will be published in due time.




Would you be kind enough to forward the enclosed carbon copy of this letter to the appropriate agency of the Federal Health service?




To Commissioner of Patents




28 June 1952




Dear Sir:




This letter is to inform your office, in a preliminary way and in order to secure my scientific priority, of the following two technological discoveries made in my laboratory at Orgonon, Rangeley, Maine, during the past 18 months approximately:




1. 

Cloudbusting




It is technically possible, by using the so-called “orgonomic potential” (potential from low to high) in primordial Orgone Energy functioning, to disperse clouds, to concentrate water vapors in the atmosphere to the extent of making rain, and to draw atmospheric energy into lakes and rivers. This also makes it possible to remove the so-called “DOR”—clouds which lately appeared over this region and caused biophysical distress to many people. It will also, basically and on principle, from now onward be technically in all probability possible, to destroy thunder clouds, and, in principle, there are no longer any obstacles in the way to influence or even destroy hurricanes (at least theoretically), to create clouds and rain over deserts, to stop or diminish the causes of floods.




This preliminary information will be extensively dealt with in publications at some future date.







2. “

Melanor

”




In the course of the Oranur Experiment, a function in the atmosphere was discovered which causes rocks of an ordinary nature to turn black and to disintegrate at a much accelerated rate. (microscopically: in a bionous fashion). The black something has been named by me: “Melanor.” It reveals all kinds of chemical and physical properties which are still under investigation; among these properties is especially one most interesting one: 

change

, and 

possibly creation of matter.




This function, too, will be extensively presented in print at some future date.




 




cc: President of the United States




Chairman, Board of Trustees of The Wilhelm Reich Museum







12 July 1952




I took the first steps in the preparation of CORE II.

*

 Its purpose: 

rain making over deserts

.




There can be little doubt as to the possibilities to make and stop rain. To be sure, it must be tried over desert lands.




I chose the S.W. desert region of the USA for the following reason: the land is rich but arid. To open it up to agriculture and habitation is a most challenging task.







TASK: Draw Orgone over both Western and Eastern Divide into Arizona plateau




Make clouds—rain




This is highly problematic.




Doubts as to outcome:







Too big a job for my outfit




No fully reliable people




Cooperation of S.W. states?







To Robert A. Mccullough

*




14 July 1952




Dear Mr. McCullough:




I received your two letters of July 8th and July 11th.




The information I wanted was about the climate and agricultural problems in the South West of the United States, especially Arizona. I am preparing an expedition which possibly will start on its way sometime toward the end of this year, with the objective to study orgone phenomena, cloud formations and possibility of rain making over desert land.




I wonder whether you would be interested and available to participate in such an expedition. This matter would need further personal discussion should you be interested. Please let me know as soon as possible. I also would need a connection with the Agricultural Department of Arizona or Colorado. Do you know anybody there?




Telegram to Justice Department




30 July 1952




Washington DC




I protest emphatically unlawful trespass at private property Orgonon by Mr. A. Harris Kenyon, Mr. Robert B. Heller, Dr. Karl W. Brimmer of Food and Drug Administration who disregarded chains across road, No Admittance No Visitors signs. Letter follows




The United States is still a land where the responsible citizen can refuse government agents to enter his home without search warrant; where the citizen can investigate his government just as government can investigate the citizen; where the right to privacy is still kept being unassailable, in sharp contradiction to Modju land.

*

 We are determined to preserve these rights. Now, who is and on whose behalf did Mr. A. Harris Kenyon act? Who is behind Kenyon? Ewing, the administrator of Federal Security? And who is behind Ewing? This we shall have to investigate very thoroughly.




To Elsworth F. Baker, M.D.




5 August 1952




Dear Dr. Baker:




I am enclosing a few documents for your file, and for possible discussion with the lawyer.




It is of crucial importance to view clearly the situation as it is, in the 

lawful incorporation of the orgone energy into present-day social frameworks

.







It is questionable whether the orgone energy accumulator can be designated as a “device.” Are 2 palms, moved toward and against each other, or two metal plates doing the same, thus exciting orgone energy, a “device”?




Is a water jug which contains and handles water and makes drinking possible, a device in that sense?




Is a heap of steel wool which accumulates orgone energy spontaneously, a device to be inspected by the Food and Drug Administration?




Is the accumulator itself which, energetically cannot be sharply delineated from its energetic environment, a device?







I do not pretend to be able to answer these questions. The only thing I want to point out with these questions is that orgone energy devices, if at all, 

cannot possibly be delivered to the practices of the FDA as we know them.




You will see from the statements 1 and 2 that these gentlemen came with rather doubtful intentions, and that to my deep regret I had to ask them to leave Orgonon. They came fully unprepared, especially the physicist who had read only the Oranur Experiment, after we had made it clear to them in a letter of August 3rd, 1951, that 

we would cooperate with them only if they came fully prepared and familiar with the orgonomic literature

. They also did not seem to be aware of the fact that I, personally, 

have nothing whatsoever to do with the distribution of the accumulator

.




It is also quite obvious that we must work toward a new law, similar to the laws that were established to govern Radio, Television, Aeronautics, laws which will govern all matters pertaining to cosmic orgone energy engineering. Of course, I must leave the final decision as to whether an orgone energy accumulator is a device or not in the usual sense to further discussions and deliberations. Until the legal incorporation of the cosmic orgone energy in our present social law system is effectuated, and in order not to be in conflict with existent laws, I am contemplating to suggest that orgone energy accumulators be built within the respective states, and not be shipped in interstate commerce. Could you get an inquiry under way as to whether New Jersey and New York could and would under supervision of our physicians start building orgone energy accumulators for their respective states in exactly the same manner as they are built in the state of Maine? In such a case, the Food and Drug Administration would not even have the pretense of being a legal authority of the orgone energy accumulator.

*




P.S. Please tell Mr. Green

†

 never to send off letters without previous information and authorization. This due to special features of OR.




10 August 1952




At Observatory




I slept here tonight after a long while of keeping away. I woke up without distress only slight pain in chest. I slept on the open porch until it clouded up. Then I went to the wing. There was pressure but not bad. I am not dried out as before and I don’t feel parched as before, after sleeping in Observatory.




Did I succeed in reconquering the Observatory? I deeply hope so; I love this place so very dearly—




The sky is completely overcast with clouds, but it drizzles only, no real rain.




30 August 1952




DOR very bad; sky, mountains are 

black

; no oxygen in air; bad nausea




Desert development bothers me gravely




Cosmic Engineering, i.e., water making, is only answer to save life on planet.




To Donald Wight




15 September 1952




Dear Mr. Wight:




Your patent law firm has been recommended to me by Mr. H. Green of Little Silver, New Jersey. I am sending you, under separate cover, for your information two pamphlets on my experimental work with ORGONE ENERGY (The Orgone Energy Accumulator, and The First Oranur Report). I am also enclosing a paper on “DOR” Removal and Cloud-Busting” and a machine called “CLOUDBUSTER” which developed out of dire necessity during last summer. This paper is scheduled for publication in two months. Is there any objection to such publication from the standpoint of patenting the device? The first model machine is at present being built at the Southworth Machine Company at Portland, Maine, under the supervision of Engineer Thurber. A blueprint of the machine could be made available to you when you need it.




Would you kindly study the material and let me know whether this machine comes under your specialty and whether you would be willing to carry through the necessary patenting procedures? Also, please inform me about your fee for such service.




A patent for the Orgone Energy Accumulator was applied for in 1941, but not granted; mostly, I feel, because the application was not handled intelligently and correctly,




1 October 1952




Situation with Ilse Ollendorff is desperate. If it were not for Peter’s sake, I would have left long ago. Ilse is dead; she hides; she is scheming; she wants to destroy me because I disclosed her empty ego. She knows that Peter flattens out if he is here with her. Peter’s flattening out is the agony. 

Not Ilse who is flat, and utterly unimportant

.




5 October 1952




Today I left, I hope definitely, Ilse and Peter. I had become very ugly with her.




Characteristically, she said crying “But you need us.” Not: “We need you.”




And: “You want to make another Eva out of Peter.” Later: “I am sorry, I know Eva was her mother’s victim.”




Thus, she tries to make me bad in order to retain her self-respect.




Poor Peter—He will have to fight his way through in life. He tried desperately, as so often before, to join his mother’s and father’s hands together, not to lose them—in vain.




I left and wrote the following letter to my son:




 




My dearest Peter:




I am so very sorry that you had to witness my leaving your mother’s place this morning. She will take care of you from now on. I shall deposit money enough for you to obtain what you need for living. But soon you should pull out and learn to stand on your own feet. But, if you want to live with me now, you should do so.




Please, do not blame either mother or father for what went on. It was nobody’s fault. We just did not agree with each other any longer and we only suffered. So I feel and hope that peace will return to your home after I have left.




Now listen, Pete: I told you a few days ago that I would never leave you unless 

you want

 me to go. This morning you said I should go away. I did. But still I do not abandon or forget you. You will have to come to me when you need me. I shall be there. You will or may need me sooner or later as you grow up. You will always find me if you need me, in any way. But I shall not come to you if you do not call me.




I love you dearly and I always shall. Stay honest, straight, open minded, as you basically are. Do not follow people who hide away from the facts of life.




You can always call me at the Observatory and visit me there.




Love, Daddy

 Willy




15 October 1952




During the past few weeks I observed that on foggy mornings my car, standing in the open, was covered with a dust, brownish in color, like the brown dust on the rocks. The dust was coming down with the water droplets.




Microscopic examination revealed crystals of appr. 

equal size

 (as if manufactured) blackish, or whitish with blackening vesicles, clearly Melanor. Who does this to our air?




To Thomas C. Higgins




10 November 1952




Dear Mr. Higgins:




I received your inquiry of November 7th. I would like to disadvise most emphatically experimentation with any kind of radio-active material (NR material) in connection with concentrated orgone energy, unless the proper safeguards and precautions, medical and otherwise, are taken. The consequences for people may become grave.




4 December 1952




After a forced vacation of two weeks nears Ellsworth—Bar Harbor, Maine, I feel the observatory is nearly perfect. Only, after 3–6 hours, dependant on weather, I must get out, and everybody else (Lois, Tom). Sleeping 8 hours is still impossible without risking paralysis.

1953
















22 January 1953




Peculiar!




Spring-like sunny air.




Bluegray returns to mountains.




I slept without disturbance yesterday 3 hours at Observatory with closed windows.




Air in Observatory clearly better than elsewhere.




1 February 1953




I began this afternoon to live in the Observatory again. I slept through—only with minor disturbances.




7 February 1953




I am still in Observatory, though last two days with rain and fog were very bad (vomiting, heart beat)




9 February 1953




Evacuation of Observatory 3 p.m. with seep-out of energy, after vomit-heart attack, carbon monoxide blood—edema and near fainting.




11 February 1953

 3 h a.m.




I really know very little of nature, although I seem to know a lot more than my fellow men in this age. To my mind, science, true knowledge of our existence, has not begun yet. It was very bad fumbling so far. Think of Einstein’s terrible error.

*




Freud had just an inkling, which he soon abandoned to the psychiatrist business men.




I am bitter—yes. In the face of his own tragedy, and in the face of the tremendous problems ahead of him, man should appear more modest and less malignant than he is.




 




During the past few days I saw rocks which were battle scarred with holes, powdery, and dilapidated, smooth out very slowly on the surfaces of some.




Now this sounds perfectly crazy 

even to me

. Yet, it is true and was seen first by Tom Ross, an excellent observer of nature.




Rocks which were hurt by the ugly atomic DOR clouds and developed holes, developed “scar tissue” as does living matter. This is in itself entirely logical: The same OR energy that heals wounds in living matter 

heals decaying rock

. This is a part of the basic natural law.




27 February 1953




The “healing” of destroyed rock is just as 

incredible

 now as was the moving of bions 15 years ago. It will also be as selfevident to everyone 10 years from now as is the orgone accumulator today to those who know how it works.




The “selfevidence” is this: In wound healing a force is at work which cannot but derive from bioenergy. And bioenergy is only a function of cosmic energy, active in decaying rock.




What then is so “incredible” in “healing rocks”? Nothing but our static mind, which thinks of rocks as absolute, unchangeable beings.




To Eva Reich




4 March 1953




My dear Eva:




I have your good letter of three days ago. It seems to me you suffer from having tasted the 

bitter

 pills of life—too early, and in too heavy doses. Sadness- it certainly creates. But sadness also is a propellant in life, unexcelled. All creation stems from this kind of feel in life. Peter has it strongly; sometimes he runs away from it. But, than again, he runs away from the “usual” back to his depth. This struggle will take many many centuries.




10 March 1953




A physician, student of Orgonomy, writes the following:




“…It seems desirable to be recognized as a minority group in medicine so that we can work unmolested. Whether this recognition will in anyway be expedited by belonging to these organizations (A.M.A., American Psychiatric Association, etc.) I do not know….” This physician betrays a regrettable amount of naiveté and ignorance regarding orgonomic medicine and its status in the world. He wants to be recognized. We ask: 

by whom

? He overlooks the fact that by practicing orgonomic medicine he is operating as a pioneer whether he so wishes or not. 

He fails to recognize his own authority

. Failing to recognize 

himself

, he still expects to be recognized by 

somebody else

; more, to be recognized by the very organizations or groups which were out until recently to hamper his work or to destroy it. Imagine the radio operators of the early twenties clamoring for recognition by the telephone operators, or the electricians of the early part of the century begging the gas lamp manufacturers to recognize them. The first thing they had to do was to recognize 

themselves

 as authorities in their own field and to work toward success the hard way. To expect to “work in peace” in a world which is riddled by emotional plague actions and reactions, is to concede utter ignorance in sociology.




Orgonomy is not a branch of practical medicine, designed only to earn money with, as some medical orgonomists seem to believe. Orgonomy is a body of knowledge concerning the 

basic natural

 law, a tiny part of which falls within the realm of medicine. Whoever does not like the struggle that goes with pioneering science and medicine, would be better off in devoting his time to more peaceful tasks such as shock treatment, which is fully “recognized,” or psychoanalysis. In orgonomy, for a long time to come, hard struggle by way of writing medical reports, revues, delivering lectures, participation in public discussions, etc., will belong to the daily job of the serious worker.




To Nic Waal




17 March 1953




My dear Nic Waal

*

:




I received your inquiry and copy of your letter to Dr. Boadella. It is entirely impossible for me to pass judgment on these letters since I do not know the exact positions either of the applicant or of the teaching group. I appreciate however your frankness in keeping off the realm of physical orgone energy. I prefer your attitude by far to empty enthusiasm, but I would exempt Dr. Raknes from your criticism. Dr. Raknes has thoroughly understood the basic trends of physical orgonomy.




It is also in the interest of your students and the future physicians and teachers you train in Scandinavia, to point out that Orgonomy is 

one whole

, and that character analysis or what I once called vegeto-therapy cannot be basically and forever separated from the discovery of the life energy or organismic energy. You are dealing with physical life energy processes, or orgonotic processes, in every twitching of a muscle, in every change of vaso-vegetative equilibrium, in every orgastic discharge, and so on. I know that you know this well, but I would suggest advising your students to be at least in touch with the literature of the last 7 or 8 years concerning physical orgonomy.




It is very difficult to keep everybody informed individually on events at Orgonon. The Orgone Energy Bulletin gives a fair picture on progress in research as well as on other happenings.




In the end I would like to point out that Orgonomy is today so far spread out in the world, and studied in so many institutions that it is completely out of my hands.




I hope you are personally well.




To the Office of the Governor of Maine




13 May 1953




Gentlemen:




We wish to inform you of the following:




In April, 1952, this Institute has started experiments in atmospheric Orgone Energy control. During the drought of 1952, very cautious first steps were undertaken in this direction which resulted successfully in the construction of a machine called “Cloudbuster.” Three such Cloudbusters, constructed at the Southworth Machine Company in Portland, are at present located and operate at Orgonon, Rangeley, Maine.




We intend, during the coming summer months, to proceed further in our weather control experiments at a more advanced rate, and with greater intensity than last year. It happened already this year, as it did last year, that weather predictions by the Portland and Boston Weather Stations were upset or contradicted by our experiments. This fact may endanger aircraft pilots and also embarrass the weather stations. Therefore, we prefer to inform you of these facts. Cooperation with other agencies of the State will, we believe, become necessary in order to cope with the situation.




The tendency toward a new and severe drought this summer is clearly discernible to the Orgone Institute. Therefore, operations with the cloudbusters are concentrating on the fire danger with the aim of keeping Maine wet and green. First steps in making contact with The Forest Fire Control service in Franklin County have been taken, and we would appreciate your cooperation in furthering the coordination of the various public services concerning weather control and forest fire prevention.




A first publication on the subject is enclosed; other publications will follow.




Sincerely yours

 Orgone Institute




5 July 1953




Agreement with Ellsworth Bank (blueberry growers) to make rain for them Monday till Wednesday




Drew for rain 7/5 at Rangeley




6 July 1953




DRAW 1h/10 min. at Ellsworth.

*

 Rain 5 hours all night in Ellsworth beginning 10 p.m.




7 July 1953




Return from Ellsworth




First assignment to make rain, by blueberry growers in Ellsworth, Maine with result of 5 hour drizzle rain at Coast over appr. 70 (?) miles. Also rain made at Rangeley Region.




19 July 1953




Oranur seems slowly to peter out. The lower cabin is free, unless we have become completely immunized. The emotional reactions have calmed down. The Observatory is still strong, however.




Drought tendencies are strong. This week I failed to succeed in making rain after 4 attempts.




To William Moise

†




2 August 1953




My dear Moise:




It took so long to compile this message to you because of the week of the conference and its preparation. Since then I have had more time and could study your material.




First let me tell you that you acted, as do most able beginners in almost every human endeavor, much too eagerly. Eagerness and enthusiasm are important qualities in accomplishing things. However, they should be directed toward 

factual

 mastery of natural processes; rather than toward convincing people. I felt that you made this mistake in some of your letters to the various departments of federal and state government. These agencies of social administration are usually overburdened with work and responsibility, and also with requests from peddlers and crackpots. You did not realize fully the difference between the inquiry of the Department of Commerce and underhanded activities of unfair business competition as explained to you in my letter of July 16, 1953.




The Weather Bureau was seriously interested to learn more about our Oranur Weather Control operation (briefly—OROP). In good science one is fully entitled to argue about a new piece of knowledge. Such argument is not only rational; it is indispensable. To prove this point to yourself as a tyro in Cosmic Engineering stop now before reading further and try to answer the question: “How do I know quite positively and explainable to anyone rationally seeking answers that it was the Cloudbuster and not some coincidence that caused the raining in the east a few hours after the Ellsworth OROP?”




You will find, if you question yourself honestly, that you would not quite know how to answer this question, a question which the Weather Bureau has rightly put before you. In natural science you are not taken seriously if you are unable to tell 

how

 your result came about. This is sharply to be distinguished from the underhanded pestilent character who calls himself scientific while he tries to trip you from ambush wherever he can.




I had to work quite some time on my records to answer this question first to myself. Here it is. We can be quite certain, within the limits of still possible error, about our Ellsworth OROP for the following reasons:




1. I would have doubted the Oranur operation myself, and I would not have accepted any money,

*

 if there had been too many uncertainties in the direction of the rainfall, its layout, or the absence of well known signs of positive action. I had told Mr. Phillips, of Ellsworth, at the point of draw, when somebody wisecracked, “Now lets prepare our umbrellas.” “Don’t prepare any umbrellas yet. We can only wait and see what happens.” We do not promise any rain as we do not promise any cancer cure in ten years as some do. We simply wait and see.




2. A further mistake is the impression you gave that we were 

PROFESSIONAL

 rainmakers. 

We are no

t 

professional rainmakers

, 

not even experimental professional rainmakers

. We are busy here at Orgonon to remove the nauseating 

DOR clouds

 from our region, in order to survive our anti-nuclear research operations. It was within the framework of 

these

 DEDORIZATION operations that I hit, quite accidentally, upon the function of the 

rain

 cloud making and busting. We do not even have a well operating weather station. We have a few meteorological devices. We have no regular service in weather charting, being so few people with so may important things to do.




3. It is to us as serious workers at the roots of nature more important to know our 

failures

 than our successes. For example I tried hard to break the drought spell at the end of August and failed in making rain with the exception of two negligible short drizzles. Even this failure proved important. I learned what 

cannot

 be done as yet. This, too, secures final success if any is obtainable at all. I only succeeded in achieving some fast drifting cloud banks covering all northern Maine on Saturday, August 29, 1953, during the night. This led to an innovation: 

CONTINUOUS CLOUDBUSTING OPERATION

. This continuous operation brought fourth two new insights: First, one can remove the DOR clouds far better through continuous operation with only one or two open draw pipes; Second, in this operation somehow heavy dew appeared within about 40 miles south and west of Orgonon—a dew rich enough for the soil to appear as if drenched in rain, and for the farmer within this belt good enough not to complain about the drought. Thus the failure to obtain full blown rain on August 28th brought fourth new important facts. I still do not know 

why

 I failed this time. There was between July 15 and 23 at Orgonon (five days constant east to west OR flow 

without

 rain effect, and severe DOR). I do not 

know

 whether the drenching rains in the New York area on July 23rd was a result of this operation. They had such heavy rainfall lately in Texas. Thus you can see how crucial it is to 

know what you do not know

, always better to understand 

how you do the things you do

. Let me now tell you, also to increase your self confidence and competence as a future Oranur Weather Control operator in the face of such serious inquiries as that posed by the Weather Bureau, how I can be certain to have broken the drought in New England in the beginning of August 1952 and why I am certain of the Ellsworth draw. I expressed both of these certainties with good reason in the information I gave through you to the Bangor Daily News of July 26, 1953.




 




1. 

The Breaking of the August

, 

1952 Drought




After having tried in vain for weeks to break the drought during July, 1952 with the exception of a few rainfalls, around Orgonon, I finally hit upon an idea of predominately drawing from the direction opposite to that where you want the rain to go. I wanted the rain, as you may remember for August 1, 1952 at the bridge east of Rangeley, to go toward south in the general direction of Boston. The first rainfall occurred in 

our

 region on August 3, coming as expected from the northwest. It reached Farmington, went on to Portland reaching Boston on August 10. Here I learned that we do 

not MAKE

 rain; we only influence the OR potential in the atmosphere while we trigger the various regions of the OR envelope. Thus we judge from the time of the onset of the planned rain plus its direction our data about the trigger function of the atmospheric orgone envelope (similar but slower than radio operation), and about important criteria for self control. I claim the rain only if there are not too many uncertainties and if I know what I did and how I achieved my result.




 




2. 

The Temporary Breaking of the Drought of June-July, 1953 at Ellsworth

.




This drought had been predicted by me to the State House in Augusta, Maine, in a letter of May 13, 1953. This prediction of the drought was based on careful observation on clouds which appeared to be unable to hold together and dissipated again and again.




The Weather Bureau rightly points out that there was a weather front coming form the 

west

 at the time of this OROP. This is perfectly true. However, the Weather Bureau overlooked my report on the 

preliminary

 OROP on July 5 at Rangeley which I had made as a 

preparatory

 operation to make the result at Ellsworth the following day safer. It rained at Rangeley, coming from the west, all Monday night, July 6th as expected. This rain from the west moved to southeast as drawn and was seen in Hancock on July sixth in the afternoon as a heavy blue cloudbank to the west. The 

center

 of rain in the east, however, was at Ellsworth as stated by the various observers. It had spread past Bangor to the west to the south and east. This “Ellsworth rain,” however, was mainly caused by my drawing 

from the east

. I was at first astounded to witness the rolling in of a great front of fog and clouds many miles wide from the ocean, several hundred feet high and very dense. I had not expected the moisture to come in as it actually did from the Atlantic. It was, to my mind, basically fog and humidity from the ocean which broke the drought. You know that Eva witnessed this spectacle together with me from my car east of Hancock on the afternoon of July 6. It rained as expected and reported all through the following night with the center in Ellsworth.




The chart you drew about the course and density of the rainfall drawn from official weather reports I believe, shows clearly that its center was at Ellsworth and Bar Harbor; its direction was as intended and drawn from northwest to southeast, in accordance with the preceding OROP at Orgonon. There were 

TWO

 weather fronts, one from the west mentioned, and one from the east unmentioned in the letter of the Weather Bureau in its inquiry of the Ellsworth Experiment.




Not being a professional rainmaker and having no professional weather station at my disposal, such an assembly and coordination of facts, official and my own, is quite impressive in our favor. I would like to add, and I hope the colleagues in the Washington central Weather Bureau will take it in good humor. At times when I have leisure enough to take off from my heavier duties in experimental Oranur work, I enjoy the sudden changes which are pronounced by weather stations at the radios of Portland and Boston in accordance with our DOR removal operations. These DOR removal operations are, as I emphasized before, crucial to our continued personal as well as scientific existence at Orgonon.




These are some of the facts about the Ellsworth draw. They tell to some extent why I believe to have achieved my result at Ellsworth.




You may use this letter at your discretion in answering the letter of the Washington bureau. I have no objection to sending to the bureau a copy of this letter.




I hope Eva and you are well. I shall be in touch with you regarding the planned work at Hancock very soon.




WR




To Ivan R. Tannehill




29 October 1953




U.S. Weather Bureau




Dear Dr. Tannehill:




We refer to the experiments in the realm of Atmospheric Orgone Energy Control which have been conducted at the Orgone Institute over the past 18 months. During these operations, weather bureaus have frequently been forced to change predictions; on other occasions the forecasts became contradictory due to ORANUR Cloudbuster operations in the North East. This situation, we feel, may endanger air and sea travel.




It was, therefore, decided to file with your office reports on every ORANUR Weather Control operation which could possibly have a bearing on either sea or air travel. We do not have the facilities of nationwide communication. Should the central Weather Bureau in Washington feel that our operations should be in any way coordinated with public needs, we shall be glad to cooperate. The experiments, which are resulting also in rain-making, are basically ruled by our research activities concerning engineering of the Atmospheric Energy Envelope of the planet (CORE; Cosmic Orgone Energy Engineering). Problems of drought and desert developments are emerging from these research activities.




To Eva Reich




12 November 1953




My dear Eva:




I have read your letter of November 9th with great interest. Since I do not believe either in mystical or any metaphysical forces, and, furthermore, since I would have to have 

concrete

 evidence on the truth of your assumption, I cannot say anything. But basically, as a matter of 

though

t, there is no possibility whatever of excluding the existence of an entirely 

different kind of life

 which would not be bound up with any 

forms

 of life akin to ours. The existence of full-fledged life not bound up with 

any

 form would, of course, confirm the spiritualist concept. I do not think this possible. But your observations are certainly worthy of further careful pursuit.




I have the definite feeling that your development proceeds on the track of your 

true

 nature. It is always a great pleasure to read what you have to a say.




I hope to see you soon with Bill here. Looking forward to it.




20 November 1953




After reading Keyhoe report

*




Summary: State of affairs







The flying saucers are real, to judge from Keyhoe’s report.




They use OR energy in propelling and lighting speed, colors, silence

†




Most likely they were stirred into action in far outer space by the atomic explosions: Oranur effect?




They come to investigate the disturbance of their lives by nuclear Oranur.




They are directed by intelligent beings who come peacefully.




All DOR effects began with equinox: flying saucers ride on my Galactic stream.




The melanor was brought down to earth by the Galactic Beings. Lets call them “

CORE People

”




They know Oranur and E




Using OR they cannot be armored




Melanor sucks O

2

 and H

2

O, rock disintegrates







28 November 1953




Observatory is usable for several hours now. But it still charges up and sleeping in it would be quite impossible.




I am lonelier than ever; and I have no solution to the grave dilemma:







a. I need workers, friends




b. My workers and friends run in fear and hate as soon as they encounter cosmic reality.







30 November 1953




Timelessness




It took me 40 years to comprehend the EP [Emotional Plague]




30 years to rid my soul of family dirt




20 years to discover the orgone energy in air




10 years to free myself from my psychoanalytic period, and




3 years now to regain the Observatory, my home and place of work, which I had lost in pursuit of the cosmic life force




How long will it take to put mankind straight again and to reestablish the Life laws on this planet?




And when, after decades of emotional agony, the simple fact of Love will be fully understood and lived, we shall ask: And so what? Why, in heavens name, did it take so long to put this simple truth across.




December 1953




Returning home




I have returned to the music of my home before 1910. It has been preserved in the New World. I’ve found it in tact after 40 years of searching in the old world. My mother danced the waltzes in 1906 I hear in my Observatory 1953. Life has passed me by with rich endowments. Remember? The evening when I, age 17, eager in early manhood, went to that ball of the University, masked and dancing all night with women who felt me—Love—Oh—Love—

1954
















7 January 1954




In the end it will be very simple to ask:




Why, in heavens name, did it take so much effort to put across the most simple facts of life, infant needs for love, genital love, contact, lack of formal straight jackets? Why?




Then, other, greater problems will be facing humanity:




How to feel comfortable in a spaceship; how to keep a child happily secure for his or her life. How to live well and happily.




9 January 1954




Grave Problem:




How to hold good scientific workers against the silence on part of US government, clearly an offensive, contemptuous attitude.




I must however continue on the assumptions, supported by my emotional reactions, as well as by the several indirect manifestations of friendship that the US government is friendly and has its reasons to avoid direct contact.




I may be wrong however, and another error may then be added to the many committed in the past.




 




On 10 February 1954, the U. S. District Court for the District of Maine issued a summons in which the United States of America, plaintiff, by and through Peter Mills, U. S. attorney for the District of Maine, filed a complaint for injunction against the Wilhelm Reich Foundation, Wilhelm Reich and Ilse Ollendorff (the foundation clerk). The proceeding was brought under a section of the federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act that gives the FDA authority over shipment of medical devices in interstate commerce. Directed specifically against the orgone energy accumulator, which it claimed to be “adulterated and misbranded . . . not connected with or plugged into any source of electrical or any other type of energy or power.” It also claimed that all Reich’s writings were advertising and promotion for the accumulator. This included literature written before the discovery of orgone energy and the development of the accumulator.







WHEREFORE PLAINTIFF PRAYS that the defendants, The Wilhelm Reich Foundation, a Maine corporation, Wilhelm Reich and Ilse Ollendorff, individuals, and each and all of their officers, agents, servants, employees, attorneys, all corporations, associations, and organizations, and all persons in active concert or participation with any of them, be perpetually enjoined from directly or indirectly introducing or causing to be introduced or delivering or causing to be delivered for introduction into interstate commerce in violation of 21 U.S.C. 331 (a), any orgone energy accumulator device, in any style or model, and any and all accessories, components or parts thereof, or any similar article, in any style or model, which is misbranded within the meaning of 21 U.S.C. 352 (a) or adulterated within the meaning of 21 U.S.C. 351 (c):










AND FURTHER PRAYS:




That the aforesaid defendants, their officers, agents, servants, employees, attorneys, all corporations, associations, and organizations, and all persons in active concert or participation with any of them, be perpetually enjoined from directly or indirectly doing or causing to be done any act whether oral, written, or otherwise in the manner aforesaid or in any other manner, with respect to any orgone energy accumulator device, in any style or model, or with respect to any similar article or device while held for sale after shipment in interstate commerce, in violation of 21 U.S.C. 331 (k), which results in said article being misbranded within the meaning of 21 U.S.C. 352 (a), or adulterated within the meaning of 21 U.S.C. 351 (c):










ANY FURTHER PRAYS:




That the plaintiff be given judgment of its costs herein and for such other and further relief as to the Court may seem just and proper.




Peter Mills

 United States Attorney







14 February 1954




The plague has struck again

. This time an agency of the US government, a very neglected, minor agency has struck—the Food and Drug Administration.




It has no jurisdiction on orgone energy whatever

. It is only to control proper labeling of drugs, whereas orgone energy is neither a drug, or a cosmetic. They’re incompetent. They are like leeches who have hooked onto our work.




To United States District Attorney Peter Mills




No date




Federal Court House, Portland, Maine




Your summons was served upon the Foundation, myself and the clerk of the Foundation, Ilse Ollendorff by your office to appear as defendants in court within 20 days. The accusation is served by the Food and Drug Administration, and the charge is fraud in matter of the discovery of the Life Energy.




I have nothing to add to the thousand of pages of evidence which has been published ever since 1936. I do not believe that matters of scientific inquiry can be decided in court; and less so, since those who challenge this discovery are corrupt conspirators of pharmaceutic business who are using, or rather abusing an agency of the United States Government to serve their own evil ends.




I wish to inform you who several years ago has helped so much in establishing this Foundation, and who knows the founders of the foundation well, I wish to inform you that having done my duty as a scientist and a citizen far beyond obligation, and having had no material gain but rather had suffered great sacrifices for this discovery, I refuse to be dragged as a “defendant” through the courts of the United States in a case of alleged fraud. I am not going to fight against corrupt business practices in court. Our organization will be dissolved to the detriment of the interest of the people, as requested. The discovery of the Life Energy is far out everywhere on this globe and it can take care of itself. I have nothing more to add to it.




Should any court find that the discovery of the Life Energy is a fraud, the world will certainly know better. There is nothing that can kill it. The evidence in the form of original documents of the corrupt and crookish nature of those keeping behind the scenes in this matter is at hand and at your disposal here at Orgonon.




20 February 1954




Discussion upon the occasion of Asa Richardson’s

*

 report to WR. 10–1200 hrs. Robert McCullough in attendance. Orgonon, Rangeley, Maine.




 




WR There are two immediate routes of action.







Kick it out of court on the basis that they have no authority and that scientific matters can not be decided by a court.




Get it delayed indefinitely—like at Panmunjon







It would be a political disaster for the U.S. if WR had to go to court—a great victory for the C.P. and a terrific defeat for the U.S.




AR Mills is bound by formalities. He can not throw the case out. Therefore AR will see those that can. There will be a meeting at 1000 hrs., February 25th between AR and a Joseph McGuire who is a FDA attorney.




AR agreed that he will do nothing without WR’s full agreement, knowledge, comprehension and consent.




WR The following authority is given by WR to AR:







Obtain a dismissal




Delay the action indefinitely.







AR Position of Joseph McGuire—FDA attorney: His job is to enforce federal regulations. He has no personal interests in the case.




WR The federal regulations do not cover the OEA [orgon energy accumulator] The OEA did not exist when the empowering regulation was issued.




AR McGuire has prepared a case from a complaint. It doesn’t matter with whom or where the complaint originates.




WR It 

does

 make a difference 

who

 started the complaint. The C.P. for example.




AR I can’t keep up with this factual train of thought.




WR That is why so many people are in jail innocently. It is a matter of the interpretation of natural laws—

Fact versus empty form

.




AR The FDA waits now—after the summons has been served. We can do five different things







Ask for a dismissal of complaint




Let case go by default




Make a motion for delaying the proceedings




Answer complaint




Ask for a consent decree







My position when I meet McGuire: 

We will not go on trial

. 

We want a dismissal

. If that is not forthcoming we might do one of several other possibilities.




WR Change “defendants” to 

attacked parties

: Government to plaintiffs.




WR AR must be very clear in his own mind on the facts and background in this case. He must be very sharp and to the point with them.




AR gives the procedural point of view. WR gives his answer from the functional point of view.




Five point factual procedure:




AR I will give my 

opinion

 as to what they can do on each of our possible moves.




 




1. 

Dismissal

.




AR They will not dismiss it because in their opinion they have a valid case. They have tested the OEA




WR Did they put OEAs in hospitals and try it with actual cases under informed medical supervision listing all the conditions as did WR?




AR I don’t know.




WR Do the attacked parties have the right to see their evidence before trial?




AR Yes, the lawyers can see it, but not WR.




WR Lawyers are not competent to judge medical evidence.




AR That’s very true. That is why it goes to court so the court can judge it.




WR 

The court is not competent to judge it!




The question is: Does their case hold factually? They want to get WR into court as a potential swindler and ensnare him in empty formalistic procedure. They are trapped by it and want to trap him.




 




2. 

Default

. Ignore everything.




AR In my opinion the resulting injunction will only be against WR making OEAs for sale in interstate commerce. I will take care of removing the literature from the injunction. It will not affect intrastate OEA activities. The injunction will only curtail publishing reports on the curative effect of OEA.




WR AR is not factually exact here. The injunction goes much further than that




AR Up til now no appearance has been made. AR can go no further beyond asking for a dismissal without making an appearance.




WR Can you make an appearance, get an extension of time, and then withdraw your appearance? So that it could still go by default?




AR Yes.




 




3. 

Consent Decree

.




AR I would have to make a court appearance for a consent decree. A consent decree amounts to this: We accept their injunction. I am present when the final injunction is written. I can help word it, and when it is done I can tell you exactly just what you can and cannot do.




WR A consent decree would be a defeat.




AR No, it would only be a personal thing between the two parties.




WR No! You are naïve if you believe that. It would not be a personal thing. The C.P would distort it and have it in all the papers that evening—that the OEA and WR is a fraud and a cheat.




AR thinks that both parties in this case are bona fide, honest searchers after truth. 

They

 are not. They are crooks. They are not after the truth—They only want to smear and kill. They are not agents of the U.S. Government, but rather agents of the C.P. and crooks in the pharmaceutical industry. Here is the trap where the procedural way kills the truth; the reason why millions of innocents are now in mental hospitals. It is basically fact versus the legal formalistic—but the truth has no way to get in. They have no authority but want to get it. They won’t get it.




Further discussion postponed until Monday, February 22, 1954




Robert A. McCullough




To Asa Richardson




Undated




Dear Mr. Richardson




I appreciate very much the legal help you are rendering in keeping ignorant intruders and disturbers of the peace at bay. I may in a few sentences summarize the situation; you are free to choose from this summary whatever may be useful in setting straight the facts underlying the case:




1. In 1945, with the publication of Exp. XX I predicted that the Cosmic OR energy will one day find itself in a battle against the atomic energy after matter. Otherwise it would be incomprehensible how a multibillion dollar atomic chemistry business could become so frightened of the sale of 2400 dollars worth of OR energy devices for non-medical use in a year. The fight between atomic, pharmaceutic and preatomic, cosmic OR energy is on.




2. I believe that battles of scientific beliefs cannot be fought in court or be rationally decided in court action.




3. I suggest that the battle of preatomic, massfree, Cosmic OR energy against atomic pharmaceutic interests be removed from court and be transferred to where it belongs and where it is already present, in scientific and technological institutions of research and learning.




4. The tone and wording of the plaintiffs exposition speak for itself as far as profound ignorance of matters not pertaining to foods, drugs and cosmetics such as matters of basic natural science is concerned. I have never permitted this administration, important and valuable as it may be in its field, to delve as an authority in matters of psychiatry, sexual biology, organismic energy functions and the like. This is in no way the domain of this agency. And no authority can be given them in matters they know nothing about.




5. I believe that this is a matter of a conspiracy by people unknown to me to destroy the discovery of the Life Energy by means of disguising the conspiracy as an action of the USA government. Upon receipt of the summons I was not impressed by the stupidity of the complaint, but I was deeply sorrowful at the abuse of the good name of the USA government for such actions, in these times of trial when every single government administrator must watch out a hundred fold not to make a fool of himself.




6. I am not interested in selling Acc [umulator] devices. I do not depend financially upon these devices. Most of them are being built in many lands by people I even do not know and without any royalty payments. Everybody who knows how can build an OR energy accumulator. The discovery of the Life Energy is out of my hands, and it is spread far and wide in many institutions and homes, there is nothing that can stop it any longer. Not even a shot out of the dark night through a window in my home will stop what is inevitably growing toward complete victory over the evils in some pharmaceutic practices.




7. I can wait 500 years for scientists everywhere to study and grasp what primordial Cosmic Energy really represents.




8. I shall offer no proof of the correctness of my discoveries. I insist as a free man in a free world to my right even to be wrong as long as I do not harm anyone. I shall not offer to any court the many testimonials by physicians and lay people alike about the medical efficacy of the OR energy. This is not the issue at all. At issue is, however, the question whether ignorant servants of the people have a right to bother and disturb decent scientific work in basic natural science for many years without rhyme or reason. This is what I shall contest. To permit such actions to take charge of serious scientific work would mean, in the end, to deliver human thought and freely functioning ideas to any drunken hoodlum in any tavern. This cannot be permitted to happen. To prevent this is a duty of every responsible citizen. The right to be wrong is at stake.




25 February 1954




Today my “Response” went through Asa Richardson to Judge Clifford at Portland Court who will handle the complaint of the FDA against my work; by mail.




To Judge John D. Clifford, Jr.




25 February 1954




Dear Judge Clifford:




I am taking the liberty of transmitting to you my “Response” to the complaint filed by the Food and Drug Administration regarding the Orgone Energy Accumulator. My “Response” summarizes my standpoint as a natural scientist who deals with matters of basic natural law. It is not in my hands to judge the legal aspects of the matter.




My factual position in the case as well as in the world of science of today does not permit me to enter the case against the Food And Drug administration, since such action would, in my mind, imply admission of the authority of this special branch of the government to pass judgment on primordial, pre-atomic cosmic orgone energy.




I, therefore, rest the case in full confidence in your hands.




 




RESPONSE




REGARDING THE REQUEST OF THE FOOD AND DRUG ADMINISTRATION (FDA) TO ENJOIN THE NATURAL SCIENTIFIC ACTIVITIES OF WILHELM REICH, M.D.




In order to clarify the 

factual

 as well as the 

legal

 situation concerning the complaint, we must, from the very beginning, distinguish concrete 

facts

 from 

legal procedure

 to do justice to the facts.




Technically

, legally the US government has filed suit against the natural scientific work of Wilhelm Reich.




Factually

, The FDA is 

not

 “The US Government.” It is merely one of its administrative agencies dealing with Foods, Drugs, and Cosmetics. It is not empowered to deal with 

Basic Natural Law

.




ORGONOMY (see BIBLIOGRAPHY on the HISTORY OF ORGONOMY) is a branch of BASIC NATURAL SCIENCE. Its central object of research is elucidation of the Basic Natural Law.




Now, in order to bring into line the legal procedures with the abovementioned facts, the following is submitted:




The common law structure of the UNITED STATES rests originally on Natural Law. This Natural Law has heretofore been interpreted in various ways of thinking, metaphysically, religiously, mechanistically. It has never, concretely and scientifically, been subjected to natural scientific inquiry based upon a discovery which encompasses the very roots of existence.




The concept of Natural Law as the foundation of a secure way of life, must firmly rest upon the practical concrete functions of LIFE itself. In consequence, a correct life-positive interpretation of Natural Law, the basis of common law, depends on the 

factual

 elucidation of what Life actually is, how it works, what are its basic functional manifestations. From this basic premise derive the claims of natural scientists to a free, unmolested, unimpeded, natural scientific activity in general and in the exploration of the Life Energy in particular.




The complaint of the FDA is factually intimately interconnected with a basic social issue which, at present, is reverberating in the lives of all of us here and abroad.




Abraham Lincoln once said: “What I do say is that no man is good enough to govern another man without that other’s consent. I say this is a leading principle, the sheet anchor of American republicanism.”




At this point, I could easily declare “I refuse to be governed in my basic natural research activities by the Food and Drug Administration.” But exactly here, in this constitutional right of mine, the basic confusion in the interpretation of Natural and Common Law becomes apparent.




There are conspirators around whose aim it is to destroy human happiness and self-government. Is now the right of the conspirator to ravage humanity the same as my right to free, unimpeded inquiry?




It obviously is NOT THE SAME THING. I shall not try to answer this basic dilemma of American society at the present. I shall only open an approach to this legal and factual dilemma. It has a lot to do with the position of the complaint, trying to enjoin the experimental and theoretical functions of Life in its emotional, educational, social, economic, intellectual and medical implications.




According to Natural, and in consequence, American Common Law, no one, no matter who he is, has the power or legal right to enjoin:







The study and observation of natural phenomena including Life within and without man;




The communication to others of knowledge of these natural phenomena so rich in the manifestations of an existent, concrete, cosmic Life Energy:




The stir to mate in all living beings, including our maturing adolescents;




The emergence of abstractions and final mathematical formulae concerning the natural life force in the universe, and the right to their dissemination among one’s fellow men;




The handling, use and distribution of instruments of basic research in any field, medical, educational, preventive, physical, biological, and in fields which emerge from such basic activities and which, 

resting on such principles

, must by all means remain free.







Attempts such as branding activities and instruments of such a kind as “adulterated,” in other words as fraud, only characterizes the narrowness of the horizon of the complaint.




No man-made law ever, no matter whether derived from the past or projected into a distant, unforeseeable future, can or should ever be empowered to claim that it is greater than the Natural Law from which it stems and to which it must inevitably return in the eternal rhythm of creation and decline of all things natural. This is valid, no matter whether we speak in terms such as “God,” “Natural Law,” “Cosmic Primordial Force,” “Ether” or “Cosmic Orgone Energy.”




The present critical state of international human affairs requires security and safety from nuisance interferences with efforts toward full, honest, determined clarification of man’s relationship to nature within and without himself: In other words, his relationship to the Law of Nature. It is not permissible, either morally, legally or factually to force a natural scientist to expose his scientific results and methods of basic research in court. This point is accentuated in a world crisis where biopathic men hold in their hands power over ruined, destitute multitudes.




To appear in court as a “

defendant”

 in matters of basic natural research would in itself appear, to say the least, extraordinary. It would require disclosure of evidence in support of the position of the discovery of the Life Energy. Such disclosure, however, would invoke untold complications, and 

possibly national disaster

.




Proof of this can be submitted at any time only to a duly 

authorized

 personality of the US Government in a high, responsible position.




Scientific matters cannot possibly ever be decided upon in court. They can only be clarified by prolonged, faithful bona fide observations in friendly exchange of opinion, never by litigation. The sole purpose of the complaint is to entangle orgonomic basic research in endless, costly legal procedures in la Panmunjon, which will accomplish exactly NOTHING rational or useful to human society.




Inquiry in the realm of Basic Natural Law is 

outside the judicial domain

, of this, or ANY OTHER KIND OF SOCIAL ADMINISTRATION ANYWHERE ON THIS GLOBE, IN ANY LAND, NATION OR REGION.




Man’s right to know, to learn, to inquire, to make bona fide errors, to investigate human emotions must, by all means, be safe, if the word FREEDOM should ever be more than an empty political slogan.




If painstakingly elaborated and published scientific findings over a period of 30 years could not convince this administration, or will not be able to convince any other social administration of the true nature of the discovery of the Life Energy, no litigation in court anywhere will ever help to do so.




I, therefore, submit, in the name of truth and justice, that I shall not appear in court as the “defendant” against a plaintiff who by his mere complaint already has shown his ignorance in matters of natural science. I do so at the risk of being, by mistake, fully enjoined in all my activities. Such an injunction would mean practically exactly nothing at all. My discovery of the Life Energy is today widely known nearly all over the globe, in hundreds of institutions, whether acclaimed or cursed. It can no longer be stopped by anyone, no matter what happens to me.




Orgone Energy Accumulators are “

devices

” designed to concentrate cosmic Orgone Energy, and thus to make it available to further research in medicine, biology and physics, are being built today in many lands, without my knowledge and consent, and even without any royalty payments.




On the basis of these considerations, I submit that the case against Orgonomy be taken out of court completely.




Literature on orgonomic matters is enclosed for further clarification of this issue.







4 March 1954




I must guard against falling prey to resentment and frustration from disappointment. I had, and still have, great trust in the American fairness and fair play of government. The attack by Modju USA (Kreyberg

*

 through Gordon,

†

 etc.) through the government was a most severe blow to this confidence. It would now be easy to slip off into political rebellion, neurotic resentment or, worse, politiciandom. I must remain cool and rational. I must not, under any circumstances, permit myself to let this emotional conspiracy degenerate into an act of political conspiracy in the hands of evil politicians. 

The political is a consequence of the emotional

. 

It is a sickness of society

. It cannot be handled by jail, but only by Social Psychiatry and EPP Emotional Plague Prevention. And I am the physician of plague-ridden people.




To this effect, I have done the following already:




I have rested the case confidently in the hands of the American Federal Judge, Mr. Clifford, Portland, Maine.




I have sent the Judge information on my work in the form of publications and Bibliography.




I have sent him a copy of the letter sent to Senator Smith

*

 which informs her of the conspiratory nature of the background of the assault.




I have informed Senator Smith by telegram of the pathological rather than political nature of the assault, and have asked her to stand by at the sickbed of society.




I have informed the Office of the President of the U.S.A. of these measures.




I have not gone to McCarthy,

†

 because I fear the political abuse of a good cause. But I believe that McCarthy would have done the best job in getting the Moscow Modju agents out into the open from the hiding places in the FDA offices and in the chemical industry.




6 March 1954




Still, the risk I have taken is very great as well as grave. If the Injunction should, against all logic and truth, come through, out of a whim or ignorance on the part of an American judge, a suit for fraud could follow. These chemists are ready to kill, no doubt. I am clearly their most dangerous enemy, dangerous to their billions in atomic energy enterprises and pharmaceutical chemicals, dangerous to their scientific reputation, dangerous only as the new is always dangerous to the old.




Everything is possible in these times: jail, agony, death, defamation, going down in disgrace. Still, I shall not bow my head before nuisance as Galileo has done; and I shall not confess to being a criminal against the State as Socrates has done. But I may have to go down, now, very soon. They are all out for the final kill.




15 March 1954




For some 4 decades, that is forty years spelled out, I have been wandering about the surface of this globe, wandering due to stupidities of ephemeral governments, Imperial, Republican, Socialist, Austria, Germany, Scandinavia, and others.




For some 35 years now, I have spent my life, my efforts, my money ($340,000.00 worth of labor in the past 15–20 years alone) on helping humanity to help itself, to improve its self rule, to teach governments how to rule better, saner, safer.




For some 10 years now I have tried hard to be an American citizen in full function, working over time for nothing, doing basic scientific research without pay, remaining outside the political scene of America, doing my job and fulfilling duty to my fellow men, pouring hope into this US government which pretends to be the last hope of the world. It is.




And just therefore because I behaved and trusted once more, I am ricocheting from the insult perpetuated in the name of the US government by hoodlums of pharmaceutical industry and politics, in the form of a suit 1056 against me and my main organizations for having “defrauded” the public, allegedly, in the form of an orgone energy which, to this government, does “not exist”; thus I spent $340,000.00 of cash and work on nothing; I have together with others, suffered agonies for nothing; Oranur was nothing. What seems to be is a nuisance of an agency which has interfered with and bothered decent scientific work for nearly 8 years now.




I was not obliged to do what I did; and I am not obliged to continue to pour knowledge into the US public for nothing, receiving not only no help, but getting mud smeared in my face.




18 March 1954




There is still no message from Portland Court. Will they judge by default, with all the evidence and literature at their disposal?




I received a questionnaire from the AAF [Army Air Force] regarding my observation of two lights traveling toward Round Pond, 2 miles North from Lower House, on January 28, 1954, reported to AAF the following day.




To First Lieutenant Andrew Matyas, Uic., Flt. 3-G




March 19, 1954




Reference: 

Ea

*




Air Force Base




Presque Isle, Maine




 




Dear Lieutenant Matyas,




I am returning the completed questionnaire on “Unidentified Objects” to you for your further disposition.




A manuscript, containing a survey of the orgonomic view on possible visitors from outer space, is awaiting publication. In view of the urgency of the problem, and the responsibilities involved, I am enclosing this manuscript for further clarification of the problem as seen from orgonomic basic research of the past few years.




Under separate cover pertinent publications will be forwarded to you




25 March 1954




†

 mailed [to Army Air Force] 19 March 

unknowingly

 on day of Injunction decree, 

before

 I knew of Injunction. I did not know till Monday noon, about 11–11:30 a.m., when accidentally Tom Ross told me at Observatory that Fred Campbell

*

 had told him on Saturday evening (!! 2 days before) that newspapers had brought the news in Portland. Somewhat later the US Marshall brought decree.

†




To Elsworth F. Baker, M.D.




31 March 1954




Dear Dr. Baker:

‡




Would you kindly inform whomever you chose to act on your behalf that, at least for the moment, I personally shall take no action to counteract the injunction in any kind of court-action. This injunction frees me, finally, from a great heap of unpaid work for some thing I was really not interested in any longer for many years. What I am doing at present, namely thinking, is not enjoined, neither is my 

ability

 and 

right

 to think out equations such as gravity or space problems.




I hope you understand my position. It is, of course, the right—and in many cases certainly the duty—of physicians, touched by the injunction to ask for its revocation on grounds of its unconstitutionality and its being an infringement on your work with patients. The material pertaining to the background of this injunction will be sent to you in due time.




Could you find out for me through your lawyer whether there is any time limitation to taking recourse against the injunction to the Superior Court, Court of Appeals, or which, and whether the enjoined one himself must do it, or whether someone else can do it in his stead.




Would you also inform all patients that I am still, and 

even more so

, in touch with their human problems, on an even deeper level of understanding. I only abandoned voluntary work which I did as the chairman of the WRF, but I did in 

no way abandon

 my basic position as the physician who discovered, and learned to handle the worst disease mankind ever knew, namely the Emotional Plague.




I wish you all good luck in all your undertakings. My greetings to all good friends, including the doubting Thomases, and my thanks to those who offered kindness in many ways.




The cloudbuster machine was televised with explanations in Portland, Maine, Channel 6, on Tuesday evening.




Telegram to Dr. Eva Reich Hancock, Maine




1 April 1954, 9:00 a.m.




DR. REICH HANCOCK, MAINE




I URGE YOU TO BE CAREFUL IN NOT OVERSTEPPING LIMITS OF INJUNCTION. CONFER WITH LAWYER ABOUT LIMITS. BASIC PRINCIPLES AT PRESENT MORE IMPORTANT THAN ANYTHING ELSE. REASSURE ME ON THIS POINT BY  TELEGRAM. THE BABIES WILL WIN AGAINST THEIR KILLERS.




April 2, 1954




THE FIGHT HAS STARTED




Summary







I have succeeded, through my refusal to go to court as a defendant, to force the physicians finally to accept responsibility. Some physicians found a lawyer, finally, who in contradistinction to Hays, seemed to understand my position. He is supposed to have said: If WR is the man you claim he is, his response was the only answer to the Summons. This may well be another Scopes case.




WR, Baker and Ilse Ollendorff resigned as members, the latter as Clerk. The Foundation can only be revived if new active members will be chosen. This will depend on the outcome of the struggle.




We lost about three hundred thousand dollars monthly income in the WRF.




We were on television with the Cloudbuster after the storm on March 24th, 25th, as I had predicted on March 22nd.




I am innerly quite calm and removed, caring little what happens as long as I remain feeling clean and correct.




The most terrible task consisted in resisting the inclination toward submission and smallness in the frightened, NO-saying little brave people. They, not the Judge, constitute the danger. They become the braver the 

less

 I do for them.




This Injunction will turn out, in spite of the dangers involved, to be perhaps the most important turning point in my life. It demonstrated so clearly, invisible as yet to many of my friends, the functional identity of Life in 

Man

 and Life in a 

Desert

. This lawfulness compensates fully and richly for all the anguish suffered by small souls, or souls bound up pitiably like that of the enjoining judge.







I am an experimenter by nature. If someone would wake me from deep sleep and ask me any questions whatever, my answer would inevitably be: I SHALL TRY AND SEE. I tried to see an American Federal Judge at Work on Justice. I found out, alright…NOW I 

KNOW

.




5 April 1954




Mistakes we beginners make in legal battles:




We are frightened. We are confused. We want peace. Somebody else should do it for us. We believe in lawyers, and respect the law where it is mere legalism and business concealed in the cloak of lawfulness. We do not discriminate between fact and law to execute the factual evidence, and we do not distinguish between legalistic and the lawful, in accordance with human living. We tend either to do nothing or to shoot all our arrows at once, if possible, at the mere sound of a footstep in the dark bushes. We are supporting every intention of our enemies by submission or lack of judgment.




That is WE, the experienced physicians and psychiatrists. Imagine now the situation of the little fellow having stolen a piece of bread, who falls victim to the ambition of a young lawyer wishing to prove how well he can serve in court in convicting the victim in order to please the district attorney who wants to make a career.




6 April 1954




In case the injunction of Clifford becomes Law of the U.S.A., they will only have hurt themselves, not me. I had no gain, only trouble, effort and costs in connection with the injunction. I must continue to deny any authority in judging matters of basic research to both government and court. Basic natural scientific research must remain free of any kind of intrusion by those who are not doing basic research themselves. One must have the right to be wrong.




Testing

 the society one lives in is duty of citizenship. We must test our standing, our rights, our responsibilities, and the environment in which such standing, rights and responsibilities are being exercised. No petty law quibbling can ever replace the right of free men to act according to rational conscience against evil, corrupt government.




7 April 1954




THE URGE TO WITHDRAW is insuperable in the contact with such plague in court and government. I often said that I can wait 500 or 1000 years. I could threaten the government that I would turn over the negative gravitation equations to some power, except a dictatorial one, thus exposing myself to a possible prosecution for treason.




I could do a lot of things. The one thing I really 

want

 to do is to leave it to them all to fight it out. I have done my share in fighting for 40 years. I am even too disinterested to send out a printed notice to the effect:







THE CLIFFORD INJUNCTION IS UNCONSTITUTIONAL.




NEITHER COURT NOT GOVERNMENT HAVE ANY AUTHORITY ON MATTERS OF BASIC SCIENTIFIC RESEARCH, LEST THE DOOR BE OPENED FOR EVERY POLITICAL GOOD-FOR-NOTHING SCOUNDREL TO JUDGE AS HE PLEASES WHAT IS TRUE AND WHAT IS NOT TRUE, A LA STALIN.




WHERE NO OUTRIGHT FRAUD IS PROVEN, PEOPLE MUST HAVE THE FREE CHOICE OF THE KIND OF TREATMENT THEY WANT, AND THEY MUST NOT BE COERCED TOWARD ONE TYPE ONLY BY FINANCIAL PRESSURE INTERESTS OF PHARMACEUTICAL OR OTHER KIND.







12 April 1954, 9 a.m.




Willie visited yesterday, had a good talk. They are awakening to their medical responsibilities. Cost of lawyer in New York some 50,000 dollars for two–three years. What does a poor devil do in such a case? Sit in jail for 60 years until eventually discovered by an officer of the aid society, while the criminal attorney goes free.




20 April 1954




It is characteristic of the emotional conspiracy that those who conspired were exactly the same who had snooped around Orgonon in 1947, and who were asked to leave and were told they had no right whatsoever to “investigate Orgone Energy”: The neurologists and brain surgeons of the American Psychiatric Association, with Annie Pink in the background, and the FDA with the chemists and Red fascists in the background. Baker just reported:




The American Psychiatric Association published the thanks of the Medical Director of the FDA, thanks to the psychiatric colleagues for the help rendered in the “successful development” of the case against orgonomy.

*




What a brotherhood.




What mutual compliments.




What desperate effort to maintain the mechanistic view of the mind. . . . All this goes on while I succeeded in drawing energy for the first time from the Galactic Stream in such a manner that the severe DOR was completely replaced by blue, powerfully moving OR.




The Galactic Stream is real.




My work is REAL…. If the world is ready for its use, let the world fight for it. If the world is 

not

 ready for it, there is no use for me to fight for it. I can wait 1000 years as others of my kind did. It does not really matter. The Injunction hits at a little part of my work with which I had no connection for some 8 years (medical Orgonomy), and from which I derived no financial benefits. It may just as well go.




I am happy that I have maintained my proud stature through all these decades of ghastly nuisance. I hope to maintain it to the end. They will never see me recant or crawl or repent. My job is done. My life has been lived, fully, vigorously, freely, productively.




I must, finally, get used to this nuisance Injunction as a pestilent expression of man’s disease of which I am the physician and discoverer. There is no use in avoiding it, or thinking it does not belong. It does belong to my life, always has been with me. It killed my mother as one of the first victims in my lifetime: and since it has murdered by the billions.




24 April 1954




I intended to take a brief rest at Bar Harbor, a few days only, but this emergency keeps me at bay. Ilse fell ill, mail was to be attended to, the lawyer who took on the job of defending the physicians in the New York region wanted some lists written up, Peter was in trouble because of the holocaust at home, and the many chores to keep Orgonon going made it impossible to leave. But I hope to get away at Eva’s birthday on the 27th, her thirtieth. I was thirty years old when the German first edition of DIE FUNCTION DES ORGASMUS appeared. 27 years back. That makes you think a lot, too.




The Clifford Injunction mess would not be so bothersome as it is, had it not come on top of nearly four years of the Oranur experiment emergency. In the face of our plight at Orgonon during these four years, the assault by the drug and cosmetic inspectors appears quite incredible. “Oranur” is “not true.” What a preposterous, despicable thing to say. And how irresponsible of these servants of the people. I never would have assumed that this would be the way in which my reservation at my citizenship hearing, told to the judge at that time, would come true. Then I had told the judge, upon being asked whether I swear allegiance to the U.S.A. constitution without reservation: Yes, of course, with one exception. I would fight the U.S. government if it turned clearly dictatorial. And here the FDA presented the case to fight with legal means in court its incompetence and ignorance.




This ignorance of a government agency in the face of the discovery of the cosmic energy appears like a challenge to one’s intelligence, or worse, like an assault on one’s sense of propriety. After having unloaded the load of medical matters upon many physicians, where it belongs, there remains the bulk of it, the scientific, logical, functional evidence underlying the Orgone Theory.




They do not understand, and few scientists do know, that it is a matter of theory formation which encompasses a great heap of known and new facts and observations. If matters were 

forced

 into court against my will, they would have to disprove every single NON-MEDICAL, basic observation and experiment made in nearly two decades. Here are only a selected few of them:







They would have to prove that 

there are

 germs for amebas and cancer cells in the air, in order to disprove my observations of their origin from bionous disintegration of tissue; even then my observation would stand unchallenged.




They would have to show that rock does 

not

 disintegrate into vesicles upon soaking or heating or both.




They would have to give an explanation for the function of erection, pleasure, pain; for the sinking of the potential above the plexus solaris region in unarmored individuals.




They would have to disprove the connection between spasm and tumor formation as fibrosarcoma in spastic uteruses.




They would be forced to explain how it is possible for heat waves to move 

horizontally

 and in the 

direction of the rotation

 of the earth.




They would have to disprove the temperature difference, or to explain the origin of potential from high to low, in other words, the wherefrom of the mechanical energy on merely theoretical grounds.




They would have to disprove every single fact mentioned in Oranur, such as the lumination in vacua, with 500 Volt at the electrodes; the falling ill of all workers at Orgonon: the death of hundreds of mice.




They would have to deny the DOR clouds or to explain them.




They would have to disprove Experiment XX, i.e., to show that boiled soil does 

not

 yield yellow water of high fluorophotometric value, and yellow core upon freezing, or yellow flakes upon drying.







How is truth to find justice ever, if everybody loathes and fears it? How is truth ever to reach the platform of immunity, open today to every diplomatic scoundrel?




To Charles Haydon

*




3 May 1954




Dear Mr. Haydon:




I have been informed by Dr. Willie, and also by Miss Ollendorff, that you plan to take the first step in the recourse against the injunction sometime this week. I feel it would be best if I, personally and professionally, would keep out my deeper and wider involvement in the case. However, there are two points which concern the narrower realm of your operations:




1. It is characteristic of the make-up of the complaint and the injunction that the two parties in collusion against Orgonomy, namely the American Psychiatric Association and the FDA, have both been denied jurisdiction on basic natural scientific research in the realm of orgonomy in 1948, when they intruded upon territory which was none of their business, and when it had become clear beyond any doubt that their intentions were malicious. They both wanted to destroy the threatening competition of the discovery of the Life Energy to psychiatry of the old school of mechanistic neurology and brain surgery on the one hand, and chemical, atomistic, materialistic view of living processes of chemistry on the other hand. My discovery has been and is beyond the domain of both these realms of routine knowledge.




2. It is noteworthy that, according to the Official Register of the United States of 1953, page 520ff, all the divisions of field inspection service of the FDA, without any exception, beginning in Atlanta, Georgia and ending in Seattle, Washington, are composed of a Chief, a Chief Chemist, and a Chief Inspector, with the chemist, of course, in charge of judgment. This means that anything beyond the realm of chemistry is subjected to chemical judgment which, of course, is an impossibility on principle.




I assume that this information will be of some help in your discussion with the judge. I would also suggest that you look up the following Notes and Communications in the Orgone Energy Bulletin, for further orientation:




 

























Vol. 1, No. 1, page 35 ff










Vol. 2, No. 1, page 44













Vol. 1, No. 2, page 70 ff










Vol. 2, No. 2, page 94













Vo. 1, No. 4, page 186 ff










 
















12 May 1954




Between 9:40 p.m. and midnight the following happened: McCullough had just projected for me, with Ilse Ollendorff and Peter Reich present, the copy of the televised Cloudbuster showing of March; thereafter we saw again the orgone motor film. We were about to leave the observatory when I suddenly saw one very bright, orange-yellow oval shaped “star” to the NW of the Observatory, some 25 to 30 degrees declination. I did not take any exact bearings.




The object seemed to stand still, but it pulsated and blinked. Then, soon thereafter, I noticed a second object somewhat higher up, and to the south of the first, of the same appearance in size. We observed with binoculars and came to the conclusion that these could not possibly be fixed stars or planets. They blinked while the stars were motionless. They were much larger, and not of circular shape or color. Slowly, but faster than planets would, they sank toward the NW horizon.




We then left the building after closing it up for the night, etc. The building was rarely lighted at night during the past two years except at such occasions as projections, etc. since it is not habitable and can, due to the DOR emergency, be used only a few hours every day. The objects clearly pulsated and moved slightly in various directions. I thought that the lighted Observatory may have aroused the curiosity of some CORE men.




We left the building. Before entering our cars I had the idea to test my assumption that if these were CORE space ships, they would react in some manner to a cloudbuster being pointed at them. My daughter Eva and William Moise at Hancock, Maine had a few days ago reported that they had trained a cloudbuster on a wobbling orange object to the west of them.




We opened all ten pipes and directed them toward the lower bright object. At first there was no reaction. But when I moved the pipes slightly a reaction occurred. 

The bright light dimmed slowly and vanished for a few seconds from sight

. It appeared again, brightening up to the former intensity. But, as I continue to move my machine, it dimmed again staying dark longer this time and returning seemingly with some difficulty to former brightness. Then it dimmed twice more, remaining invisible. In other words it did not reappear in the sky.




This was incontrovertible proof to me that we were dealing with a space ship propelled by cosmic energy.




23 May 1954




I am slowly being carried out from the realm of man’s affairs, including education. It is space and infinity that looms ahead. I fear it, and I’ve done all kinds of things over the past 20 years to avoid its final implications.




To Ola Raknes




27 May 1954




Dear Dr. Raknes:




Upon receipt of your good letter of May 22nd, I sent you a telegram and I wish to add by letter the following:







According to some reliable reports, the Judge had not only 

not

 read my Response and looked at the literature we had sent him, but he had not even read the injunction which he had signed.




You are the first reader of the complaint who hit upon the fact that they do not accuse me actually of anything. It is just by implication and innuendo that they hint at fraud. I do not think that anyone in New York saw this.




Your comparison of this case with that of Galilei is completely correct. However, I did not, as Galilei did, go to court as the defendant against men of bad faith. And I am ready to take the consequences. To me, this case is a test case, an experiment as it were which will answer my question: “Is it really possible that the truth can be trampled down on mere legalistic, tactical, procedural grounds?” By not going to court as the defendant against evil, I said, for the first time, I believe, in the history of science:







 







a) The quest for knowledge as the basis for all existence is supreme, beyond any judicial or governmental domain.




b) It is to demonstrate that it is not possible that any man of bad faith can call a scientist to court as defendant, because he dislikes what this scientist believes to be true.







As I wrote to you, very powerful social forces are against me, but so are also many for me.




I am looking forward to seeing you.




31 May 1954




Observatory seems to return to normal. I was able to stay and work there for many hours, even in bad weather, without discomfort.




I am slowly preparing myself and my environment for orgonometric math work. The old chart and calculations of 10 years ago are coming forth. By correcting, retracing some of the faded numbers I am getting again acquainted with them.




6 June 1954




I wonder how the Judge will decide June 14th on his own former decision. Here is an occasion to show one’s value of structure. It takes more to upset one’s own decision than it takes to upset someone else’s life work. This sounds so banal a truth that I feel embarrassed to mention it. Did the Judge read by now my “Response”? Did he compare the FDA complaint with the factual evidence in the literature? In any case he resumed the case, reinstated something he had considered a closed book. Will procedural compulsion hamstring his knowing the truth?




14 June 1954




The Fifth Annual Meeting of the Wilhelm Reich Foundation was held briefly yesterday with the main goal to keep the WRF suspended for another year until things clear up with the present trustees, who have all formally resigned, still carrying on the job of administration.




According to Dr. Baker, and a confirmation by Mr. Haydon, the lawyers of the FDA have assured the physicians in New York area that they would be unmolested; that no more investigations would be made, that they were only “out after WR” to stop all his activities; that in 

New York the accumulators could be further used in medicine without interference

.




PREPOSTEROUS!




NOW, WHAT NONSENSE IS THIS AGAIN?




Either the orgone accumulator is a fraud, then it is so in Maine, at Orgonon, and in New York and it should be prosecuted. OR, it is NO fraud, then it should be freed from the nuisance interference right away and everywhere.




This kind of dealing is characteristic of bad American deals and OF BAD GOVERNMENT in general. Again the 

fact

 does not count; the 

truth

 does not count; the true motive is not what it pretended to be; the true motive is killing the victim by all means, just as I have described it in 

The Murder of Christ

.




But this is not “AMERICA” as the ghastly freedom peddler would now say in order to boost HIS ego. Neither is it capitalist, or communist, and anything of this kind. It is plain human sickness of the emotional structure. They just don’t like the orgone energy discovery; they hate it just as every other neurotic organism does; they use their governmental position to serve their personal emotional ends; and this is what must become the first task of a true mental hygiene operation en masse: ERADICATON BY RATIONAL AND UNREVENGEFUL MEANS SUCH PRACTICES OF EP in Governmental disguise.




Today Haydon has a hearing in Portland before Judge Clifford on the dismissal of the complaint.




WHY in devil’s name don’t they use the truth to fight evil? Why only tactics? I had that problem before me fourty years ago already—It is their twisted structure—This seems to be the final answer.




30 June 1954




WE EXPECT THE COURT DECISION any day now. The 14 days were over on Saturday. Haydon did a good job on his briefs, excepting, I believe, slowly (it is always so slow) my basic position in the case against the criminal conspiracy against orgonomy. With conspiracy I mean the hiddenness, the sneaky procedures, the use of slander, the obvious absence of any honest will to find the truth, the using of court action to defame.




 




The status of this conspiracy did not preclude Reich’s concern over the planet’s growing desertification, or weaken his resolve to understand and reduce it. However, a number of questions would have to be answered before any desert operation could be laid out. One had to know the main direction of the orgone energy flow with respect to ocean shores, the main wind directions, the distribution of precipitation in inches per year, and the character of desert growth and soil. It was also important to ascertain whether government assistance and the cooperation of agricultural departments could be secured and how the entire operation would be financed.




In March 1954, Reich sent Robert McCullough to Yuma, Arizona, on a month-long exploratory trip to observe various phenomena on actual, established deserts that had been recognized theoretically as stages in desert development in Maine, and to determine the effectiveness of a single cloudbuster in such a desert environment and the possibility of DOR removal.




Yuma had been chosen as the research area because of its extreme aridity, proximity to a good stream to draw into, the Colorado River, and a large water surface, the Gulf of California, but the pressure of many planes in the air from a local jet trainer base led him to investigate other sites in Arizona.




In a letter to McCullough written on March 31, Reich said, “Should you be able to establish clearly that DOR clouds can definitely be moved and breezes and clouds can be formed, then you have fulfilled your task, even if no rain has occurred.”




26 July 1954




The decision was reached by the Orgone Institute to proceed with Oranur Weather Control operations in an attempt to check the tendency for desert development which threatens the major portion of the U.S.A. Burning heat, drought, and dryness, caused by DOR Clouds extended over most of the nation with the lower two thirds of the country suffering from severe drought. The emergency was pressing. It was feared that the situation might get out of hand if no measures were taken. This situation dictated the decision by Orgone Institute to proceed.




Notification of the Orgone Institute’s decision to act in this emergency was sent by registered letter to the governors of the following states: New York, New Jersey, Pennsylvania, Missouri, Arkansas, Oklahoma, and Texas.







28 July 1954




Judge Clifford must be in trouble. We expected the lifting of the Injunction already two weeks ago. As a judge, one must not make such a mistake as to issue an injunction without having read it, or knowing what it is all about.




On August 5th books will go out again to the public, according to my order. No accumulators will be shipped in interstate commerce, to keep strictly within the law. Thus no “labeling” can be attached to our literature.




31 July 1954




NO DECISION YET from Portland. The Judge does not seem to know what to do.




To the Board of Trustees of the Wilhelm

 Reich Foundation and Orgone Institute

 Research Laboratories, Inc.




28 August 1954




My dear Colleagues:




I would like to make the following suggestion with regard to possible solution of the apparently stalemated legal situation. I believe that the case of the conspirators against my discovery is practically dead. However, the injunction operates at present on its own force, as it were. Also, any pestilent character may in the future refer to the injunction if he so pleases. The legal tangle should therefore be resolved.




First

: We could test the constitutionality of such an injunction. As you know, it was obtained by the instigators of the conspiracy only through my non-appearance in court. As you also know the acting judge had not even read the text of the injunction before he signed it, according to one report. To some, it would seem worthwhile to test such justice in court by simply breaking the injunction and risk a contempt of court charge. I personally would hesitate to choose this way.




Second

: Someone among you as the total body of the trustees as a group could ask the attorney of the complaint, or the judge himself 

whether the injunction still stands

. The intervening briefs have been filed more than three months ago, and more than two months have passed since Judge Clifford promised the decision. We all feel that the case of the conspirators against us is dead, but the legal situation is not, and such an inquiry could possibly solve the tangle. However, I personally would hesitate to ask the representative of the complaint, who built his case against us on a clear-cut conspirational background, for permission to send out our honest and good literature.




Third

: Possibly the most rational way would be the following to end the deadlock to the satisfaction of all concerned and with the least possible noise making.




A certain date could be determined when all activities presently under injunction could be resumed without asking anyone for permission to do so. However, we would inform the Acting Federal Judge Clifford of the District of Maine of our plan and would give him the opportunity to veto such action. We could set a date until which time we would wait for his answer in case he has any objections. If no answer would be forthcoming at this date, we would assume that no objections were raised to our procedure.




I suggest you consider these three points very carefully to reach a decision as to which would be best worded to break the legalistic deadlock.




To Grethe Hoff




Monday 13 September 1954




My Greta, dear

*

:




Right at this moment, a few hours after my return from Bangor, I feel as if I wanted to be carried away by my deep desire to ascertain 

my own

 right to some happiness, the same right I have so long and so keenly defended for others. I feel unhappy of not being more reckless, as reckless as any other man would be in my place, just asserting myself in what I want: coming home to 

my

 harbor as you put it. To forget all obligations to situations long passed, to duties freely taken upon myself, yet unable freely to drop them as I would love to do at this moment—to take my car, some money, my happiness with me and simply go away, far, very far away, 

with you

. I feel exactly that it would be right, doubtless, and THE THING to do.




It is not my tasks that keep me from doing so; I can do my job anywhere on this planet. It is not lack of decisiveness; I usually obtain what I want. It is not lack of trust in my ability to devote myself anew, to pour my love out once more, to accept the challenge of a new beginning. No. It is, I feel, one thing only that keeps me in check: 

I fear you may become very unhappy living under circumstances as they oppressed my life for so long

. This is the 

true

 obstacle in the way to the fulfillment of the certainty that you were in me for many long years while silence was inner law in my situation as accepted “high priest” of so many devoted men and women.




One does not take a beloved one onto a battered, stormswept ship. One wants her to be safely tucked away on land, the more so since the dangers have increased manyfold, since I am at clearcut war with savage hounds out to kill.




I ask: Could I change the course of my life? Does it not change now on its own from struggling up-hill to enjoying the peak? I think it does.




I read your letters again and again, and I do not trust my senses: That such a sweet being should meet my path once more in my life. I knew it did, of course. But, after many years, it is still not quite real yet, though the two days were beyond any doubt of concrete fulfillment. I jumped once more like the messenger on the wall.

*

 and I made it again. If I could only talk to you now. Should I cause any trouble, please let me know. I shall retire if you so wish. But I refuse to let go of you. You took such lovely hold of me, and the urge to take you to Arizona grows irresistibly. To dare being foolish in full, responsible awareness, what delight that is, though it hurts.




Please let me hear from you, either by letter, or by phone. (239) 7–8 p.m.




29 September 1954




We shall not rush to Arizona in 10–12 days but shall make 4–6 stops to see how Oranur works in various places.

†




18 October 1954




Protocol

 dictated by Dr. Wilhelm Reich on trip from Rangeley, Maine to Tucson, Arizona




Start 7:00 a.m. from Rangeley, Maine.




Note: Buds on birches and strawberry blossoms at Orgonon




DOR heavy 196 miles south of Rangeley.




Boston area clearcut DOR desert.




20 October 1954




Sturbridge, Mass. 68 miles south of Boston.







Observe: Desert development of rocks




Trees brown and bent




CPM 50–100 Erratic










Hartford, Conn. (90 miles S. of Boston) 9:00 a.m. EST










DOR ++++, Air gray




Trees very bad




Bitter




Clouds in irregular bands—covering far stretches of sky, also mottled Emotional difference is crucial between splendid isolation in tower and being in center of misery










New Haven, Conn.










CPM 100–200 erratic




Gas station attendant had noted drying trees










Westport, Conn. (50 miles from NY)










Rocks severely attacked




Trees move




Color more blueblack







21 October 1954




First impression view of Washington DC:







a. Functional




b. Integrated




c. Harmonious with exception of Navy Building




d. Architecturally perfect with grouping of 

Idea

, Washington, Lincoln, Jefferson










People of US–World




But still no knowledge of EP in people—of difference between man as 

principle—

and man as 

is

.




I wished I were 20 years younger with my true experience of man.




22 October 1954




Visit to Mt Vernon; Washington living place. Everything reminded me of my childhood.




Arlington Cemetery is deeply moving.




23 October 1954




Trip from Washington to Roanoke, Virginia




In Shenandoah Valley, taking the mountain route, a black DOR ceiling could be seen toward both East and West.




Blue sky above




Black ceiling




Mountain sticking out of blackness




No sparkle in landscape




Trees decayed




Soil yellow—red—clay




26 October 1954




Departure for Texas, 6 a.m.




27 October 1954




3 p.m. at Siesta Motel, Seymour Texas




Everything goes well except the personal. What is awaiting me in Tucson? I do not know. Here, in Texas, the drought situation is most severe. Shall reach Tucson on Friday noon, if all goes well.




31 October 1954




In Tucson:




Arrived here on 29th of October 1954, after 9 days travel time with 3200 miles, without accident.




Found a possible base for our operations in lodge, private oil man house 10 miles north of Tucson.




We finally arrived at a kind of new home, the house of a Mr. Thompson who is in Florida. Three hundred dollars per month with excellent facilities: observation deck, laboratory facilities, big study, several bedrooms, garage—all recommended by Tucson Bank Trust Company. Tomorrow my truck is coming with McCullough.




McCullough will live in tent. I shall often sleep on deck.




1 November 1954




Desert is doubtless not static, but 

a process of dying and reaction against dying in various stages

.




 







DOR Attack:










Original vegetation dies, decays, reacts with own lush growth.




Trees bend, bionously disintegrate.




Drought, water wells dry out surface




Soil dries out, but comes back easily




Rocks disintegrate—reorganize










2. DOR Attack

:










Soil cakes, becomes fissury




Rocks decay to gray or red clay




“Red sands” begin to show




Reaction: development of loam from clay (of rock + Melanor: Still fruit bearing




Beginning of DOR ceiling (Pennsylvania 1954)










3. 

DOR Attack










Soil, caked, turns into dry “sand”—still reversal




Mountains are eaten up




Melanor eats mountains







3 November 1954




First three draws of DOR yesterday, today. Effects nearly immediate.







10–15 minutes clear sky




Mountainsides “greening” while the survey is done.




Green grass blades over formerly sandy patches




DOR dis.







To Michael Silvert, M.D.




5 November 1954




Dear Dr. Silvert:




Our establishment here in Tucson is near completion. Our address is Magee Road, Route 6, Box 281, Tucson Arizona, and the telephone is Tucson 3-8263. I would appreciate it if you would report about every two weeks of major events in your region. I also expect that you have sent already the remainder of the available October money by check to us here. Make the check out, I repeat, to the Orgone Institute Research Laboratories, Inc., OROP Desert account signed by you as treasurer. Please do not fail to send the $300.00 check to Tom Ross at Orgonon about the 25th or 26th of each month, and the rest of the available money again by check after the first to Moise who will deposit it on the account in Tucson. It appears as if the amount of $2000.00 per month should cover all operations and subsistence.




8 November 1954




We had achieved a cloud blanket yesterday, Nov. 7. Then, feeling that a DOR bank to S.W. was obstructing the incoming moisture we traveled and drew while traveling. 4 p.m. heavy clouds were in sky. 5:30 Appr. These clouds cleared fully.




A Core ship appeared over N end of Mt. Catalina and swiftly followed this path.







It had not been there the night before.




It was certainly a space machine since it traveled unlike a planet. (see above sketch.)




Today all work we have done seems deliberately undone:







No clouds in sky




Severe DOR blanket, as seen in Pennsylvania, sticking to ground low. (Only Mt Catalina is still free)




After early 35 minute draw DOR removed right away, mountains to South and West very severely veiled.







The war between OR and Core men is on.




To Grethe Hoff




18 November 1954




Grethe, my dear:




I am happy that I can write now to you. The happiness is rather selfish. In my emotional and intellectual loneliness I have always longed for someone who without distortion and structurally immediate, would be capable of listening to what I have to tell. I said before it would be selfish—to the extent that I wish to ask you to regard these letters as my private, personal communications to you, in other words, as confidential. I told you some time ago that the cosmic functions I am dealing with are the same which, in a distorted or dangerous form, appear in the sensations and fantasies also in the hallucinations of schizophrenics. This was the basic reason why a few psychoanalysts who hated my work or feared it tried to destroy me twenty years ago, interpreting my descriptions of the orgonotic streamings as schizophrenic.




Now you know well what I am dealing with today, with material which to a much higher degree frightens the armored Babbitt and forces him to do away with it all, i.e. with the most burning, most crucial problem facing humanity today, a problem which harassed highly responsible top men of the American Air Force for years. Briefly, the DESERT problem which I am devoting myself to, is, as you well know, identical with the menace facing us from outer space. Not only is this beyond any doubt; it is more: I or we are criminally negligent in not pursuing this problem as we should, with vigor, organization, keen, searching spirits and resolution to win this battle which I termed a few weeks ago “The Planetary Valley Forge.” I did not search this task out; it searched me out as it were.




I remembered at this moment with great love and satisfaction that in the beginning of the DOR emergency in early 1951 and 1952 you were the only one at Orgonon who in a simple, matter of fact manner took my urgent warnings about the DOR sickness and the blackening rocks to Health Commissioner Stevens. I never had the slightest feeling that you regarded my communications as even out of the ordinary. Shortly, you were wonderful while I had to fight not only the outer riddles of a new unheard of fact, but also the hatred and the suspicion of insanity which came my way on the part of several of my assistants. Black DOR WITHIN the human organism and black DOR WITHOUT in nature had thus united or merged to make life miserable for years. I am not complaining now in the least. On the contrary I feel proud in having survived the period 1951–52; I am at this very moment tingling with excitement to be able to tell it now to a dear friend. I would do it again if I had to. And I want you to preserve these historic facts for me and for the historians who are bound to come onto this scene and pick them up. You did not know what you promised when I asked whether I could write letters to you on my work here. Now I can tell: you are going to receive, in installments, the history or 

some

 history of the battle at The Planetary Valley Forge. I know you will not shrink away now since you did not shrink away in 1952 from telling an American health commissioner about that “crazy idea” the BLACKENING ROCKS in Maine. Should you feel that you do not wish to receive such material, please, 

DO

 let me know about it, and I shall cease writing to you. Most of the story is unpublishable at present. It would make excellent alibi material in the hands of the haters of my work. However, at present, if nothing changes, my position in the world, including with my foes, is like steel. Nothing can shake it since I hold the key to the Functional Law of Nature in my hands.




Am I too serious, or too solemn? I do not think so. If I could do at this very moment what I wish to do it would be playing tennis, or drinking a good cocktail with you, or having a jolly time with some good friends here, or just playing catch-ball with little friend Peter Reich. (By the way, he hugged me again for the first time in a long while the other day. He had been mad at me for having lost me as a friend for a while). How wonderful it would be if I could transplant you right now 3200 miles to the Southwest onto the veranda where I am writing these lines.




To Grethe Hoff




November 14 1954




Grethe, my dear one:




I was resting after a sleepless night on the observation deck when I was called to the phone. I was excited and happy that you had called. I immediately understood that you had felt what had happened here during the past few days: I had succeeded slightly in detaching myself from you. Not because I do not love you, but because it was so very painful to continuously think about you, feeling you close, wanting you badly in utter frustration, facing the uncertainty of the situation. The next most important thing is to solve your situation and mine, as soon as possible. Here are the facts:




I feel you exaggerate the problem of “uprooting the child.”

*

 It has happened many times with many mothers that they had to change domicile, or that they went on a trip, or infants were carried from place to place. I feel what you really fear is that once you pull out of your present situation there may be no return. Now, if this is so, then the answer is quite clear: if a human situation is not strong enough to withstand a short separation, then it is very problematic, to say the least. Even medically separation is the only remedy, to find out from a distance as it were.




I would suggest that you consider taking a three month vacation with the child, being our guest here, with help in cleaning and kitchen available, ample space for the child to roam around in sunshine and good weather, for you to take a long look at yourself, for us to enjoy your pleasant company. I do not think that anyone sane of mind could have any objection to this. You do not make any final decisions with this step. Nothing is irrevocably pinned down. You would rest and find yourself again. I am certain the boy will gain much more from your easy relaxation than ever from a tensed situation. I am not pleading for myself. I may be on duty away a lot of the time, or I may not. Anything may come about my way.




If you do not mind, I must put in a word for M.S. [Myron Sharaf] He would benefit too from such a situation, finding himself as it were. (Please do not tell him this here.) Your great conscientiousness may have more entangled than solved the situation, paradox as this may sound. To be away always clears the air, and you are not bound in any way if you enjoy a few months in Arizona. Also you avoid having to face the whole of the question at once and under so much pressure. Why not keep things pending freely for any turn for a while? Because you are afraid it might rip you away completely from your present situation? If it does, then what? Then it is in your path, and staying on does not eliminate, it increases the negative pressure. I feel it is far more your sense of obligation and your bad conscience which pins you down. But, Greta dear, you’ve tried so hard for such a long time. You have done more than anyone would have expected you to do.




All this sounds so very diplomatic or round about. Of course I want you to be here as I want nothing else in this world right now. Of course I need you, and you me. But you know well that it would not work out with me if I felt you are still somebody else’s woman. And it may work out differently if you are close here a while and see me living at close range. Anything is possible, nothing is fixed beforehand, eternally. You do not 

have to

 risk your child. You do not have to be my wife right away and forever. If you are mine, basically, you will be mine, no matter how you try to escape it; only with less agony and heartbreak. Maybe this vacation will only be a transition to either back to Boston in early Spring or somewhere else. Certainly it would be better than the present compulsive, damaging, painful, frustrating agony.




In short, what I’m trying to do here now is to relieve some pressure off your chest: You do not have to leave your husband forever, or rob the child of its father. You do not have to do anything, not even to love me.




Now I would love to stop being the older, wiser friend and physician. I would like to be myself again with you:




I love you, Greta. There is no doubt about it. I was miserable for several days and was about to do some foolish things. I warn you. Be prepared to find a monster if you and when you will know me at close range. I can scream in anger, and be rough, inpatient, intolerant, reckless, ruthless, single minded. But also I am, I must confess and many said so, rather charming and lovely—You know, many young women are looking at me the certain way when I enter a restaurant or a shop. I like it, to be frank about it. It warms the inside up. Unfortunately, I am not easy-handed at taking advantage.




It is nearly midnight. Moise and McCullough have just drawn from an object. We were sitting and discussing the terrific task. (How much more would I enjoy it if I had you here right now and forever.) We had already success in observation, and changes in surroundings enough to warrant return home. (Young new moss on granite formerly bare.) But I do not wish to spend the Maine winter alone at Orgonon. Peter and others long for Maine. But the steady sunny warmth here is very pleasant. Your Peter could bake in the sun as much as he pleases.




I must close now. It is midnight.




15 November 1954




Summary of draw from E [a]

*




Don’t look up astronomical chart. Get the experiential feel of difference between star and objects













Star










  










Objects
















1. Steel blue













  










yellow to red
















2. Large do pulsate little













  










pulsate strongly, irregularly
















3. Move in 

strict

 Galactic pathways













  










Move also in Galactic pathways but also irregularly among stars dimming, fading extinction, return strong wobbling removal, smaller
















4. Upon draw, slight dimming, but no fading













  










 
















5. ________________













  










Look more like planets Jupiter, Mars, Venus
















6. No emotional reaction except beauty













  










Sudden or gradual onset of 

Draw

 feelings, nausea, dryness
















21 November 1954




Summary, so far:




 







1. The hypothesis in 

CORE

, 1954, of connection between CM [Core men] and drought seems (seems only) confirmed, beginning to form a theory.




2. OROP [ORgone OPeration] Desert required:










a. Observation of special functions




b. DOR knowledge and removal




c. Space ship knowledge and draw due to orgonomic potential




d. Practical combination of

 DOR removal

 CM removal

 Moisture draw, conversion from DOR 

 high level










2. It is far more important to obtain data than to make rain over desert. I learned:










a. DOR 

 Moisture 

 H

2

O




b. Desert 

 green without rain




c. Soil has first to soak up moisture from atmosphere




d. Atmospheric moisture has to increase







 




27 November 1954




Microscopic confirmation of L

E

 

 H

2

O [Le = life energy]




In the ORe work it was learned that L

E

 drowns in water direct, but soaks H

2

O +++ when in vicinity.




In OROP Ea Tucson I resisted the temptation to draw in moisture from Pacific immediately. Instead I drew moisture slowly by DOR removal. Greening of landscape was the result.




Now microscopically: I took caked dried out soil and put part 

into

 H

2

O, part 

near

 H

2

O, The soil 

in

 H

2

O showed swelling to bions. The soil near H

2

O developed plant-like germ protozoa 

toward

 the moisture like this:







Is this formation the beginning of 

primal

 germination.




It strikes me that most desert vegetation has this form of 

stretching

. Also all vegetation seems equipped with 

needles

 as if to protect itself against DOR that dries it out, e.g. cactus.




7 December 1954




McCullough drew from Ea at 11 a.m. He soon complained about “it coming down strong” and “sour.” He felt crippling in right leg. (The radio at that time gave strong “static” continuous noise on 

all

 bands.) Right side seemed paralyzed. However, pupillar reflexes, patellar, sensitivity, was not impaired. Only motility (grasp of a hand) was slightly weaker, yielding on will power. He recovered soon.




8 December 1954




McCullough came in sick, hardly able to move right leg; little motility in right arm and hand.




A warm, soaking bath and a warm tea and Southern Comfort removed to great extant these symptoms of a progressive anorgonia of the right side.




Diagnosis: 

Functional hemiplegic anorgonia




10 December 1954




It rained tonight in Southern Arizona Tucson region for two hours in Oranur way [gentle rain] with 0.33 inches of rain. Beautiful DOR free morning.




Clouds from East cover sky again tonight.




I am worried: rain may drown primary desert vegetation as does H

2

O with







It may well be that 

: has soaked H

2

O at its own rate until it becomes grass, which can take rain. Thus:







a. Rain for germinating rooted secondary vegetation




b. Moisture at distance for primordial vegetation.







Therefore rain may drown primary vegetation




6:15 p.m.




It is raining in the S. Arizona desert steadily, gently—the Oranur way:




The first chapter of OROP Desert has been written—closed, the second may begin.




We are taking a rest over the weekend.




To Charles Haydon




30 December 30 1954




CONFIRMATION COPY




ALLEGED FDA INSPECTOR HOLLIDAY FROM LOS ANGELES ACCOMPANIED BY FRIEND US MARSHALL POTTER NOT ON OFFICIAL MISSION VISITED LITTLE ORGONON

*

 NEAR TUCSON WAS REFUSED APPOINTMENT FOR WELL KNOWN REASONS OF SUBVERSION CRIMINAL CONSPIRACY AND LACK OF JURISDICTION. PLEASE INQURE LEGAL RIGHTS OF SUCH INTRUSION WHILE RECOURSE PENDING IN HIGHER COURT.

1955
















2 January 1955




I am somewhat worried about what the HIGS

*

 of the FDA may try to do now, since I refused to see their Holliday, with recourse pending in higher court.




3 January 1955




Will they still try to kill me? And succeed?




3 January 1955




To Charles Haydon




Dear Mr. Haydon:




This letter is to add to my telegram of December 30th regarding the FDA intrusion. The situation was basically characterized by:




(1). Disorientation of the alleged inspector. When asked whether he came on court order he said “no.”




(2). Asked what he wanted to inspect he answered, “everything”; which would naturally include my early personal diaries, my love life, my poems, my thoughts, Orgonometric equations, my ideas about space travel and more of such things. Furthermore he did not even ask whether Little Orgonon had anything to do with the manufacturing or distribution of Orgone Energy Accumulators. The answer would have been no. The Tucson operation base has nothing to do with any object of the injunction and is fully outside its temporary jurisdiction.




 




cc. Commander




Air Force Technical Intelligence Center




Wright-Patterson AFB




Dayton, Ohio




Director




Federal Bureau of Investigation




Washington, D.C.




4 January 1955

 10 p.m.




I saw tonight the Martin Luther film.

*

 What a man! Good performance. It is always the same story: The HIG and HOG

†

 against the truth.




But “Truth” is hard to earn and still harder to protect and to maintain.




To Elsworth F. Baker, M.D.




25 January 1955




Dear Dr. Baker:




I have received your letter + notes on DOR + the films and meter; many thanks—




Dr. Silvert wrote he has taken all books and OR accus away from Orgonon.

‡

 Will a committee of physicians be found to administer the books and accums?




It is well advised to have the burning possibly be done away from Orgonon. A meeting with the agents of pharmaceutic chemistry may be dangerous.




To Dr. Hoff




30 January 1955




My dear Dr. Hoff

§




Grethe has shown me the last letter you wrote to her regarding our friendship and our plans for the future. I appreciated your candid manner very much. Grethe is taking a long, well deserved vacation

*

, and Peter II, as we call him, in contradistinction to my “big” Peter, is  growing apace, developing all the stronger qualities of his lovely mother. It is a great pleasure to see him growing, and to witness the vanishing of some conflicts which had made Grethe’s life somewhat difficult.




As you may know, we are here working at a major research project (drawing moisture inland from the ocean into the desert and removing the black clouds which have lately oppressed our continent). We are combining work and rest as well as pleasure and are very happy in our little community.




I suggested to Grethe to let matters develop slowly and organically, to let her future grow as her good sense directs it. She will probably write you more about it herself.




To William Steig




10 February 1955




Dear Mr. Steig:




I have just sent the telegram asking you not to publish any facts or claims regarding my desert work. It is 

too much

, 

too new

, 

too incredible for average people to swallow

. You may say, however, that the desert work is extremely successful, that a publication is in prospect, that Maine laboratory findings have been confirmed regarding DOR and Drought; that it will take much effort, skill, patience, 

and money

 to get the research work through completely and responsibly, that several long drawn—out soaking rains have been achieved (referring to Arizona News of January 1955).




Please stress the problems rather than the final success. We are meeting with ranchers and cattlemen here regarding continuation of our work.




If I can be of any further help to you, please call on me. We are all happy about the great success, but with the success more and tougher responsibilities emerge, esp. with regard to the spaceship problem.




25 February 1955




Decision what to do next is hard and risky.




Staying in SWest, build up anew?




Withdrawing to silence at Orgonon?




Leaving Moise here in Tucson with job to continue on restricted basis?




Eva, Peter 

 Hancock?




WR 

 Orgonon.




2 March 1955

 1:40 a.m.




I am tired, on the whole. Man has vanished from my horizon, though I still love my boy and daughter.




I wonder whether I shall have enough enthusiasm to finish my orgonometric equations.




I seem to have won the battle with government agency FDA out of court. But “then what”? or “for what”? It was a nuisance to begin with.




23 March 1955




We are concluding operations as of end of March with last Oranur rain on March 26.




To Gethe Hoff




20 April 1955




My deeply beloved Grethe:




When I left Boston early yesterday morning, I was desperate. I understood both your desire to be on your own, and my fear to go back into that abysmal lonesomeness at Orgonon. I felt that I would not be able to take it after the seven months of good companionship and family life. I dreaded to go back to my eagle’s nest; and I dreaded the feeling to have been abandoned by everyone, and to have to take care of myself. I was miserable all the way home until I entered the lower house and later the observatory. I was, after the numerous contacts with people in the world, overwhelmed by the grandiose, I dare say majestic beauty of Orgonon. The observatory, far from frightening me, gave me instantly the feeling of belonging to an Olympus of Science. I did not feel deadly silence as I had feared, but the discrete hum in a deep forest. My paintings brought me back to myself; and as you know I like myself and being with myself. I feel only dislike for myself when I am forced to meet people 

their

 way.




After having spent several hours in the observatory (which still carries the smell of Oranur) I went to sleep having boiled a soup with some meat in it. And I woke up with the sudden clarity I know so well in creative moments.




My first letter to you already had pointed out the factual obstacle in the way of our love. Your vacillations all through these months were, as I now saw, not due to neurosis but to the severe dilemma in you of wanting to live with me, but not wanting or being able to live OUTSIDE the trap

*

 at Orgonon. These several months had brought me into the trap too and I loved it, such as the Green Lantern

†

. In contrast, eating food cooked by myself seemed preposterous and unbearable. In the face of 20,000 miles of travel, so much of it with you, seemed to make the rich silence at Orgonon unacceptable. Yet, this morning I had transcended this feeling; I knew now that as long as you were attached to the usual way of life you would not stand living at Orgonon; that you would get restless frequently and want “to go to Boston” with all it represents, not so much in reality but in all your dreams, “Harvard,” and “visiting friends” and “being with people,” etc. I do not say this to deprecate it. I want it myself, but not forever. You want and know well my silent tower where my thoughts and my clean emotions are safe, and this is why you love me too, but you do not want it, at present, forever. You are simply not ready for it. And I do not want, because I fear it, to submerge in the usual way. In other words, 

I want to be alone

.




Unless you, my darling, will or can reach the point where the life in the usual sense appears to you as what it really is, and where the desire for living my way becomes a necessity, coming to live at Orgonon for good would be inadvisable. It would kill our love and may even create hatred. It appears thus, that your wish to be on your own was rational, that to go to Oslo is prudent, that to see for yourself, as it were, will help solve the problem of where you really belong.




And how long would that take? There is little doubt about the extraordinary, outside of the trap nature in you. But if it took me 20 years to realize my way, how long would it take you?




I am glad I realized all this. I am happy being back again in my eagle’s nest with its clean air and emotion. I may dip into the trap a few times more, but I know where I belong. I am going to build up Orgonon further, buying the beautiful oak set and much more stuff. I overcame the feeling of not being able to live without the settings of an unhappy humanity. The isolation is not mine; it is all EVERYBODYS.




23 April 1955




I am alone. Being without a beloved woman is hardest of all. Still smarting from the many inflicted injuries. It hurts so badly. At times death would be welcome.




24 April 1955




This loneliness is beautiful, majestic, but sad like mountain peak in the clouds, and I the lover of humans, of women, of gaiety, of good talking together am sitting majestically on top of the peak on the mountain. I am headed for a sad end indeed.




To Gethe Hoff




25 April 1955




Grethe:




After having succeeded last night in detaching myself from you enough to take a final breakup of our love with calmness and the certitude that I shall find another kind of Grethe, it was possible for me to be less absolute, less stiff-necked and to call you this noon again. I wanted to know how you were, how it all affected you; I know better maybe than you what kind of battle you are fighting now with yourself, having been thrown into this basic battle to which I had to submit for three decades. And I was happy to feel at the phone that you were calm, that your conflict was a rational one and as such experienced by you, that you are fighting now for 

YOUR true

 way and not for a marriage only. I was also happy that I succeeded in extricating myself from the to and fro’s of the past months of vacillation, uncertainty, waiting, despairing, putting the flag up and then down again, getting mad and repenting, and so forth, endlessly. Now, it seems, the conflict will be resolved one way or another for you. You will return to where you came from or you will proceed toward a development in you which, in your case, would certainly not be small. Your apparent pettiness at times only reflects your sense of your great potentialities seen in the mirror of fear. I know this from myself well enough.




You see now that all the hesitancies had nothing whatever to do with your marriage, or your child, or “Boston,” or other such things. They were the expression of a NO which is common to all mankind as far as life 

outside the trap

 is concerned, and it hit me specially only because I am the most clear cut exponent, practically, of this life of the mind outside the trap.




I had to detach myself because I have hard work to do, and this tearing and wearing simply could not go on. In a way, I am glad to be alone now to consolidate my great gains in Arizona without major conflicts at home.




If, as I still believe, you were and are my mate, my natural woman, and if you find your way in this direction, the future may harbor the hope of a happy life together without conflict of such dimensions. Most important, as I said, is now that you find 

yourself

 no matter what the outcome, no matter what happens to us.




As far as I am concerned, I believe that my way will lead further and further away from the petty and usual. I see ahead of myself great tasks which will carry me very far. I need a home of course, and I want children, even if in a “home on wheels.” I do not know at present where and when, with whom I shall find it. I had hoped so very much, and reality has to such a great extent realized this hope, that it would be 

you

. But I shall no longer fight for you, or rather, against your “no.” Neither shall I “wait” while you decide. I do not wish to be kept pending, as it were, like a little man on a thread.




But as a friend, as a man who knows you so very well, and as a physician I certainly shall be there for you. The rest must remain quite uncertain.

*




Be yourself, Grethe; I admire your will for truth




To Elsworth F. Baker, M.D.




18 May 1955




Dear Dr. Baker:




Would you be kind enough to transmit the following message to whoever carries the responsibility for your legal action against the FDA.

†

 It should be obvious by now that the issue before the courts of the USA is new in its substance, that the statute books carry no provisions regarding the Emotional Plague. I would like to summarize briefly the true issues coming up before the Supreme Court:




1. Is it legally, morally and factually, if 

truth

 should prevail, any longer permissible that THE MOTIVE of a complaint should be kept out of the proceedings? In case of murder the motive is decisive. So it is, too, in the case of the assault of psychopaths acting and posing as bona fide government agents.




2. If the motive can no longer be overlooked, the question immerges whether it is any longer possible to exclude the 

irrational

 element from the legal procedure. Since the irrationality in human behavior is today acknowledged as powerfully active, it no longer can be excluded from the law, if justice be done.




3. Is it permissible legally and morally that sick individuals, motivated by their own anxieties, very well known to us as physicians from our daily medical practice, should drag what they dislike into court, into a well prepared trap, under the pretext and disguise of bona fide government action?




4. Is it legally and morally excusable that such activity be taken over, even if innocently, by a court of justice, thus putting itself at the disposal of illegally motivated complaints? Is it, further more, admissible that such court action follow the line laid out by political, subversive hoodlums, subversive to a foreign power, in the execution of the task of killing (in the USA) for mere political reasons, a crucial discovery in medicine and natural science?

*




5. Is it true justice to omit the factual situation, to restrict the total issue to procedural, empty legalism, to force the public to believe that a device is 

fraudulent

 in the hands of A, but perfectly legal and not fraudulent in the hands of B, C, D, E, etc.? Is it sound judgment to follow in this screaming contradiction the criminal conspirators who are out to kill only the person WR (“ad personam”)? Is the law to serve the facts, or are the facts to be distorted, falsified, and otherwise distorted to serve empty procedural compulsion?




6. Is it morally and legally permissible that newly discovered facts be subjected to laws written into the statute book 

before

 there existed any knowledge of the nature of the unknown natural phenomena?




7. Has a court of law the right and authority to pass judgment on the validity of bona fide basic research in new territory? Has established opinion the right to decide what is 

new

 basic knowledge? Have established commercial interests the legal and moral right to kill discoveries by subversive, conspirational means?




8. Has a natural scientist the right to refuse to fall prey to such criminal activities on the part of emotionally sick individuals, by not appearing in court and by putting his trust into the judge’s judgment? Or should the killing of scientists and pioneers by evil men continue forever unchallenged, unabated?




These are only a few of the issues before the Supreme Court of the USA, and not only whether interests of a few physicians have been curtailed.




Orgonon, 6 June 1955




This afternoon came up accompanied by Deputy Marshall (William H.) from Maine District, US Court, Portland, a Harris Kenyon and Hyman Hiss alleged bona fide Inspectors of the “Federal Security Agency” (which does not exist any more). The question, whether I have executed the Injunction. I did not accept them since they are conscious or unconscious tools of Moscow spies. I saw only Marshall Doherty and I told him the following:







I have no power whatever to execute the injunction. I have no power to execute what they have dreamed up as alleged fact.




I cannot possibly order publishing houses in England, Argentina, France, etc. who own rights, to burn the books.




I never owned any accumulators, except forty which were sold non-medically.




There is nothing at Orgonon that concerns the FDA

. The books are under the supervision of physicians. I do not own them; I never owned or sold any books.




Several books were published long before the discovery of the Orgone Energy.




The physicians and others are in charge of the medical OR accumulators.




I deny the FDA authority on the Cosmic Orgone Energy. It was discovered long after the Food and Drug act was enacted.




I have not heard and do not possess any document which would invalidate the last document I received, namely the stay of execution of Injunction of January 18th, 1955, signed by Judge Clifford. Neither the agents not the Marshall were in possession of any document or warrant to contradict the stay. I have handed the matter over to Mr. Charles Haydon in New York, the lawyer for the intervening physicians.







Witness:




William Moise




Grethe Hoff




 




On June 17, Inspector Kenyon and another FDA representative made a surprise visit to Orgonon caretaker Tom Ross. A protocol of that visit describes its purpose and effect.




Board of Social Psychiatry

 Protocol




20 June 1955




Orgonon




Rangeley Maine




Wilhelm Reich (WR)—Mr. Ross will you tell about the visit of FDA Inspector Kenyon to you, what happened, the facts, as well as you can so that we may get the truth on paper? Are you willing to do this?




Tom Ross (TR)—Yes. I’m little but I learned a lot, thinking how they 

brainwashed

 me; a little brainwash that can grow big.




 




WR—They frightened you. They had no right.




TR—It dawned on me. I had read stories but had thought nothing of it. Then I felt it my duty to tell you, otherwise I didn’t feel I should go on working for you.




WR—Will you tell what happened?




 




TR—On Friday June 17th, in the evening after dinner when it was nearly dark, a car drove into my place. I heard the car and walked out. There was Kenyon and another FDA fellow, a new fellow, I don’t remember his name.




Kenyon to TR—Can I talk with you a minute?




TR—Sure.




(WR—Did you feel bad at this time?)




(TR—No he seemed like a nice fellow. The moment they came in the fear was not great. I had nothing to fear. I had done nothing against the Injunction. I felt they had their rights.)




(WR—If it comes to a court action we want 

to show what a decent man like you goes through

, 

fears

, 

when a man such as Kenyon acts like this.

)




Kenyon—When were the accumulators and books taken away? TR—I don’t remember exactly. It was sometime when the snow was still on.




(Then they told me the date just when they were taken away.)




Kenyon—Were you instructed by Dr. Reich to let anyone take any books or accumulators away?




TR—To the best of my knowledge I got no instructions.




(WR—I didn’t know myself of it.)




TR—I told Kenyon that Dr. Silvert had taken them away.




(WR—Dr. Silvert took them away as a physician. Neither books nor accumulators belong to WR. They are not his property.)




Kenyon—Being a caretaker why should you let someone come in and take things away?




TR—Dr. Silvert belonged to the institute. I never stopped any of the doctors from doing what they did.




(WR—Were you afraid?)




(TR—I didn’t like it, didn’t like to be connected with it. I’m small. Never encountered anything like it.)




Kenyon—Did Dr. Silvert have a key or did he get it from you?




TR—I can’t be exact, don’t remember. The key is there. All of the doctors know where it is kept. I could have opened the door for him but I don’t remember.




(WR—Did you give him the feeling that you were a criminal?)




(TR—I told him that I had done no harm, hadn’t shipped any accumulators or books.)




Kenyon—How many men were there?




TR—Two besides Dr. Silvert.




Kenyon—Did Dr. Silvert order the men to load the stuff?




TR—I might had answered yes, if so it was a lie, because anybody knows that when a truck comes to move something you don’t order them to put stuff on. They ask where it is and go ahead and load it.




Kenyon—How many accumulators were taken away?




TR—I couldn’t answer that. I don’t know.




Kenyon—How many books were taken away?




TR—I couldn’t say.




(WR—How did you feel about this?)




(TR—I felt alright about it. He seemed like a nice fellow.)




Kenyon—I know when they were taken away. I know when the truck was here, the date, the number of pieces. There were three crates. What would you guess such a crate would weigh?




TR—I guessed. Then Kenyon told me that he knew what they weighed and that it was a good guess.




Kenyon—How many accumulators were there? How many would you say, how many would you guess.




TR—I guessed a number. Kenyon then took out a little slip of paper and looked at it and then told me that I had only missed by a few.




Kenyon—Did you tie up any books?




TR—Yes I tied up some books.




Kenyon—Does Dr. Reich own the books?




TR—No, they belong to the Foundation.




Kenyon—It may be that everybody involved will go to jail.




WR—Why didn’t you report this to me right away? Why did you wait until Sunday morning?




TR—I couldn’t see the brainwashing until Sunday morning. After thinking things over I saw it. They asked for the truth and I gave it to them. Then they showed me that they had the answers already. Kenyon tried to get me to say how any accumulators there were, and they confused me to lie to them. I don’t k now how many accumulators there were. It is 

like reading General Dean’s Story

. 

They asked the same questions

. You read those stories and don’t think about it. They did the same thing as in those stories only I thought of it as being small. After I told him the truth, Kenyon tried to entangle me. If he already knew all of the answers why did he ask me? I feel bad about this in the American Government. Now I feel I don’t have to answer at all to Kenyon.




Tom Ross

 Orgonon, Rangeley, Maine.




Recorded by William Moise, 6/20/55




5 July 1955




Rangeley, Maine




Franklin County S.S




Personally appeared before me, Thomas Ross, and said the above statements are true.




HM Beal

 Notary Public




My commission expires March 25, 1960




 




Shortly thereafter, on 15 July 1955, the Wilhelm Reich Foundation, Wilhelm Reich, and Michael Silvert were served an order to appear at the U.S. Court House in Portland, Maine, on 26 July 1955, to show cause why they should not be punished for criminal contempt of the decree of injunction. If the defendants denied that they had disobeyed the injunction, a trial date would be set by the court.




To Judge John D. Clifford




23 July 1955




Dear Judge Clifford:




The matter which is pending before your court is of crucial importance. May I ask your permission to address you briefly during the procedure on July 26. I would like to explain, in a few words, why I did not appear before you in March 1954. It would be helpful if you would kindly let me know by asking me whether I had anything to say.




 




STATEMENT TO COURT AND PRESS IN PORTLAND, MAINE USA—ON JULY 26, 1955 AT THE HEARING ON “CONTEMPT OF COURT” CHARGE AGAINST WILHELM REICH, M.D. AND MICHAEL SILVERT, M.D.




All I have done in the past and my do in the future is being dictated by my responsibilities as a scientist, as a physician, and as a responsible citizen. Permit me to rip open a piece of the IRON CURTAIN that hides the issue here. I am pleading “not guilty,” of course. Guilty of contempt of truth and justice are those who have engineered this conflagration on the public scene, guilty of treason are those who have tried to destroy the Discovery of the Life energy.




The question asked most frequently is: 

WHY DID WILHELM REICH NOT APPEAR IN COURT IN MARCH 1954

. to defend his case? I would like to tell now why I did not appear in court:




At first I was ready to go to court although it was perfectly clear from the complaint of the FDA that this was a well-set trap to kill my discovery and to get me into jail as a fraudulent person. The decision not to appear in court was made when a lawyer pointed our to me that TRUTH IS NOT THE PRIME OBJECTIVE IN AMERICAN COURT PROCEDURES. What counts, he said is the process of LITIGATION. The one who litigates better wins. The truth may or may not come forth in these procedures.




The Injunction itself proves the point:







a) It is unconstitutional.




b) As a fantastic product of sick minds it cannot be carried out.




c) It gives an agency which supervises Foods, Drugs, and Cosmetics power over experimental basic scientific research. In looking through the nature of the trap I have of course denied, on principle, to both court and government the right to decide on matters of basic natural research. These matters can never be decided by litigation.







Now, I am by very nature an experimental research man. I like to solve problems and I thrive emotionally on finding truth. When I heard what this lawyer said, my interest in finding out whether his statement was correct far outweighed the risk I took by not appearing in court. Also, at that early phase, though I knew that I was dealing with traitors to Truth and Justice, I was not prepared to meet the malignancy successfully. At that time I could not know that a few months later several hundred traitors would be cleaned out from the department of Health and Welfare of which the FDA is a branch.




In the meantime a great deal has been found out with the result that I, who has discovered the Life Energy practically, am standing here today accused by traitors of contempt of court. This fact seems to prove the statement correct that only procedure and not the truth counts in American courts.




However this is not the end of the story: Having found out the mechanisms by means of which truth and justice can lose out in two courts before four judges, having furthermore succeeded in finding the link to this mechanism to the Political Plague that besets our social life everywhere, I am now ready to proceed in public to expose the traitors who have shaken in honest, hardworking men the belief that truth and justice prevail in courts of justice.




I wish to state here briefly that this case is only one link, though a crucial one, in a chain of events precipitated in the USA and abroad by Moscow. They have changed their methods in a very dangerous manner. While they are talking peace and bargain 

here

, they are busy there in a quite unsuspected place and with the help of frightened common people, to undermine and finally destroy our trust in each other, our confidence in the workings of decency, our hope and our lives. I am looking forward to the opportunity to reveal what I know about this in public. There is much to learn here.




I am proud to have stood my ground so far. What I have done I would do again in a similar situation. No threat of jail can alter here anything. To yield here would mean no less than to abandon Truth to the practices of the “Beria” type hoodlums, no matter whether Russian or American.




To Frederick F. Fisher Jr.

*




15 September 1955

†




Dear Mr. Fisher:




I have given much thought again to the legal situation; I came to the following conclusion, part of which I have communicated to you:







We are clearly not dealing here with bona fide government nor with any bona fide dispute. We are dealing with a disease, called the Emotional Plague based on irrational activities, called legally “conspiracy.”




The present day laws and procedures do not contain any provisions to cope with 

irrational

 activities and motivations. This is the reason why the case was lost in two courts and would lose, 

inevitably

, in any further merely legalistic procedure.




New laws and procedural rules are required to take irrationalism into the framework of court action. It is my duty as a scientist and social pathologist to try to accomplish this task. It can only be accomplished by revealing fully, relentlessly the true SUBSTANCE and the TRUE MOTIVE and BACKGROUND of this case.




There is, regrettably, no one except myself who is familiar with the factual background of this case. Therefore only I can help to pull the truth to the foreground by questioning witnesses and examining witnesses of the opponent. No lawyer, not thoroughly familiar with the 

factual essence of my life and work

 can ever hope to accomplish this. I had hoped that you or Mr. St. Clair

*

 would be interested in learning, as I am trying to do, what can be done in such a case. I still do not understand your refusal to help with procedural rules and leave the factual procedure to me. I hope you will agree with me if and when you witness the actual operation. Mr. Haydon agreed to help me out with the formal element of legal procedure. I also assume, and hope, that the judge will want to hear the truth.







I shall wait with further decisions until the judge makes his decision as to trial by jury. He has now all opportunity to throw out the case on good grounds, including your legal rebuttal which I have read with great interest.




I shall be in touch with you later on. Would you please handle the response to the reply of the alleged bona fide administration? Please do not hesitate to charge for your services. My motive to mention the financial angle at all was from entirely different reasons.




Telegram to Judge John D. Clifford

†







COPY




WESTERN UNION TEL CO




JUDGE CLIFFORD DISTRICT COURT




PLTD




 




I REQUEST PERMISSION TO EXECUTE MY RIGHT AS US CITIZEN TO FUNCTION AS MY OWN LEGAL COUNSEL IN YOUR COURT AGAINST CRIMINAL CONSPIRACY FDA HAVING DISCHARGED MY LAWYERS FOR LACK OF UNDERSTANDING OF TRUE ISSUES INVOLVED WIRE DECISION COLLECT WILLIAM REICH, M.D.




 




WESTERN




UNION




To Clerk Wilhelm Reich Foundation




14 OCT 1955 357P ME




ASSOCIATE JUSTICE FRANKFURTER OF THE UNITED STATES SUPREME COURT ON 7/17/55 DENIED A STAY IN BAKER ET AL AGAINST THE UNITED STATES. SUPREME COURT DENIED PETITION OF WRIT OF CERTIORARI ON 10/10/55=BRADSHAW MINTENER ASSOCIATE SECRETARY DEPT OF HEALTH EDUCATION AND WELFARE




Charge of Fraud




Hearing—October 18, 1955—Portland, Maine




(Stenogram by H. Skellenger at Hearing, checked against Court Record.)




Dr. Reich: Your Honor, I am not a lawyer. I know nothing about law or law procedures. I know very well that you must not drive on the wrong side of the road. I have asked my lawyer to step out of the case for one reason only—not because he is a bad lawyer, he is a very good one—and that reason is the procedure itself, since it is this procedure which killed the truth, and my whole endeavor from the very beginning, February, 1954, was only to get the truth into this Court. You remember, Your Honor, that I sent you a response when I saw the complaint. I knew from my factual point of view that illegal methods have been used to get the complaint in. I have two basic points in my response: (1) 

Lack of Jurisdiction

 anywhere in basic natural science. 

I denied the right to decide what is truth or not truth in basic natural science to both Court and Government

. If we were to permit lawyers or politically minded people to decide what is right in science, then I believe the future of science would go to the dogs. On July 26, 1955 Hearing in Portland District Court, I explained why that is so and why I have to refuse authority on Basic Science to any Government, and 

especially the FDA

. I don’t know how people who deal with drugs, cosmetics, etc. should obtain the right to judge what basically cosmic orgone energy is. The (2) second point I have raised in the response was the fact of 

conspiracy

. I don’t want to talk here about a political conspiracy. I would like to bring in one point here, with your permission. The way I understand the documents which you have sent to me—they contain misrepresentation of facts perpetrated upon your court. There may be a legal ground to bring this matter here if it is important or crucial to the decision whether jurisdiction rests in this Court or not.




(Judge postpones this second point for hearing Nov. 4th, 1955).




With the 

charge of misrepresentation of facts perpetrated

 upon this honorable Court I don’t think I have much more to say. I have only to add a few words which go beyond that. I have been presented to this Court as a crook, as a swindler. I would like to stress the point of fact. (

interrupted by Judge Clifford, who said that WR’s reputation as an outstanding scientist, honored by the profession, etc. was known

). Then I don’t understand this at all. Thank you.




Wilhelm Reich

 (signed W. Reich “approx. correct”)

 10/22/1955




Motion to Dismiss Amended Information on the Ground of Illegal Misrepresentation of Facts.




EPPO, Case No. 1




Case 1056 and 5003 before First District Court, Portland, Maine, 1954–1955




 




Motion by Counsel for Defense:




To Dismiss Amended Information 5003 on the Ground of Illegal Misrepresentation of Facts.




I respectfully request and move to be heard on factual evidence at the hearing to be held November 4th, 1955, and to show that:







Illegal misrepresentation

 in court of pertinent facts;




Illegal concealment

 from court of pertinent facts;




Illegal procedural maneuvering

 contrary to fact, truth and justice have been perpetrated upon your court, in both Civil Action 1056 and the following Criminal Charge 5003.







Wilhelm Reich, M.D.

 Counsel for Defense

 Orgonon EPPO

 Rangeley, Maine, USA

 October 24, 1955

 Motion denied, Nov. 4, 1955

1956
















It took in depth psychiatry 40 years of study, training, patience, correcting error, convincing oneself that there is at work in man an unconscious mind which determines the conscious activities.




It took in orgonomy 20 years of painstaking work to make the atmospheric energy visible.




It takes further now from 5–10 years to train physicians or scientists in the comprehending and handling of a few orgonotic functions.




How, the discoverer asked himself should it be possible for an overloaded judge to comprehend and meet rationally the unbelievable, the revolutionary in a piece of new knowledge of the future. A discovery to boot which, or will be shown later, has vast conviction for our economy and our total outlook on life.




To Sheldon N. Kowdle

*




27 February 1956




Dear Mr. Kowadlo:




I am late in answering your letter of Jan. 30th. I am well aware of the fact that the human race has known about the existence of a universal energy related to life for many ages. However the basic task of natural science consisted in making this energy useable. This is the sole difference between my work and all preceding knowledge.




To William Steig




4th March 1956




My dear Steig:




Thanks for the report

†

 The planetary tragedy grows apace. I am grateful for every little bit of help in doing what can be done to awaken the public to the danger.




Please continue to collect such material and to edit it. Would you consent to have your name on the title page as co-editor for DOR Emergency?




You know the trial was off again. The best to you and Kari.

*




To Judge George C. Sweney

†




Tuesday, 24 April 1956

 16:00hrs.




U.S. District Court




For the District of Massachusetts




Dear Judge Sweeney:




I am sending you by separate special delivery airmail a set of photostatic copies of original legal documents and a brief summary of one procedural manipulation around October 10th 1955. These documents pertain to unlawful manipulation of pre-trial procedures I have mentioned in my telegram to you of April 23, 1956. These manipulations have heretofore completely succeeded in preventing factual truthful evidence from appearing in Court.




Should you after inspection of these documents still feel that I and Dr. Silvert should be taken before a Jury accused by the manipulators of procedures of contempt of Court, please, send as the acting Judge through a U.S. Marshall an official order to appear for trial on April 30th. I shall wait in my quarters for your order. Should such official order signed by you not reach me in time. I would have to assume that I am not required to appear. I shall then notify Dr. Silvert accordingly. I wish to repeat that we are ready to appear upon receipt of such an official, duly signed order, with plane and hotel reservations already secured for trip to Portland.




I wish to assure you that I as well as my coworkers and assistants prefer by far to take the grave risk of these extraordinary, precautionary steps and to feel 

clean

 like mountain brook water rather than to act against our conscience and what we know is the truth in this case and to feel dirty like sinking into a 

swamp

.




 




We stood by with plane and hotel reservation until, including Monday 30 April, 1956 the day of the trial. No message was received. Tuesday WR and Silvert were arrested on bench warrant—Why? Is a judge too honorable to send a telephone message?




4 May 1956




Request for instruction to the jury by Wilhelm Reich.




To Judge George C. Sweeney




Dear Judge Sweeney:




Re: Case #5003




I believe I understand the legal jam which my case finds itself. I have given a great deal of thought to the basic nature of the tangle which is constituted on the one hand by the clear-cut fact that I am innocent and could not act differently from what I did. On the other hand, the merely legal procedural formulation binds the jury to find whether or not I have violated the injunction. This I certainly have done, and I am accordingly, legalistically, but not factually guilty.




I have the impression that everybody concerned wishes to dissolve the tangle in a decent truthful way without committing a judicial injustice. Now I believe that this could easily be accomplished by the insertion of one word into the formulation to the jury. I suggest to formulate 

had

 the defendant to violate the injunction instead of 

did

 he violate the injunction. I deeply hope that in the interest of all and everything concerned you will agree to the amendment of the word “

did he

” by “

had he to.

” I am asking for this privilege on the basis of the fact that during pre-trial procedure I had been arraigned on the basis of an error when instead of dismissal 

or

 trial the formulation was dismissal 

and

 trial on October 10, 1955.




 




Request denied, May 4, 1956




12 May 1956




My fellow workers, friends, citizens on this planet:




There are two ways of conducting human affairs:







Telling people what to do and to shoot them if they don’t do as told.




Telling people what they should do if they wish to reach a certain end; to leave it to them to do so or not.







Those of my friends who were present at the trial in Portland, Maine, on May 3rd to 7th, 1956, of myself and the director of the OIRL, Inc., Michael Silvert, M.D., have witnessed the operation of Hoodlums in Government. These Higs constitute a sector of the echelon of future murderer-dictators of an enslaved America. They betrayed themselves to the seeing eye as slyly efficient, determined to kill truth instead of establishing truth, of lying under oath, of robot-like coordination of disciplined action, of abuse of the weaknesses in the American procedural law system, of soft spot and guilty feelings in single human beings, hiding and conniving, and in Panmunjon techniques of dulling judge, jury and spectators alike by brainwashing dulling of the senses. I had to wake up the jury by objections from the seat of defense in order to bring this technique to the attention of the Judge.




When I called the Hig Maguire to the witness stand, I confronted him with the deadly question of whether he recognized the black volume from which he had quoted at the hearing of July 26th 1955, and from which he quoted again when discussing a few days before the trial matters with his witness, Ilse Ollendorff, the former clerk of the Foundation. It was copy No. 41 of the “Conspiracy”

*

 which had been compiled from our Archives 

after

 the Injunction of March 1954. It contained original documents pertaining to a 

Red Fascist Conspiracy of long standing in the U.S.A

., of 

espionage

 on the Orgone Energy Motor, 

illegal trespass

, on reports to the FBI and similar matters crucial to an American Administration official. The Hig denied under oath at his own and at Ilse Ollendorff’s second testimony that he knew the volume, its contents, deadly to him and his breed; he twisted like a 

tail-wriggling tapeworm

 when confronted with his perjury. Nearly everyone saw this. It repeated itself at the interrogation of his stooge, the Judas Ischariot of the XXth Century, Peter Mills, who, too, perjured himself by denying that he had been present at a meeting where the Red Fascist nature of the FDA was discussed at a Board of Trustees meeting of the Wilhelm Reich Foundation on August 20, 1952.




These Higs who mistook me for a rabbit to be slaughtered silently will be further prosecuted for treason. We, however, must now turn to more serious matters:




Our Planet is Dying




For more than five years now, in ceaseless effort, and with great financial sacrifice (I have spent $350,000 since 1935), I have together with my fellow workers tried to call to the attention of such U.S. officials as the Surgeon General Scheele, of the Health and Welfare Department, of the National Research Council, the Academy of Sciences, and other top administrative agencies the fact that 

our planet is dying. Our forests are drying

 and decaying from brittleness at a rapid rate. Desert development mars our lives with drought of many years’ duration, with dust bowls returning, with wells drying up and water levels sinking, with frequent tornadoes and unusual storms, forest fires from dryness, ravaging floods and billions of dollars damage done by severely disturbed weather conditions. But our officials, under the heels of drug Higs and pharmaceutic horse thieves (the president of a drug firm is head of the National Academy of Sciences), have so far failed to do anything else but to cringe before organized evil. They have ignored our reports on the DOR emergency, repeatedly, painstakingly, laboriously documented and executed, the severe sourness and parching quality of the atmosphere deadly to life, on the DOR sickness under which people silently, because abandoned by their corrupt elected health officials, are suffering from diarrhea, high pressure in heads, chests, purple discolorations of the face, choking difficulty to breath right, and other such symptoms of a new type of disease, misrepresented by the corrupt hirelings of the chemistry racket as “virus X disease.” Every good, conscientious physician knows the truth but is afraid to tell the people what he knows is true. The practitioner is under the heels of crooks in the drug business and their henchmen in the FDA: and the FDA is a department of the Russian Hig, while our planet and our populations are in grave distress and suffering near agony, getting steadily worse.




Moreover, while we have spent money from our own pockets, provided knowledge from our own research, time, skill, diligence, confidence and perseverance trying to bring these matters to the notice of the responsible administrators, the Higs in the Health Department have done everything in their power to harass our work, to slander our honorable names, to destroy us physically, to stop our work.




We know well, and we were told by many people that there are great sympathies behind our efforts, supporting us with knowledge of the truth on the true state of affairs, waiting for us to 

do something

 sensible. For many years I have let it be known in unmistakable terms that I am not a political leader and never will be. I am a scientific worker, ready to take any pains to secure my work. Now I have learned that there is no other way than to expand my old decision 

not to permit anyone, no matter whoever he may be, to disturb my work on Life

. We were ready to use our rifles against the Higs over the past few years; we have told this to the jury and we added that we would do it again under the same circumstances; we are ready to defend the truth which is crucial to the salvation of what is left of hope to cope with the planetary emergency by all means. Obeying a corrupt, factless, merely conniving, cheating, killing procedure would be irresponsible aid rendered to murderous Higs. I shall not bring in at this point the deep and complicated background of the planetary emergency. This will be done gradually in the course of the succeeding publication of the CORE PILOT BULLETIN.




The public must by all means learn to start taking care of its own affairs connected with the planetary emergency. This emergency is, only to indicate, connected with the problems of visitors from outer space and space travel, as reported officially in the Ruppelt Report of the AAF on UFO’s.

*

 It was truly this secret work the Higs were after. I told them in court on July 26th, 1955, before Judge Clifford already that they would never come through with their curiosity, that they would be treated with force, if necessary.




The facts that beset our lives and constitute a deadly planetary emergency will be brought forth in careful, responsible fashion. To accomplish this end and to secure our work against further criminal assaults by Higs will be the task of the newly established CORE PILOT, under my scientific and medical guidance. To keep the broad public here and abroad informed on what we are doing and how we will cope with the emergency will be the task of the CORE PILOT BULLETIN.




 




Judgment and IMPOSITION OF SENTENCE as to Wilhelm Reich

 United States District Court




For the

 

District of Maine—Southern Division




United States of America




No. 5003v




WILHELM REICH




 




On this 25th day of May, 1956 came the attorney for the government and the defendant appeared in person without counsel; the Court advised the defendant of his right to counsel and asked him whether he desired to have counsel appointed by the Court, and defendant thereupon stated that he waived the right to assistance of counsel.




IT IS ADJUDGED that the defendant has been convicted upon his plea of 

not guilty

, and a verdict of guilty of criminal contempt for violation of the terms of a degree of injunction issued by this court,




_______________




as charged




and the court having asked the defendant whether he has anything to say why judgment should not be pronounced, and no sufficient cause to the contrary being shown or appearing to the court




IT IS ADJUDGED that the defendant is guilty as charged and convicted IT IS ADJUDGED that the defendant is hereby committed to the custody of the Attorney General or his authorized representative for imprisonment for a period of TWO (2) YEARS, and that he stand committed in execution of said sentence. Sentence of imprisonment stayed by order of Court, pending Appeal, with bail previously furnished ordered to stand continued. Request for Stay granted with the distinct understanding that defendant will not engage in the activities of which he was found guilty.




(signed) George C. Sweeney

 United States District Judge




The Court recommends commitment to:_______________ A True Copy: Certified this 25th day of May, 1956




(signed) Morris Cox




Clerk




Written Statement to the Court




25 May 1956




Before Judge Sweeney




Your Honor:




We have lost, 

technically only

, to an incomprehensible procedure treadmill. I and my fellow workers have, however, won our case in the true, historical sense. We may be destroyed physically tomorrow; we shall live in human memory as long as this planet is afloat in the endless Cosmic Energy Ocean as the Fathers of the cosmic, technological age.




Already today every decent soul knows that truth and wells of new knowledge are on my side. I have won the battle against evil.




One day the motives and legalistic maneuvers of the technical winner of today, the drug and cosmetic Hig, will emerge from the archives and see the clean light of day.




I certainly prefer to be in the place where I am, instead of being in the shoes of the Hig. I may suffer physical disaster, but shame and dishonor are 

not on my face

. It is on the face of the XXth Century Judas Ischariot, Peter Mills, who betrayed his former friends and clients when the Oranur experiment struck us in 1952, and when the Red Fascist Hig, under Moskau order, was out to get our experimental secrets while, at the same time, they spread poison and slander in our peaceful village about us. Judas hurriedly left the apparently sinking ship; in addition he covered up his tracks by accepting the role of prosecutor for the Moskau inspired drug Higs against his former friends and clients.




In a deep sense, too, we are all guilty, bar none. We were and still are on trial, without exception, in one of the most crucial test crises in the history of man. This important subject has been presented by me in 1953, during the grave planetary DOR Emergency, as if in anticipation of the Hig assault. Here, the Murder of Christ, 2,000 years ago has been taken as an historical example of the method used by the Emotional Plague of Man to kill Life and Truth.




This time, however, Judas has betrayed and the Hig is killing the scientific hope to cope with the planetary disaster that is upon us.




I wish to thank you, Judge Sweeney, for the fairness shown us, within the given bounds. I know you know the truth. May your knowledge help to improve the American judicial system to secure factual truth.




To Judge George C. Sweeney




8 June 1956




Dear Judge Sweeney:




I wish to inform you that 

ALL

 operations in New York have been discontinued. The Orgone Institute Research Laboratories, Inc. were dissolved. The WRF (Wilhelm Reich Foundation) was suspended in 1954 and is in the process of liquidation. The assets will be transferred to an agency in charge of legal expenses, Infant Trust Fund, and settlements of debts.




Some problems still remain in regard to the fulfillment of past obligations.




You will be kept informed of further developments.




To Judge George C. Sweeney




22 June 1956




Dear Judge Sweeney:




I wish to inform you of the following:




On June 21, 1956, I have suggested by phone to Dr. Michael Silvert to expedite the liquidation of orgone energy accumulators and books in New York by requesting the representative of the FDA to supervise as soon as possible this act of destruction in accordance with the terms of the injunction.




The Orgone Institute Press has informed the Post Office to return all mail to sender.




Two lawyers, Mr. Daru in New York and Mr. Platz of Lewiston, Me., have been authorized to examine the court trial records on our behalf.




Mr. Platz will arrange for setting up a “WR Foundation Liquidation Account” to receive income from the sale of the assets of the foundation, and to fulfill all legal obligations.




To William Steig




9 August 1956




Dear Steig:




I would drown in work if I had not developed my special way of order. This makes it possible for me to find time to thank you for your help.

*

 Thanks.




Would it be possible for you to come up toward end of August to discuss some important matters?




May I have your assurance that you do 

not

 and 

will not

 discuss any of the legal affairs with anyone, not your family, even Kari.




It’s bloody war.




To William Steig




4 September 1956




My dear Steig:







I sent you a wire today asking you to seal and wrap securely the manuscript.

†




To stand by to deliver it as discussed upon special notice to whomever I designate, requesting receipt.




Please, do not talk about the contents.




Before sealing, please add at the end of the “No precedent” part the words:

 “My emphasis upon the lack of precedence of my discovery in no way reduces my gratitude to all those men of knowledge to whom I owe so much for what I have learned from them. Their names are many in my writings.”




When can you or Kari go to Washington to supervise?




Please, do not be generous with paying out bills.




I may go for a rest somewhere soon.







9 September 1956




I am closing up.




A period ends as have others before.




A new life begins.




Human history is just beginning to dawn.




I must clean out the past completely as so often I have done before:




Organizations must go




Power must go, influence will stay.




Will I build up a personal happy life again? I hope so—

very.

 I deserve it.




I shall burn all paper—I shall travel light.




To William Steig




Christmas—New Year 1956




My dear Steig:




I feel impelled to shed some of my usual, enforced restraint. I wish to express my deep-felt appreciation to you for all you have done and are ready to do for our children. They will certainly need your devotion.




I wish you the best of peaceful happiness for this holiday season. New Year’s Eve always had a special meaning for me: A newly born hope, regularly recurring once every year.




PS I used to love and to dine well in small French restaurants in “Quartier Latin” in Paris. This only to erase any hang over from my harsh talk about “Greenwich Village.”

*




To William Steig




New Year 1956–57




Dear Mr. Steig:




Will you please be good enough to transmit the following message:




I wish to express my deeply felt thanks to everybody who has during the DOR emergency and the legal process contributed his share to the task of removing for our children a serious “obstacle in the way.”




The battle could not have been conducted in our favor, as it has been, with out the manifeld kindness of people, close and distant alike.




May this brief note suffice to serve in place of a much larger acknowledgement of good will.




Wilhelm Reich

1957
















To William Steig




3 February 1957




Dear Mr. Steig:




Please avoid 

militant

 use of words in public announcements regarding 

factual

 information. Words like “Hig” are coined only for use in proper contexts such as EP, OREP or similar elaborations. We should not indulge in name-calling where not 

absolutely

 necessary.




Also, I suggest to all concerned, that one refrain from criticizing social administration or business unless one is certain to do it better than the one being criticized.




 




The severity of Reich’s sentence had surprised lawyers and shocked students and associates. And although Reich told a worried colleague, “I have just begun to fight,” he felt he would not survive imprisonment and asked Tom Ross to dig a grave for him at Orgonon. Surely, he must have recalled the three weeks he was held on a false charge at Ellis Island after the United States entered World War II. He had described that experience upon his release in January 1942:







Deprivation of freedom and pain inflicted by gross injustice undoubtedly affects the life apparatus like toxic poisoning. Rage must be curbed, crying suppressed, sexual excitation is displaced or very painfully endured. The life apparatus is subjected to an extreme exertion, to an energy stasis, which expresses itself in spasmodic shivering (trembling). The trembling goes out from the solar plexus.







Now, on 12 March 1957, all appeals denied, Wilhelm Reich was handcuffed and taken to the federal prison in Danbury, Connecticut, where he was held for ten days before being moved to the Federal Penitentiary in Lewisburg, Pennsylvania.







I have made a crucial discovery in Biophysics and Physics/1923 till 1956. My successes in the world of science and medicine were great; though also controversial. Some endangered certain political and commercial interests. An order was 

unlawfully

, by way of fraud upon courts, obtained to stop my work. I resisted the unlawful order as I had done if a judge had ordered me to break into a safe. 

After

 having proven the unlawfulness of order, I followed it 

to the letter

.




All information which can be given is on official court records. I shall be glad to help clarifying if necessary.










From 1936–1956 I have worked with Cosmic Energy. My desert work was based on a new type of technological use of Cosmic Energy. This work was interfered with by agents of the John & Nelson Rockefeller Atomic Energy Enterprises, foods, drugs, cosmetics, and by agents directed from Moskau. See volumes I, II, III, IV, and V of Record Appendix proving 

clear cut treason and fraud on part of assailants

. I suggest that the parole officer of this institution be acquainted with the court records in order to understand my situation: 

The law and the principles of justice are on my side

–What now??




I pleaded “Not Guilty” My basic defense position during legal procedures: Please note:







“I do not take orders from Moskau through American Institutions”




I do not follow orders which are unlawful, such as breaking into a safe or yielding to the enemy of Selfgoverment and orders which were obtained by 

fraud and falsification of facts

 as in this case.




BASIC RESEARCH MUST BE FREE FROM COMMERCIAL POLITICAL INTERESTS.







Inmate Request to Staff Member




22 April 1957




I like to play piano and organ. I would appreciate information on how to obtain opportunity to enjoy this hobby of mine; also painting (oil).




 




ACTION REQUESTED:




An interview on this matter.




Inmate Request to Staff Member




25 April 1957




I request permission to have in my possession one complete set of legal documents re. my case for further legal action against my unlawful detention here. This material will be sent to your office to be transmitted to me. I am informed that my daughter Dr. Eva Reich has sent a draft of habeas corpus writ through Mrs. Reich (Aurora Karrer).

*




 




ACTION REQESTED:




Interview to clarify details re. habeas corpus proceedings. I function as my own counsel. No lawyer could handle the defense of my discovery of the Cosmic Energy against the Drug & Cosmetic Industry fraud.




To Judge George C. Sweeney




6 May 1957




My dear Judge Sweeney:




I wish to thank you for your kindness shown in the discussion Aurora had with you. She fell ill the following day. She could not understand why you still believed that I had ever anything to do with the sale of fraudulent, “misbranded” devices; that you did not see, at this late hour, that the FDA agent had succeeded in putting over an untruth on the Portland Court from beginning to end. I give you my word of honor (and, in my Reply Brief in Supreme Court I have on six pages summarized the fraudulent allegations of the FDA):




1. I have never sold any medical devices, with Silvert or otherwise. 2. I never received money from medical experimental devices. 3. All money went for basic research. 4. No medical devices were shipped in interstate commerce 

after

 the Injunction. 5. The Injunction was executed to and beyond the letter of the unlawful order after the sentence. 6. What Silvert did was done without my knowledge or consent, even against my specific wishes and orders. 7. To advise you, and to induce you to change your decision, that I would “in the future do again with Dr. Silvert what I had done in the past,” only confirms the character of the assailant as I revealed it during the proceedings. I beg of you to look through my briefs and the trial records to convince yourself that my main task consisted in uncovering before you as best I could, what no lawyer did, the conspiracy and espionage activities entailed in the Injunction. The accumulator question had to become secondary to the social problem. All allegations of the original complaint are false, simply untrue. 

Cosmic Superimposition

 deals with hurricanes and not with cancer, etc. etc. It is all on record. The truth in this case is still accessible. I simply committed no crime whatever; 

my resistance was civic duty

 to be fulfilled against 

traitors

. My decision never again to give as freely time, efforts, results to the American public is firm. The Parole Board may rest assured.




This is a very great, 

undeserved

 tragedy that overcame me and my family.




Inmate Request to Staff Member




27 May 1957




I am preparing for legal counsel all the pertinent legal material in order to make its use easily accessible. Mr. St. Lewis* took 4 already prepared volumes with him today. I would like to replace 2 of them by transfer of 2 volumes among my private papers to the library where I work, to be kept under lock. The 2 volumes III and V of Supreme Court are in vault in reception room.




May 1957, in Prison, USA




The legal and technical aspects of my case are contained in the public court records. The following reveals some of the true, factual background.




I have “done wrong” in having disclosed to mankind the primordial, 

massfree

 Cosmic Energy that fills the Universe. This energy rules all living processes and the lawful behavior of celestial functions; it determines our emotions, our First Sense of Orientation, judgment and balance. I have “done wrong” in having discovered and made practically accessible the basic force in nature that for millennia was called “GOD” in many tongues. God was made earthly, reachable and understandable 

within

 man’s heart and intellect. 

Without

 in astrophysical manifestations.




The consequences of this discovery are truly dangerous: To the emotional beliefs and intellectual constructions of man; to his total natural scientific outlook, to his accustomed social, planetary and emotional (cosmic) existence. The scope of the discovery of the primal Cosmic Energy is of course not my fault. I was imprisoned because my work needs has given the impression that I was either a dangerous lunatic or a criminal faker to my foes, a genius and founder of a new hope for this world to my friends. I am neither a lunatic nor a faker. My discovery obeys simple natural laws. It was anticipated by many scientists, philosophers and writers; it is well known and at home in all true world religions. I have discovered the LIFE ENERGY. 

My Imprisonment is basically unlawful

, no matter what the legal or technical excuses or rationalizations. I have done no wrong in the criminal sense. I am not responsible for either my discovery or for its consequences. I am of course fully aware of the dangers my discovery has created for all planetary economy, for emotional, religious, national and political existence everywhere. This, however, does not imply “guilt.”




In my adherence to the principles involved in my legal test case; in my resistance to unlawful court procedures and conspiratorial administrative activities, I have only done whatevery cadet at West Point is pledged to do:







To live above the common level of life.




To choose the harder right instead of the easier wrong.




Never to be content with a half truth when the whole truth can be won.




To scorn to compromise with injustice.




To know no fear when truth and right are in jeopardy.







I have lived my life devoted to those principles. I am determined to end my life living by the very same principles.




To Eva Reich, M.D.




6 June 1957




Dearest Eva:




I am returning the Hab[eas] Corpus material with notes. See what you 

can do about it

???




Also, please, report on how Orgonon is being kept, whether any damage was done.




Write to me—I love you very much.




To Eva Reich, M.D.




15 June 1957




My dear Eva:




I want you, Peter and Bill to 

relax now

; 

to go it slow

, but never to diminish alertness. We all are in a terribly dangerous situation. I have your good long letter. Thanks. The Habeas Corpus is 

not

 acute. I had asked Aurora to phone this through to you. Wait until we know what St. Lewis does. Always keep in mind that since trial you all are uninformed, kept that way, on most events. Much that seems black is not as bad as it looks. Much is going on. We must be prepared for 

anything

 to happen. Here is a list of matters to be done 

gradually

 as a 

family

 affair in due time, well 

thought

 through, 

without rush

:







Prepare a list of all things in the various places.




Address of places, kind of things (

not

 detailed enumeration, only general character)




All keys should be near where I am, in case no one is around when, 

if,

 I get out.




The bank deposit in Barrington should be transferred to Lewisburg Bank 

Bank to Bank

 (Aurora to handle this end).




Arrange for selling of 

all

 WRF assets if possible, including (?) lab equipment in lower lab.




Steig has deeds for 80 acres land = 3 to 4,000 dollars.




Cancel legally my Maine

 residence. I shall not return if the HIGS are in charge. I suggest you get out, too. They are very dangerous.




My Will should be changed (has time)

*




Consider with Steig distribution of desert work

†

 through some business house.




My personal diaries in Observatory cabinet should be removed to safety (?). 

Think it over

. Don’t rush any action. It is all long term.—




Paintings (?), personal archives etc. to be saved.







Your letter sounded reassuring. You know I love you as always, but my fate has removed me from old ways. 

Personally

, I suffer from being so much bother. 

Officially

, I have nothing to regret, except the slow pace of learning on everybody’s part.—I hope you all will have a good summer. Take it easy. Nothing rushes you. However, you, Aurora, Pete and Bill are those to think about the property in case I do not survive this hot summer. 

All WRF assets should take care of legal expenses

. My private property esp. Observatory I would wish to make the foundation of “

Harbors of Life,

” a logical extension of the Infant Trust Fund. A new belief, in Life, should be the logical outgrowth of this disaster. The observatory could function as the first one, since nothing much else can be done about it. Tell me frankly how you feel about it. Give me time to think over selling 

all

. My way ahead is not clear at all since secrecy has engulfed me as all others. (Where would you take me if I died, my ashes I mean?) I’m glad my work will stand in history if history will be at all. Aurora is fighting bravely. Be careful with her, since she has no experience of such social affairs. It is a month since I applied for Bill as correspondent.

*

 Nothing heard yet.—Keep me informed on affairs; be prudent with Pete.—Could I have the names of those who contributed to the lawyers fees? The WRF could carry it all.—I am no good at writing.—By the way: The “brainwash” technique derived clearly from PSA techniques as you had suffered from 1935.

†

 Write—and don’t worry if I keep silent.




My Love to all—Be careful with Pete!!




To E. Peter Reich, c/o Dr. Eva Reich




8 July 1957




Son, my dear: I have your letter of 7.4. You sound, under the circumstances, quite happy. 

Good

. 

First

: Please, let me know whether and what kind of E-Bonds are in the envelope you took from the Barrington safe. This is important. Are your personal bonds there?—You should ask Elden Collins

‡

 by mail how much it would cost to repair the porch of the Lower Cabin. I am glad you like Orgonon. As you grow up you might start really taking care of the Lower House. Somebody has to. Other wise we shall have to sell it.—It is good that you work and earn some money. It is always good to learn to be independent, to 

rely on yourself

.—Be most careful not always to tell people what you think about them. If you speak, tell the truth. But 

no one ever tells all the truth he knows

. 

This would be horrible

. I would love to see you, too. But it is so far away and it 

is

 possible that I might be released. Everybody here knows I am 

held unlawfully

.—Pete, as you grow up, please, do me the favor, don’t grow into the sky, so to speak, both physically and emotionally. Don’t grow over 6 feet, and 

don’t look down at people

. 

Be modest, always

. I understand that you know more than many, but this is an 

obligation

 to understand others 

better

. Try to understand Bill too, your mother, others without getting mad at them. Let Eva tell you some of the story of 18 years how I fought silently for her; you know your moods will change often during the following few years. If you have any 

serious

 questions to ask me, 

do

. You know 

I’m always standing by you

. Keep you belly soft. Do not permit it to harden up. 

Rather suffer pain than become hard

. My love, Dad




 




This is for Eva




My dear Evchen: I am grateful to you for having Pete with you and thanks to Bill too. Write your findings at Orgonon. Ask St. Lewis for copies of your draft for Habeas Corpus writ. I gave it to him for typing.—I hope you and Bill are well and happy. I still wonder why you never write, or 

only so rarely

.—Things are happening in the world the 

big

 way, aren’t they? The Supreme Court decision might work out in my favor, though it helped a few Stalinites who belong to those who brought this mess about.—May I invite you all three for a lobster festival? Do; take it off my money. Also take whatever Peter costs. I am not in the poor house 

yet

. Are Peter, you, Bill in good health? Should my release be effectuated before October 57, I might decide to stay at Orgonon or Bar Harbor region. What news? There must be 

some

 reaction to that unlawfulness!? Never forget: You see only a little segment of the whole story. I am still in 

grave danger

. But the tide is on my side. 

I am winning

. My love to all of you.




Inmate Request to Staff Member




23 July 1957




1. I expect my lawyer, Mr. St. Lewis of Washington DC, within the next few days. I have prepared 2 more printed legal volumes for his use, and would like to transmit these volumes to him at his visit in visiting room.




2. I have separated my legal test case in my experiment of social pathology from Dr. Silvert in Case 688 in the Supreme Court action already in December 1956. Dr. Silvert’s case has substantially and on principle 

nothing whatever to do with mine

. The conspirators active behind the scenes doubtless will try in the future in such procedures as parole decisions to keep his case linked with mine. I request that, if not done already, my case should be dealt with entirely on its own merits. I do not wish to be held responsible for Dr. Silvert’s opinions or actions. I had 

never

 any common “business” with him. Neither do I want him to be held responsible for my position 

on principles

 as made public on official court record. I have informed my lawyer, Mr. St. Lewis, of this crucial legal necessity and 

he agreed with me entirely

. My case is of a 

singular

 nature; it is bound up with 

my life

 and 

scientific discovery

, and 

with no one else

. May I ask you for a special interview to discuss the problem of parole as it is situated with respect to my legal position.




 




1. Please, arrange for transmission legal records to visiting room at visit of Mr. St. Lewis.




2. Disconnect and keep separate the case of co-defendant Silvert from my legal test case.




 













Wilhelm Reich










No. 23937













Library










Living Quarters C-2, 218
















Inmate Request to Staff Member




26 July 1957




I have been informed by Mrs. Reich that my lawyer Mr. St. Lewis will arrive to see me tomorrow before noon. I am expecting good news: the end of my unlawful imprisonment. I would like to show you if possible tomorrow, in presence of Mr. St. Lewis, the “table of events” March–July 1957, the notes I made here on events, including basic research observations, as discussed on the 19th with you.




 




ACTION REQUESTED:




An interview to show the “table of events” I compiled while here, and to request permission to take them with me if released or to transmit them to my lawyer or Mrs. Reich for safe-keeping.




 













Wilhelm Reich










No. 23937













Library










Living Quarters C-2, 218
















To Mr. Taylor, Chief Warden




1 August 1957




U.S. Penitentiary, Lewisburg, PA.




Dear Mr. Taylor:




During my last interview with you, you told me to submit my petition for Presidential Pardon to you personally for further action. I am ready to submit the petition. In this connection there are a few technical problems which I would like to discuss with you.




1. I am submitting the petition 3 months before parole eligibility date (November 10, 1957). The true reason is this: The nature of my discovery as well as my well known medical and philosophical theories make it quite certain that the parole board, basing its opinions on current social views, would hesitate to grant me parole. The opposition to my factual discovery on the part of dominating commercial and political organizations is overwhelming. To me this fact constitutes 

sufficient reason

 to by-pass rule 7 which requires that, 

as a rule

, parole should have been denied before application for pardon can be made. The fact that quite obviously I am in prison 

unlawfully

 may be added here.




2. I know many people of social standing who agree with my views. However, I had on purpose 

avoided

 keeping contact with the many persons who know and appreciate my work. I felt they should not be involved in my so complicated case which is related to espionage. Now: Is it feasible that the warden and perhaps the Chaplain should endorse my application for pardon. I am informed that the warden has even the power to 

set a prisoner free

 within his own powers.




To me, it would appear hopeless to discuss these matters with lawyers.




May I ask you for an interview to fill in these 

technical

 gaps?




Sincerely,

 Wilhelm Reich




Inmate Request to Chief Warden




5 August 1957




I heard your message regarding the drought and water shortage on the radio the other night. I believe it is in this emergency my civic duty to inform you: The 

technological

 means and skill are available to 

break this dangerous drought

 and keep it broken within a few days. There are at my disposal machines, called “cloudbusters,” by means of which 

moisture can be drawn

 in from ocean regions and clouds can be created until gentle, soaking rain repairs the drought damage and fills the wells gone dry. 

Publications

 on these operations, 1952–1956, are among the 

enjoined

 literature (CORE, 1954/1955) (Also, Vol. V in custody of this institution, re. OROP DESERT Ea). 1954/55 rain was produced in the SW-USA desert and prairie grass grew again where drought had killed all vegetation for decades. This is now 

everybody’s responsibility

 since the suffering and water shortage are 

not necessary

.




Wilhelm Reich




Call out if further detailed information required. This memo should be put on my record file.




 













Wilhelm Reich










No. 23937













Library










Living Quarters C-2, 218
















To Roy St. Lewis




20 August 1957




Dear Mr. St. Lewis:




Again several weeks have passed and I have heard nothing from you. I do not know whether or not you saw Judge Sweeney as consented by me through my daughter Eva. I do not know the outcome of Dr. Silvert’s parole matter, 6 weeks after he became eligible for parole. I do not know what you are doing in this case at all. Being highly responsible in a general way for the outcome of my case, I should like to establish the following, in case your silence should continue:







Please, return to me all legal records, especially those marked by me, through the warden’s office.




Do not use the power of attorney of my daughter for any action. She has been directed by me to obtain my consent 

for each

 special act.




Should I not obtain thorough information from you on your activities on my behalf within about 2 weeks, I shall have to cancel your engagement as counsel in this legal matter.




Please, return to Mrs. W. Reich (Miss Aurora Karrer) all books and other material you received from my daughter Eva

.




Let me know whether you would, under the circumstances, continue as counsel in technical matters in the Washington area, such as matters of Last Will, execution of affidavits, typing out of legal documents, real estate functions, contracts.







I carry no grudge against you. I have to conduct my case 

informed

 on what is going on. I hope you will have no ill feelings if we part. You have yourself severely criticized Peter Mills to have turned against me after having served as my legal counsel for many years, only to cover up his tracks in a critical situation.




I shall assume that Dr. Silvert has been denied parole and that I am to be kept 

uninformed

 should silence continue.




To Eva Reich, M.D.




28 August 1957




My dear Eva:




I have your extensive communication—was put on parole file by officer:







I 

share

 your 

legal

 worries. The USA & world are in grave danger. I may not be able to survive this. However, great power on side of right is 

growing

, beyond 

your

 vision.




St. Lewis is 

silent

, has done 

nothing

 so far, is 

helpless

 as are 

all

 lawyers in this NEW realm. 

I know nothing

 of 

what

 he is 

doing

 or 

planning

. Maybe complete legal flop if not dangerous. 

Not your fault

. He did not visit me as promised, nor the Judge.




Thanks for financial accounting. I shall transfer one of the 2 $500. checks to Pete. Many thanks to you & Bill for Pete’s sake.




Your power of driving emotion is 

too great

 for the 

small

 aims you’ve set yourself. I understand your desire to withdraw, doubt you can. 

You are very honest & brave

. Try to mend your relationship to Aurora. She is so brave, but 

NEW

, inexperienced in these things. 

Be Tactful

.




I need the Last Will copies for change.




You did an 

excellent professional

 job. I am very grateful to you for all. But I believe you should build 

your own

 life. Stand by from afar.




Where will the cloudbusters be kept over winter? I suggest Orgonon, (or your barn). Please make suggestions. 

Where are my deeds

?




Please 

don’t talk about my private affairs to anyone

. You are too involved emotionally.




Will Pete visit me 

before

 school starts?




Where are my suitcases with mathematical material. Transmit to Aurora & keys for safe deposit box. I may need it here later on.




Don’t send 

3

 letters when 

one envelope

 will do. My quota is only 7 letters per week. Everything will turn out well, but crisis is deep, dangerous, deadly.




Will you 

keep or return

 Power of Attorney?







Inmate Request to Staff Mamber




12 September 1957




Within the next two weeks, before Sept 28, 1957, I would like to talk to you about my parole problem which is rather complex. Being financially completely independent, do I need an “adviser” or “employer”? I am self-employed. Also my 

unlawful

 imprisonment must be properly presented. I wish to talk to you personally.




 




ACTION REQUESTED:




Interview




 













Wilhelm Reich










No. 23937













Library










Living Quarters C-2, 218
















Inmate Request to Protestant Chaplain




14 September 1957




I am merely fulfilling my public duties as a US citizen & worker in planetary affairs if I continue to point out where the 

true

 danger to our social & personal existence is placed: It is 

Emotional Poisoning

: Disruption through sowing distrust throughout our society, doping & drugging of our population, espec. our YOUTH; draining us financially through arms race, a camouflage of the true menace, the 

Emotional Poisoning

 a la Little Rock racial upheavals; keeping our high-placed officials at bay through fear of sexual scandals; railroading efficient men and women into prison or lunatic asylums through pranking up their environments; subverting justice by whispered little lies & frightening or using judges. Doing all this destruction unnoticed as it were by all those responsible. It was clear from the very beginning that Egypt and now Syria were subverted by such use of 

stupidities & evasions

 on our part, especially by the staid reluctance to talk bluntly & take the bull by the horns. The bull is really no more than a few 

slimy tapeworms

 eating away at our emotional guts. It is high time to start giving social power to the established functions of love, work and learning as bastions against the tapeworms.




Please place this information on my file.




To William Steig




16 September 1957




My dear Steig:




Aurora just informed me that you need some clarification on Legal Matters, and wish to have ½ hour to 1 hour time to visit. There is the possibility to obtain permission from the warden, Mr. Taylor, to visit me outside my regular visiting time (only 3 hours per month): Call Warden Taylor and tell him some of the confusion that exists regarding our lawyer St. Lewis whether it would be possible to obtain extra time up to 1 hour for you to discuss Legal Fund matters. The warden, who is very correct and understanding, may well feel it justified to grant such permission of extra visiting time. Possibly also, you could obtain such extra time by asking St. Lewis to arrange for your extra visit. I fear that Kari would not obtain permission since she is not listed as either correspondent or visitor. I may only see family approved by warden and approved, listed visitors. Please, have your problem precisely organized for discussion. Am informed that my Petition for Pardon was sent off. I expect message from you soon. Best regards also to Kari.




 




William Steig was granted permission to visit Reich, and they met a few weeks later, in a guarded prison room. Steig found Reich to be very much himself. He didn’t look resigned or uneasy, but treated Steig as a guest, reassuring him, trying to make him feel comfortable. “Don’t be uneasy,” he said. “Relax, smoke, feel comfortable.”




Sitting quietly with Steig, who felt himself inadequate because there was nothing he could do to get Reich out of prison, Reich spoke of his life in prison and raised questions about Aurora Karrer, who was his principal contact with the outside world. He voiced respect for the prison population and told Steig that he attended services and prayed. When people who had helped to get him into prison were mentioned, he expressed only pity. He felt sorry for them. They were “sick, unhappy people.”




Reich’s plans for the future did not include many people, Steig learned. “He would be more by himself. He would go the solitary way.”




 




Undated




Premonition




I hope from the depth of my heart one day in the far future to look backward upon my past life with contentment and gratitude to the fortune which had endowed me with the power of accomplishment and the devotion of service to mankind. To have felt and known the children of mankind as a searcher for their happiness in decent toiling will be the great comfort of my last breath. To have escaped the pitfalls of petty revenge for their smallness will mean a great deal at the end of it all.




To have fully understood what the human race had embodied in the idea of God, to have lived it and yet not to have fallen prey to its unrealities will add to the great consolation.




To have discovered the force of life humbles the highest aspirations, renders modest all zest of search and thought.




In music and in rhyme, in colour and in thought, we human children have striven for perfection which always had only meant returning to the great ocean of all being.




To have lost and found again one’s soul in the embrace of loving, to have spent happiness and to have lived fully the great oneness in beloved mates soothes the return to the eternally fruitful.




To have created lovely children, to have lived their first grasping, laughing, walking, singing—meant to have known THE GREAT LORD, to have felt his magnificent manifestation.




To have held the thread of one’s life in one’s hands, to have adhered to it from the beginning through every single day of labor and existence.




To have remembered every single happening, disaster and delight, in one great streaming of living—, what more can or does one expect?




Endless is the view on high mountain ranges




Unlimited on their peaks the great longing




Unknown, yet close to one’s blood is the infinity of future possibilities, reborn in every child in every forlorn hut. Once no more feared but caressingly protected, this infinity will make Man gather himself into that great effort, the great beginning, from which small souls at present are shrinking away, drowning in foggy lostness.




 




On the morning of 3 November 1957, seven days before he would have been eligible for parole, Wilhelm Reich was found dead in his prison cell. The coroner’s report listed myocardial insufficiency due to calcific aortic stenosis as the cause of death. But, years later a small child visiting the museum at Orgonon would exclaim, “I think he died of a broken heart.”

Appendix










ORGONE ENERGY EMERGENCY BULLETIN

 

NUMBER 1

 DECEMBER, 1950




ORANUR PROJECT




 




THE ORGONOMIC ANTI-NUCLEAR RADIATION PROJECT




(ORANUR)




By




WILHELM REICH







THE WILHELM REICH FOUNDATION




ORGONON, RANGELEY, MAINE, U.S.A.




 




The approach to the project of experimentation with nuclear radiation effects required clear definition of the pathological functions in 

radiation sickness

 which could be linked up with similar or identical lesions in general pathology which had already been made accessible to orgone energy treatment.




Abrasions, lacerations, and burns are 

not

 specific nuclear radiation effects. They could be regarded as belonging to general pathology, known to be accessible to orgone treatment by means of local orgone energy application.




The real problem was the 

specific radiation sickness

 consisting of deterioration and degeneration of blood tissues, of hemorrhages due to inner lesions, of decay of the blood cell system, loss of hair, weight, general decline of biological vigor, and final death. Would these specific effects of nuclear radiation be accessible to orgone energy treatment?




The anti-nuclear radiation research project had to concentrate on this problem. It could be divided into three major groups:




1. 

Is it possible to establish a certain degree of

 IMMUNITY, 

as it were, against nuclear radiation effects?




In order to answer this question, one group of mice is to be kept irradiated 

prophylactically

 with orgone energy over a period of several weeks. Then half of this group is to be injected with radioactive material in half lethal and the other half with lethal doses. The actual result would answer the question whether 

preventive

 orgone energy treatment had any chance at all, and if so, 

to what extent

 the preventative treatment would be effective. It was assumed that it would not be too complicated to draw conclusions regarding human beings from the results achieved in mice.




The outlook on the possibilities of partial immunization of the population against atomic energy effects well in advance of actual warfare and atomic bombing thus seemed promising: It is entirely reasonable to assume that highly charged biosystems would at least offer greater resistance to the degenerative process caused by nuclear radiation. Details could easily be elaborated with the necessary equipment and personnel.




2. 

Is it at all possible to

 STOP, 

to undo, or to cure nuclear radiation effects without prior immunization

?




In order to answer this question, a large group of healthy mice should be injected with a half-lethal dose of nuclear radiation material. One half of this group should be treated with orgone energy by means of the accumulator, the treatment beginning soon after the injection of the radioactive material. This would be the model of the assumed situation of a group in the population just having been affected by half-lethal nuclear radiation in the vicinity of where an atomic bomb had been dropped. It is further assumed that this group of people had not suffered any direct burns or other wounds. It would fall under the class of victims which develops the radiation sickness during the weeks following the blast.




The effective dosage of orgone energy is to be worked out by either doubling and redoubling the time of orgonotic irradiation or by doubling and redoubling the strength of the accumulator or both.




 




In order to comprehend fully the way in which orgone energy affects nuclear radiation sickness in the half-lethal realm, the mice which were injected accordingly would have to be dissected and carefully examined singly, both in treated and in the non-treated half. By comparison of treated and untreated sick mice, it could be established if at all and to what extent, particularly 

in what way

, nuclear radiation effects the tissues and the blood, and to what extent these effects are reversible by means of application of bio-energy (= orgone energy).




Here, the bridge connecting other degenerative processes with degeneration of tissues and functions due to nuclear radiation could be established. Such a bridge actually exists and is found to be most valuable in the approach to radiation sickness. The latter, according to the reports so far available, mainly consists in 

loss of bio-energy

, in a rapid lowering of the energy metabolism in the organism. The nausea, the bleeding of inner organs, the loss of hair, the anemia, etc. are secondary results of the primal noxa which, in the light of orgonomic research, is loss of bio-energy. From this it follows that charging of the organism with bio-energy contains the great hope, beyond its healing qualities, of REPLACING THE LOST BIO-ENERGY AND THUS OF STRENGHTENING THE RESISTANCE TO FURTHER DEGENERATION OF LIFE FUNCTIONS. Timing of curative irradiation with orgone energy, amount of energy to be applied, number of layers of accumulators necessary, are matters of research easy to accomplish once the basic question has been answered.




In order to obtain reliable preventive and curative results in the realm of 

lethal

 affliction with radiation sickness, it is indispensible to establish the 

kind

 of degeneration in tissues and blood. In this realm medical orgonomy is already well equipped, due to 15 years of experimentation with degenerative processes in the cancer biopathy and other diseases. It is highly probable that radiation sickness does not basically differ from other diseases where degeneration of tissue and blood is involved. Only the 

cause

 of the degenerative process is different from other diseases, not the process itself, except in regard to the rapidity of the decline.




We know from ample, experimental observation that tissue decay due to Xray radiation yields, though not easily, to orgone energy treatment. Deep burns due to Xray heal out, often 

completely

. It is therefore not precluded that nuclear radiation decay will yield too.




The basic mechanism of this healing process consists in blood pouring into the diseased region, in rejuvenation of the still healthy tissue in the surrounding area, in sequestration and elimination of the dead tissue and its replacement by new granulating tissue.




All tissue degeneration so far studied takes the route of development of T-bodies, i.e., bions with little orgone energy, from the degenerating tissues. This 

“T-process”

 rules the degenerative processes in cancer, and also, as we now find, to an even higher degree in leukemia. It is to be expected that it is also at work in the radiation sickness. It is impossible at this time to predict how the experimenting will have to be carried on in order to answer this question practically; but once the T-character of radiation sickness is established, we shall travel in well-known territory. To teach the new techniques of T-cultivation and T-observation to physicians and technicians will then be comparatively easy.




3. 

Where is the borderline, if any, of the efficacy of orgone energy irradiation in lethal cases of radiation sickness

?




This most vital question cannot be answered before concrete information has been obtained with regard to questions 1 and 2. It will obtain its proper answer in due time, and, so we hope, with as few victims of our ignorance as possible. To reduce unnecessary dying from lethal radiation sickness it will be most important to develop point 1, the 

preventive

 part of the total job, as fully and as efficiently as possible.




ORGONE ENERGY TODAY IS THE ONLY KNOWN MEDICAL TOOL ABLE TO COPE WITH DEGENERATIVE processes.




A further great possibility consists in constructing 

bomb shelters

 in such a manner that they actually function as orgone energy accumulators thus accomplishing a double effect: first, keeping the people 

inside

 charged, and second, reflecting nuclear radiation to the 

outside

.







ORGANIZATION OF THE PILOT RESEARCH PROJECT.




There are the following facilities available for the ORANUR project which can easily be extended without delay:




1. 280 acres of land at Orgonon, Rangeley, Me., partially wooded, partially meadows, suitable as building sites, self-sufficient in fuel material and food supply, 1700 and 1800 ft. above sea level, in dry climate most suitable for research in cosmic orgone energy; 40 miles from the nearest railway station, 80 to 130 miles from the nearest major city, with good roads available.




2. Two large buildings, worth together approximately $80,000, one built from rock and cement with partial steel structure, both fully equipped for research; two smaller buildings equipped for living.




3. Lakeshore of approximately 600 yards, suitable for landing of seaplanes in emergencies. Road put in from lake to main road.




4. Instruments and other research equipment worth altogether some $30,000 to $40,000, high power microscopes, Geiger counters, orgonotic darkrooms, photographic darkrooms, electroscopes, microphotographic equipment, etc. Part of it owned by the Wilhelm Reich Foundation, part owned privately by Wilhelm Reich, all of it at the disposal of the ORANUR project.




5. A workshop suitable for the establishment of a small pioneering construction plant.




6. Small truck, station wagon and tractor with equipment for farming.




7. Total available assets worth approximately $200.000.




8. 350 orgone energy accumulators for research purposes.




9. Staff organized to do essential central job, functioning as a well-trained nucleus, consisting of some two dozen specialized workers, about a dozen orgonomic physicians, one zoologist, one public relations officer, two well-trained social workers, two administrators, two maintenance men, all fully devoted.




10. A loosely organized but highly interested fringe of scientific, medical, educational, and other workers on the West Coast, in the Middle West, in New York, Montreal, England, Scandinavia, South America, etc.




11. A fully organized and registered Press, the Orgone Institute Press, equipped to handle all publication matters and capable of rapid growth, with connections through mailing lists all over the world. 

The USSR has ordered orgonomic literature, and a patient of Dr. Hoppe (an orgonomic co-worker, in Israel) reported that she has used an orgone energy accumulator in a Russian hospital.

 We wish to warn against the intention of the red fascists to use the benefits of orgone energy while trying to keep the same benefits from the U.S.A. through slander of orgonomy by their agents in this country. It is to be emphasized that the benefits of the orgone energy accumulator are intended to 

all

 peoples.




12. At present a steady income from contributions for the use of orgone energy accumulators of about $40,000 yearly, and from tuitions, etc. some $10,000 yearly, sufficient to carry the expenses of the job in its present framework. Orgonomic research has so far been completely self-supporting, independent of endowments from either public or private institutions. The present finances available are of course not sufficient to meet fully the needs resulting from the international crisis.




13. Work done regularly at present:







a. Continuous work on the cancer biopathy; courses for physicians and biologists in orgonomic cancer research;




b. Research in leukemia;




c. Study of orgonotic weather functions, daily charting;




d. Study of biogenesis through continuous work on




e. Experiment XX;




f. Continuous improvement of the orgone energy accumulator;




g. Orgonomic study of the healthy infant in the Infant Research Center;




h. The Orgone Institute Diagnostic Clinic and the Orgone Energy Clinic for orgonomic bio-energetic tests and examinations in Forest Hills, New York;




i. Training of physicians, educators, and social workers;




j. Preparation of the orgonomic anti-nuclear radiation project;




k. Preparation of further building of facilities;




l. Guidance in scientific matters on an international scale.







One should not raise false hopes where there is no hope. But where such great hope exists, it should in such emergencies as the present be pursued with all the vigor and determination available. Once the basic possibility is given, it is only a matter of equipment and skill as well as organization to cope with disaster. The few circles, powerful as they may be, which are economically interested in suppressing the dangerous competition of orgonomic medicine, will, so we hope, step aside modestly and decently, and will not try or dare to disturb or even to prevent this overall important task, as they have tried to do in the past. There would be no excuse for such procedure due to pecuniary interests when millions of human lives are involved. We know there are such sharks in the world, but even sharks, we believe, have hearts and some degree of consideration. So do not try to smear this great effort. It will only help the murderous enemy of life.




Let us not fail to prepare in time against the disaster which threatens all of us. Let us give full and continuous information to 

all

 peoples in the world threatened by atomic warfare. There is at present no more sacred duty than this one, not only for physicians, but also for military men, if they truly prosecute the saving of life and freedom. Those who will obstruct or try to prevent this job from fulfillment will show up clearly as the true enemies of mankind, without employment of secret police, political denunciation, or rigmarole. PREVENTION OF RADIATION SICKNESS AND DEATH is the watchword for every decent physician and health administrator from now onward. The sooner this realization dawns upon the responsible circles in the U.S.A and abroad the better, the fewer victims will there be. WHO WILL DARE TO STAND UP AGAINST IT?




The hour is at hand to prove one’s contentions and ideals by deed beyond words. Let us not miss this heart-searching task. Let us not for a second forget that the eyes of all the future, yet unborn generations of mankind are upon us, searching our souls.




Decree of Injunction

 Civil Action No. 1056x




Plaintiff having filed a Complaint for Injunction herein to enjoin the defendants and others from further alleged violations of the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act; and each defendant having been duly served, on February 10, 1954, with a summons and copy of the Complaint; and no defendant having appeared or answered in person or by representative, although the time therefore has expired; and each defendant having been duly served, on February 26, 1954, with a copy of Requests for Admissions; and no defendant having served any answer to said Requests, although the time therefore has expired; the default of each defendant having been entered herein; and it appearing that the defendants, unless enjoined therefrom, will continue to introduce or cause to be introduced or delivered, or cause to be delivered into interstate commerce orgone energy accumulators, devices within the meaning of the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic act, 21 U.S. C. 301 et seq, which are misbranded and adulterated, and in violation of 21 U.S. C 331 (a) and (k); and the Court having been fully advised in the premises;




IT IS HEREBY ORDERED, ADJUDGED, AND DECREED that the defendants, THE WILHELM REICH FOUNDATION, WILHELM REICH, and ILSE OLLENDORFF and each and all of their officers, agents, servants, employees, attorneys, all corporations, associations, and organizations, and all persons in active concert or participation with them or any of them, be, and they hereby are, perpetually enjoined and restrained from doing any of the following acts, directly or indirectly, in violation of Sections 301 (a) or 301 (k) of the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act (21 U.S.C.C. 301 (a) or (k) with respect to any orgone energy accumulator device, in any style or model, any and all accessories, components or parts thereof or any similar device, in any style or model and any device purported or represented to collect and accumulate the alleged orgone energy:




(1) Introducing or causing to be introduced or delivering or causing to be delivered for introduction into interstate commerce any such article of device which is:




(a) Misbranded within the meaning of Section 502 (a) of the Act (21 U.S.C. 352 (a)) by reason of any representation or suggestion in its labeling which conveys the impression that such article, in any style or model, is an outstanding therapeutic agent, is a preventive of and beneficial for use in any disease or disease condition, is effective in the cure, mitigation, treatment, and prevention of any disease, symptom, or condition; or




(b) Misbranded within the meaning of Section 502 (2) of the Act (21 U.S.C 352 (a)) by reason of any representation or suggestion in its labeling which conveys the impression that the alleged orgone energy exists; or




(c) Misbranded within the meaning of Section 502 (a) of the Act (21 U.S.C. 352 (a)) by reason of any photographic representation or suggestion with a caption, or otherwise, which conveys the impression that such is an actual photograph depicting the alleged orgone energy or an alleged excited orgone energy field; or.




(d) Misbranded within the meaning of Section 502 (a) of the Act (21 U.S.C. 352 (a)) by reason of any other false or misleading representation or suggestion; or




(e) Adulterated within the meaning of Section 501 (c) of the Act (21 U.S.C. 351 (c)) in that (1) its strength differs from or its quality falls below that which it purports or is represented to possess or (2) it purports to collect from the atmosphere and accumulate in said device the alleged orgone energy; or




(2) Doing any act or causing any act to be done with respect to any orgone energy accumulator device while such device is held for sale (including rental, or any other disposition) after shipment in interstate commerce which results in said device becoming misbranded or adulterated in any respect; and




 




IT IS FURTHER ORDERED:




(1) That all orgone energy accumulator devices, and their labeling, which were shipped in interstate commerce and which (a) are on a rental basis, or (b) otherwise owned or controlled by any one of the defendants, or by the defendants, be recalled by the defendants to their place of business at Rangeley, Maine; and




(2) That the devices referred to in (1) immediately above, and their parts, be destroyed by the defendants or, they may be dismantled and the materials from which they were made salvaged after dismantling; and




(3) That the labeling referred to in paragraph (1), just above, except those items for which a specific purchase price was paid by their owners, be destroyed by the defendants; and




(4) That all parts or portions of orgone accumulator devices shipped in interstate commerce and returned to Rangeley, Maine, or elsewhere, and awaiting repair or reshipment be destroyed by the defendants or, they may be dismantled and the materials from which they were made salvaged after dismantling; and




(5) That all copies of the following items of written, printed, or graphic matter, and their covers, if any, which items have constituted labeling of the article of device, and which contain statements and representations pertaining to the existence of orgone energy, its collection by, and accumulation in, orgone energy accumulators, and the use of such alleged orgone energy by employing said accumulators in the cure, mitigation, treatment, and prevention of disease, symptoms and conditions:







The Discovery of the Orgone

 by Wilhelm Reich




Vol I—The Function of the Orgasm




Vol II—The Cancer Biopathy




The Sexual Revolution

 by Wilhelm Reich




Ether, God and Devil

 by Wilhelm Reich




Cosmic Superimposition

 by Wilhelm Reich




Listen, Little Man!

 by Wilhelm Reich




The Mass Psychology of Fascism

 by Wilhelm Reich




Character Analysis

 by Wilhelm Reich




The Murder of Christ

 by Wilhelm Reich




People in Trouble

 by Wilhelm Reich







shall be withheld by the defendants and not again employed as labeling; in the event, however, such statements and representations, and any other allied material, are deleted, such publications may be used by the defendants; and




(6) That all written, printed, and graphic matter containing instructions for the use of any orgone energy accumulator device, instructions for the assembly thereof, all printed, and other announcements and order blanks for the items listed in the paragraph immediately above, all documents, bulletins, pamphlets, journals, and booklets, entitled in part, as follows: CATALOGUE SHEET, PHYSICIAN’S REPORT, APPLICATION FOR THE USE OF THE ORGONE ENERGY ACCUMULATOR, ADDITIONAL INFORMATION REGARDING SOFT ORGONE IRRADIATION, ORGONE ENERGY ACCUMUATOR ITS SCIENTIFIC AND MEDICAL USE, ORGONE ENERGY BULLETIN, ORGONE ENERGY EMERGENCY BULLETIN, INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF SEX-ECONOMY AND ORGONE RESEARCH, INTERNATIONALE ZEITSCHRIFT FÜR ORGONOMIE, EMOTIONAL PLAGUE VERSUS ORGONE BIOPHYSICS. ANNALS OF THE ORGONE INSTITUTE, and ORANUR EXPERIMENT, but not limited to those enumerated, shall be destroyed; and




(7) That the directives and provisions contained in paragraphs (1) to (6) inclusive, above, shall be performed under the supervision of employees of the Food and Drug Administration, authorized representatives of the Secretary of Health, Education and Welfare; and




(8) That for the purposes of supervision and securing compliance with this decree the defendants shall permit said employees of the Food and Drug Administration, at reasonable times, to have access to and to copy from, all books, ledgers, accounts, correspondence, memoranda, and other records and documents in the possession or under the control of said defendants, including all affiliated persons, corporations, associations, and organizations, at Rangeley, Maine, or elsewhere, relating to any matters contained in this decree. Any such authorized representative of the Secretary shall be permitted to interview officers or employees of any defendant or any affiliate, regarding any such matters subject to the reasonable convenience of any of said officers or employees and of said defendants, or affiliates, but without restraint or interference from any one of said defendants; and




(9) That the defendants refrain from, either directly or indirectly, in violation of said Act, disseminating information pertaining to the assembly, construction, or composition of orgone energy accumulator devices to be employed for therapeutic or prophylactic uses by man or for other animals.




(signed) John D. Clifford, Jr.

 United States District Judge

 for the District of Maine.




19 March 1954

 2:45 p.m.

 LAST WILL




I, WILHELM REICH, residing at Orgonon, Rangeley, Maine hereby make, publish and declare this as My Last Will and Testament:







No personal revenge nor disregard for the many kindnesses I enjoyed during my lifetime determine my decisions in this Will. Being in full possession of my judgment of people and social matters and being clear of mind, I made the consideration of secure transmission to future generations of a vast empire of scientific accomplishment the guide in my last dispositions. To my mind the foremost task to be fulfilled was to safeguard the truth about my life and work against distortion and slander after my death.




I hereby revoke all prior Wills by me at this time made.




direct that all my just debts and funeral expenses be paid with the exception of the specific requests hereinafter made; I hereby give, devise, and bequeath all the rest, residue and remainder of my estate, both real and personal, of every nature and kind whatsoever and wheresoever situated, of which I may die seized and possessed or to which I shall then be entitled, to my Trustee hereinafter named, and to such successor trustees as may be appointed to administer the same, to have and to hold the said property and to manage, sell, invest the same and to collect the interest., income, dividends and proceeds arising from the said property for the uses and purpose herein set forth:










a. The Trust shall be held and administered hereunder under the name of the Wilhelm Reich Infant Trust Fund.




b. The administrative expenses of the said Trust shall never exceed 20% of the total income.




c. To operate and maintain the property at Orgonon under the name and style of the Wilhelm Reich Museum.










During the years following 1949 my life was running its course within and around the walls of the Orgone Energy Observatory. I supervised the building myself for two summers; I paid out upwards of $35,000 from my privately earned possessions for the construction. I have collected all of the pertinent materials such as instruments which served the Discovery of the Life Energy, the documents which were witnesses to labors of some 30 years and the library of a few thousand volumes, collected painstakingly over the same stretch of time and amply used in my researches and writings, the paintings, some 25 of them, small items which I loved and cherished during my lifetime such as the carved African stick given me by Malinowski, the Sigmund Freud picture, a few inexpensive but meaningful vases, the “Rock Woman” by Jo Jenks, the “Zaenn’t Weh’ Bauer” carved 12,000 feet above sea level on some mountain refuge in Austria—all of these things and similar things should remain where they are now in order to preserve some of the atmosphere in which the Discovery of the Life Energy has taken place over the decades.




The grounds should be kept neat and clean and repairs should not be neglected. The costs of maintenance, repairs, services and salaries should be paid from this trust.










d. In order to enable the future student of the PRIMORDIAL COSMIC ENERGY OCEAN, THE LIFE ENERGY discovered and developed by me, to obtain a true picture of my accomplishments, mistakes, wrong assumptions, pioneering basic trends, my private life, my childhood, etc., I hereby direct that under no circumstances and under no pretext whatsoever shall any of the documents, manuscripts or diaries, found in my library among the archives or anywhere else be altered, omitted, destroyed, added to or falsified in any other imaginable way. The tendency of man, born from fear, to “get along with his fellow man” at any price, and to hide unpleasant matters is overpoweringly strong. To guard against this trend, disastrous to historical truth, my study including the library and archives, shall be sealed after my death by the proper legal authorities and no one shall be permitted to look into my papers until my Trustee, hereinafter named, is duly appointed and qualified and takes control and custody thereof.

      These documents are of crucial importance to the future of newborn generations. There are many emotionally sick people who will try to damage my reputation regardless of what happens to infants, if only their personal lives would remain hidden in the darkness of a forsaken age of the Stalins and Hitlers.




e. I therefore direct my Trustee and his successors that nothing whatsoever must be changed in any of the documents and that they should be put away and stored for 50 years to secure their safety from destruction and falsification by anyone interested in the falsification and destruction of historical truth.




f. These directives are established by me solely for the 

preservation of documented truth as I lived it during my lifetime

.




g. I have throughout all of my lifetime loved infants and children and adolescents, and I also was always loved and understood by them. Infants use to smile at me because I had deep contact with them and children of two or three very often used to become thoughtful and serious when they looked at me. This was one of the great happy privileges of my life, and I want to express in some manner my thanks for that love bestowed upon me by my little friends. May Fate and the great Ocean of Living Energy, from whence they came and into which they must return sooner or later, bless them with happiness and contentment and freedom during their life times. I hope to have contributed my good share to their future happiness.

      To this end the Wilhelm Reich Infant Trust Fund should be mainly devoted and safely directed.




h. I bequeath the cabin below the road opposite the Student’s Laboratory at Orgonon to my daughter Dr. Eva Reich.




i. The 80% of all income, profits or proceeds due me and the Trust from royalties on tools originating in my discoveries shall be devoted to the care of infants everywhere, towards legal security of infants, children and adolescents in emotional, social, parental, medical, legal, educational, professional or other distress. Part of the proceeds may be used for basic orgonomic research.




j. Should the Wilhelm Reich Infant Trust Fund fail of purpose, then my Trustee after careful deliberation of the matter shall transfer all of the assets of the said Trust Fund to an appropriate agency designed and capable to handle such affairs.










4. My son Peter will need financial support for many years in his education to adult social activity. I therefore direct that:










a. All Treasury Bonds of the United States of America, bought and made out in Peter’s name, should not be used before the bonds fully mature.




b. I hereby specifically give, devise and bequeath certain bonds made out in my name, my son Peter Reich as receiver after my death, to Ilse Ollendorff in trust nevertheless, or in the event of her death to Eva Reich in trust nevertheless, to have and to hold the same and receive the income and profits thereof and pay out to Peter the income, proceeds and principal thereof at the rate of $150.00 per month.




c. I hereby give, devise and bequeath to Peter any two of my rifles which he may choose, and together with those rifles such accessories as cartridge belt and cleaning material as he desires; my photographic equipment; such of my clothes as he may choose. For his life and until he decides not to use it personally, prior to his death, possession of the so-called “lower-cabin” at Orgonon with its furniture, together with surrounding acreage of about 10 acres, more or less, subject to a license in Eva Reich to use the cabin if she wishes; upon the death of Peter or upon his deciding not to use it personally, or upon his having not used it personally for a period of three years, the lower cabin shall revert to the Wilhelm Reich Infant Trust Fund for use by the Fund as a summer home for children; under no circumstances shall such summer home be in the possession custody or control of any person other that Peter, or Eva Reich, is she likes, as herein-before set forth.










5. I hereby give, devise and bequeath to my daughter Eva $10,000, any of my personal furniture she may desire to possess.




6. I hereby give, devise and bequeath to Aurora Karrer $4,000 and my Chrysler 300, 1955 automobile.




7. I hereby give, devise and bequeath to my daughter Eva and my son Peter, share and share alike each 10% of all royalties which may be due at the time of my death or thereafter, which such royalties mean income from my discoveries, books, or translation of books.




8. I hereby nominate, constitute and appoint Eva Reich M.D as the Trustee of this My Last Will and Testament and as my Trustee direct that he or she shall be required to file no bond as such Executor or Trustee, any law to the contrary notwithstanding; and I further direct that in the execution of the Wilhelm Reich Infant Trust Fund, my said Trustee by an instrument in writing may appoint a successor, in the event my Trustee resigns or becomes incapacitated, or by a testamentary instrument may appoint a successor upon his death, which said successor and all of my trustees shall thereafter successively have the same power; it being my sole direction in this regard that such successor trustees shall make appointments consistent with my expressed purposes.




9. I harbor no ill will against my relatives. Most of them I have not met for many decades. Since I know of no relative of mine who would be able to serve the main purpose of this will, namely the Safeguarding of the Full Truth about my Life and Work, I disinherit for all future and in every aspect ALL my relatives by blood and by marriage (both legal and common) on both my father’s and my mother’s line. They should have no claim whatsoever, no matter who, in what form or under whatever pretext to any of my present or future possessions, or to the possessions of the Wilhelm Reich Foundation which carries my name and was founded to preserve my discoveries; no claim on any ground and at no time whatever. 

This includes my own children with the exceptions mentioned above

.




10. This Will and all of the provisions herein shall not be wholly or partially revoked or rendered or rendered wholly or partially in effective or otherwise affected by the subsequent birth of a child or children to me.




11. I do not wish to be buried in any cemetery, but on Orgonon under the open porch, facing East or at Rock cove in the South. My Jo Jenks bust should be put on top of my grave. The inscription should be on granite and should contain the following words: Wilhelm Reich, born March 24, 1897, died _____,_____, No religious ceremonies should be performed. The “Ave Maria” of Shubert, sung by Marian Anderson, should be played.

      IN WITNESS WHEROF I have hereunto set hand and seal this 8th day of March, 1957.







Wilhelm Reich (L.S.)

 Witnesses:

 William Moise

 Michael Silvert

 William Steig




 




Signed, Sealed, PUBLISHED AND DECLARED by the above named Testator as his Last Will and Testament, and we, at his request and in his presence and in the presence of each other, have hereunto signed our names as subscribing witnesses this 8th day of March, 1957.




 













William Moise










residing at










R.F.D. 1 Box 721 Alexandria, Va.













Michael Silvert










residing at










50 Grove St., N.Y. 14, N.Y.













William Steig










residing at










R.D.2., Cream Ridge, N.J.

Acknowledgments










I want to express my sincere appreciation to those who have been valued helpers in the creation of this book. My friend and coworker Mary Henderson provided computer skills and the infinite patience essential to preparing the manuscript, while translators Derek and Inge Jordan donated their time and expertise to translating the German materials written in 1948, and science historian James Strick contributed a moving introduction that brings knowledge from Reich’s three previous autobiographical volumes into his continuing story, 

Where’s the Truth?




 




May this book honor the memory of publisher Roger W. Straus Jr., who for over fifty years was responsible for making available more than twenty volumes by Wilhelm Reich and who, when once asked why he published Reich’s work, replied, “I want to do something important.”

Index










The index that appeared in the print version of this title does not match the pages in your eBook. Please use the search function on your eReading device to search for terms of interest. For your reference, the terms that appear in the print index are listed below.




Adams, Dr.




Adolescents, Genital Rights of




Air Force, U.S.




Technical Intelligence Center, Wright-Patterson AFB




American Association for Medical




Orgonomy (AAMO)




American Civil Liberties Union (ACLU)




American Medical Association




Journal of




American Men of Science

 (Cottel Press)




American Psychiatric Association (APA)




Anderson, Marian




anorgonia




functional hemiplegic




heart




Arizona




Agricultural Department of




Grethe in




preparation for expedition to




see also

 Tucson




Arkansas




armoring




astrophysics




Atmospheric Energy Envelope




Atomic Energy Act (1946)




Atomic Energy Commission (AEC)




Advisory Field Service Branch




Division of Biology and Medicine




Isotopes Division




Office of Technical Advisors of




Auchincloss, James C.




Austria




 




Baker, Elsworth F.




Bangor Daily News




Bar Harbor (Maine)




Barth, Lawrence




Bastian, Henry Charlton




Beckerley, James G.




Bed of Neurosis, The

 (play)




Beethoven, Ludwig van




Beregi, Armin




Bergman, Ingrid




bio-energy, 

see

 orgone energy




Bion Experiments




bions




biophysics




cancer and




DOR attacks on




Melanor and




orgone




Boadella, David




book burning




by Nazis




overseas presses and




Bornstein, Berta




Boston




DOR over




Reich’s students in




weather station in




Brady, Mildred Edie




Brandt, Willy




Brimmer, Karl W.




Bruno, Giordano




Bryn Mawr College




Bukovina




 




Canadian Uranium Corporation




cancer biopathy




Cancer Biopathy, The

 (WR)




Catholicism




Character Analysis




Character Analysis

 (WR)




Children, Genital Rights of




Children of the Future

 (WR)




Children’s Research Center




Circuit Court of Appeals, U.S., Eastern Circuit




Clifford, John D.




climate change




cloudbusting




see also

 Oranur Weather Control operation




Collins, Elden




Collins, Vernon




Colorado Agricultural Department,




Commerce Department, U.S.




common law




Communist Party




Congress, U.S.




Connecticut




Contact with Space

 (WR)




Core Pilot Press




Cosmic Energy




operation of motors with




primordial




space ship propelled by




see also

 orgone energy




Cosmic ORgone Engineering (CORE)




Pilot




Cosmic Superimposition

 (WR)




Cott, Allan




Cottel Press




Cox, Morris




Crout, Prescott D.




 




Daru (attorney)




Deadly ORgone (DOR)




in desert




emergency caused by




Galactic Stream replacement with OR of




in Orgone Energy Observatory




removal of




Dean, Gordon




Discovery of the Orgone, The

 (WR)




District Court, U.S.




District of Maine




District of Massachusetts




Doherty, William H.




drought, orgone energy for breaking, 

see

 Oranur Weather Control operation (OROP)




Dunham, Charles




Dunham, Mrs. Milford




 




Einstein, Albert




Ellsworth (Maine)




OROP Experiment in




Emotional Plague (EP)




court order to destroy documents mentioning




as disease of society




in government practices




murder of Christ as example of




Prevention (EPP)




Ether, God and Devil

 (WR)




Experiment XX




 




Farmington (Maine)




Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI)




Federal Security Agency




Fisher, Frederick F., Jr.




Florida




Food and Drug Administration (FDA)




American Psychiatric Association and




challenges to authority of




destruction of books, printed materials, and orgone energy accumulators by




Emotional Plague exemplified by actions of




injunction initiated by, 

see

 injunction, FDA-initiated




Mills and




Soviet agents in




trespassing at Orgonon by agents of




Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act (1938)




Fowler, Bill




Frankfurter, Felix




Franklin County (Maine) Forest Fire Control Service




Freud, Sigmund




Function of the Orgasm

 (WR)




Funktion des Orgasmus, Die,

 (WR)




 




Galactic stream




Galileo Galilei




Geiger-Müller (GM) counters




Genital Rights




Germany




Nazi




Goethe, Johann Wolfgang von




Gold, Philip




Gordon, J. Berkeley




Green, H.




 




habeas corpus proceedings




Hartford (Connecticut)




Haydon, Charles




Hays, Arthur Garfield




Health, Education, and Welfare, U.S. Department of




Heller, Robert B.




Higgins, Thomas C.




Hildreth (patent attorney)




Hiss, Hyman




Hitler, Adolf




Hoff, Grethe




Holliday (FDA inspector)




Homestead, Kari




Hoodlums in Government (Higs)




Hoppe, Walter




House Un-American Activities Committee




 




Infant Research Center




injunction, FDA-initiated




Clifford’s failure to read before issuing




contempt charges for violation of




decree of




execution of




questions of constitutionality of




Ross interrogated about




Inquisition




Internal Revenue Service




International Psychoanalytic Association




irradiation




orgone




 




Jefferson Memorial




Jenks, Jo




Jesus Christ




“John & Nelson Rockefeller Atomic Energy Enterprises,”




Justice Department, U.S.




 




Karrer, Aurora




Kemper, Werner




Kenyon, A. Harris




Kepler, Johannes




Keyhoe, Donald




Kinsey, Alfred




Korean War




Kowadle, Sheldon N.




Kreyberg, Leiv




kr

x

 number system




Kuhn, Thomas




 




Leonardo da Vinci




Lewisburg Federal Penitentiary




inmate requests at




Reich’s death at




Library of Congress




Life Energy




blockage of




discovery of




see also

 Orgone energy




Lincoln, Abraham




Lincoln Memorial




Listen, Little Man!

 (WR)




Little Orgonon (Tucson, Arizona)




Lough, Allan




Lucerne (Switzerland)




Luther, Martin




 




MacDonald, Helen




Maine




Health and Welfare Department




see also specific cities and towns




Malinowski, Bronislaw




Marquis, A. N., Company




Martin Luther

 (film)




Marx, Karl




Mass Psychology




Mass Psychology of Fascism

 (WR)




McArthur, Gen. Douglas




McCarthy, Joseph




McCullough, Robert A.




McGuire, Joseph




medical orgonomy (

see also

 American Association for Medical Orgonomy)




Melanor




Menninger, Karl




mental hygiene




Messenger, The

 (WR)




Mills, Peter




Mintener, Bradshaw




Missouri




Mocenigo, Giovanni




Modju land, 

see

 Soviet Union




Moise, William




in Tucson




Morseth, Aenne




Murder of Christ, The

 (WR)




 




National Academy of Science




National Association of Authors and Journalists




National Research Council




Natural Law




Neill, A. S.




New Hampshire, University of




New Haven (Connecticut)




New Jersey




antagonism to Reich’s followers in




construction of orgone energy accumulators in




drought in




New Republic




Newton, Isaac




New York




Atomic Energy Commission in




attorneys in




liquidation of books and accumulators in




orgone energy accumulators in




orgonomists practicing in




Reich divides time between Orgonon and




State University of




weather conditions in




Norway




bion experiments in




nuclear radiation (NR)




orgone energy to counteract (

see also

 Oranur experiment)




 




Oak Ridge Institute of Nuclear Studies




Oklahoma




Ollendorff, Ilse (Reich’s second wife)




at Atomic Energy commission meeting




FDA injunction against




marital problems of WR and




New Year’s Eves with WR




during Oranur experiment




orgone motor test witnessed by




resignation from Wilhelm Reich Foundation of




in WR’s will




Oppenheimer, J. Robert




Oranur experiment




cloudbusting and, 

see

 Oranur Weather Control operation




injunction and




letters to U.S. government officials about




Melanor and




negative effects of




reports on




Oranur Experiment: First Report

 (WR)




Oranur Weather Control operation (OROP)




Desert




Ellsworth Experiment




Orgasm Theory




orgone energy (OR)




accumulation and concentration of, 

see

 orgone energy accumulators




atmospheric/cosmic (

see also

 Cosmic Energy)




atomic energy and nuclear radiation and (

see also

 Oranur experiment)




attacks on




biological




definition of




deadly (

see also

 Deadly ORgone)




discovery of




equatorial




medical effects of




motor operated by




Oppenheimer’s denial of




organismic




physics and biophysics of




preparation for experiments with




primordial




science of, 

see

 orgonomy




specific characteristics of




theory of




weather and (

see also

 cloudbusting; Oranur Weather Control operation)




orgone energy accumulators (OEAs)




American Medical Association denunciation of




animal experiments using




bomb shelters constructed as




Brady’s attack on




charging of vacuum tubes in, 

see

 VACOR tubes




FDA investigation of




first, building of




injunction against




and Little Orgonon




for medical treatment




in New York




and Oranur experiment




pamphlet on




patent application for




for Pilot Research Project




production of




Ross interrogated about




Orgone Energy Bulletin




Orgone Institute




Press




Research Laboratories, Inc.




Orgone Theory




orgonometric equations




Orgonomic Anti-Nuclear Radiation Project, 

see

 Oranur experiment




orgonomy




atomic theory toppled by




court case against




definition of




history of




medical (

see also

 American Association for Medical Orgonomy)




psychoanalysis versus




Red fascist slander of




sex-economy and




special applications of




University of Orgonomy




Orgonon (Rangeley, Maine)




court order for destruction of accumulators, books, and printed materials at




DOR at




Emotional Plague Prevention Office (EPPO) at




FDA inspectors at




Little (Tucson, Arizona)




move from New York City to




Oranur Weather Control operation at




Orgone Energy Observatory at




Orgonomic Anti-Nuclear Radiation Project at, 

see

 Oranur experiment




Reich’s grave at




during Reich’s imprisonment




and Reich’s will




removal of books and accumulators from




return from Arizona to




Richardson’s report to Reich at




students’ laboratory at




University of Orgonomy at




Wilhelm Reich Museum at




see also

 Orgone Institute




Oslo (Norway)




University of




 




Pasteur, Louis




Pearson, S. V.




Pennsylvania




U.S. penitentiary in, 

see

 Lewisburg Federal Penitentiary




People in Trouble

 (WR)




physics




classical




orgone




quantum




Pichel, Irving




Pink, Annie (Reich’s first wife)




Planck, Max




planet, dying




“Planetary Valley Forge,”




Platz (attorney)




Portland (Maine)




cloudbusters constructed in




U.S. District Court in




weather station in




Potter (U.S. Marshall)




Preventive Social Service Center




primal germination, beginning of




Princeton University, Institute of Advanced Study




Psychiatric Quarterly




psychoanalysis




orgonomy versus




 




quantum physics




Quimby, Lila




 




radiation sickness




radium (Ra)




Raknes, Ola




Rangeley (Maine)




cloudbusting in




DOR effects over




injunction against Reich’s publications and equipment in




Reich’s property in, 

see

 Orgonon




rumors about Reich in




trip to Tucson from




Raphael, Chester M.




Raymond, Berle




Red fascists




Reich, Eva




bequests to




cloudbuster experiments witnessed by




effect of parents’ divorce on




habeas corpus writ drafted by




marriage of




in medical school




negative effects of Oranur experiment on




Reich’s letters to




Reich, Peter




bequests to




early childhood of




with Eva during Reich’s imprisonment




health effect of Oranur experiment on




impact of parents’ marital problems on




on trip to Arizona




Richardson, Asa




Roanoke (Virginia)




Roosevelt, Eleanor




Ross, Bea




Ross, Tom




Rossellini, Roberto




Ruppelt, Edward J.




Russia, 

see

 Soviet Union




 




St. Clair, James




St. Lewis, Roy




Sanger, Margaret




Scheele, Leonard A.




schizophrenia




Schneeberg (Germany)




Schubert, Franz




Scopes trial




sensations




sex-economy




Sexual Revolution, The

 (WR)




Sharaf, Myron (Mickey)




Sharaf, Peter (Grethe’s son)




Shenandoah Valley




Silvert, Michael




contempt-of-court charges against




publications and accumulators removed from Orgonon by




Skellenger, H.




Smith, Margaret Chase




Southworth Machine Company




Soviet Union




Stalin, Joseph




Stalinism




State Department, U.S.




State University of New York




Steig, William




Stevens, David H.




Sturbridge (Massachusetts)




Supreme Court, U.S.




Sweeney, George C.




 




Tallaferro, Alberto




Tannehill, Ivan R.




Texas




Thurber (engineer)




Trial by Prejudice

 (Hays)




Tropp, Simeon J.




Truman, Harry S.




Tucson




Bank Trust Company




operation base in




OROP Desert in




trip from Rangeley to




 




unidentified flying objects (UFOs, Eas)




United States Health Agencies




 




VACOR tubes




vegetative energy, 

see

 orgone energy




Vienna




University of




Virginia




 




Waal, Nic




Wallace, Henry




Washington, D.C.




Washington, George




Washington, William




Washington Monument




Weather Bureau, U.S.




Westport (Connecticut)




Wight, Donald




Wilhelm Reich Foundation (WRF)




income of




injunction against




liquidation of assets of




Mills as attorney for




and Oranur experiment




in Reich’s will




resignations from




Wilhelm Reich Infant Trust Fund




Willie, James A.




Wolfe, T. P.




WR—History of Orgonomy Biography




Wylie, H. Lee




Wyvell, Lois




 




Yuma (Arizona)

A Note About the Author










Wilhelm Reich’s many works include 

Character Analysis

, 

The Function of the Orgasm

, 

The Cancer Biopathy

, 

Cosmic Superimposition

, and earlier autobiographical writings: 

Passion of Youth

, 

American Odyssey

, and 

Beyond Psychology

—all published by Farrar, Straus and Giroux. An early disciple of Freud’s, he came to America in 1939, published 

The Function of the Orgasm

 in 1942, and died in 1957.

Bust of Reich by Jo Jeuks, 1949, now mounted on Reich’s tomb (The Wilhelm Reich Infant Trust)










Ilse Ollendorff and Peter Reich (The Wilhelm Reich Infant Trust)










Reich’s laboratory at the observatory (The Wilhelm Reich Infant Trust)










Reich with his dog, Troll, on the porch outside his study at the Orgone Energy Observatory (The Wilhelm Reich Infant Trust)










Eva Reich (The Wilhelm Reich Infant Trust)










Working in the observatory. This is also the area where Reich painted; see table with brushes at left. (The Wilhelm Reich Infant Trust)










Wilhelm Reich with the sculpture he made. He called it “The Messenger.” (The Wilhelm Reich Infant Trust)










Working with the cloudbuster (The Wilhelm Reich Infant Trust)










Grethe Hoff (The Wilhelm Reich Infant Trust)










Wilhelm Reich, 1955 (The Wilhelm Reich Infant Trust)










Wilhelm Reich, 1950. Still in doubt about whether to fight the Emotional Plague on its own turf (The Wilhelm Reich Infant Trust)










Wilhelm Reich, 1951, during the ORANUR experiment (The Wilhelm Reich Infant Trust)










“Bound for Prison: Dr. Reich and Dep. Marshal William Doherty” (The Wilhelm Reich Infant Trust)

The author and publisher have provided this e-book to you for your personal use only. You may not make this e-book publicly available in any way. 

Copyright infringement is against the law. If you believe the copy of this e-book you are reading infringes on the author’s copyright, please notify the publisher at: 

us.macmillanusa.com/piracy

.

Also by Wilhelm Reich




American Odyssey: Letters and Journals, 1940–1947




Beyond Psychology: Letters and Journals, 1934–1939




The Bioelectrical Investigation of Sexuality and Anxiety




The Bion Experiments




The Cancer Biopathy




Character Analysis




Children of the Future




Early Writings, Volume One




Ether, God and Devil / Cosmic Superimposition




The Function of the Orgasm




Genitality




The Invasion of Compulsory Sex-Morality




Listen, Little Man!




The Mass Psychology of Fascism




The Murder of Christ




Passion of Youth: An Autobiography, 1897–1922




People in Trouble




Record of a Friendship




Reich Speaks of Freud




Selected Writings




The Sexual Revolution

Farrar, Straus and Giroux

 18 West 18th Street, New York 10011

 Copyright © 2012 by The Wilhelm Reich Infant Trust

 Introduction copyright © 2012 by James E. Strick

 All rights reserved

 Distributed in Canada by D&M Publishers, Inc.




Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data




Reich, Wilhelm, 1897–1957.




[Selections. English]




Where’s the truth?: letters and journals, 1948–1957 / Wilhelm Reich; edited by Mary Boyd Higgins; with an introduction by James E. Strick; with translations by Derek and Inge Jordan.—1st ed.




p.; cm.




Includes index.




Direct continuation of the author’s American odyssey.




ISBN: 978-1-4668-2012-8




I. Higgins, Mary (Mary Boyd). II. Reich, Wilhelm, 1897–1957. American odyssey. III. Title.




[DNLM: 1. Reich, Wilhelm, 1897–1957. 2. Psychoanalysis—Collected Correspondence. 3. Pyschoanalysis—Diaries. 4. Psychoanalytic Theory—Collected Correspondence. 5. Psychoanalytic Theory—Diaries. WZ 100]




616.89'170922—dc23




2011049910




www.fsgbooks.com

*

 

The Cancer Biopathy, Volume 2, The Discovery of the Orgone

, New York: Orgone Institute Press, 1948.

†

 The office of New York attorney Arthur Garfield Hays. founding member of the American Civil Liberties Union, member of the defense team in the Scopes trial, and author of 

Trial by Prejudice

.

*

 Reich’s term for the primordial energy substratum that fills all space. Reich has written that “It moves in an undulating fashion and in a certain direction; in our planetary system generally from west to east, faster than the planetary globe.”

*

 Socialist politician and chancellor of West Germany 1969–74; he participated in Reich’s bioelectrical experiments while in exile in Oslo, Norway, 1935–36.

†

 The energy was named “orgone” in reference to the history of its discovery through the study of the orgasm and to its biological effect of charging substances of organic origin.

‡

 Eva Reich, Reich’s elder daughter from his early marriage to Annie Pink, from whom he was divorced in 1934, was in medical school at this time.

§

 Reich’s student Allan Cott, M.D.

*

 Reich refers here to the standard physics explanation of the functioning of Geiger-Müller tubes. The tubes are filled with gases whose atoms are electrically neutral. Radioactivity causes ionization, i.e. the atoms in the gas, (which were formally electrically neutral) become electrically charged—they become ions. When the gas is ionized, it becomes more electrically conductive—the ions will conduct an electrical current that is manifest in the “click” of the Geiger-Müller counter. For further experiments on this problem see Reich’s report 

The Oranur Experiment, First Report

 (

1947–1951

), The Wilhelm Reich Foundation, Rangeley, Maine, 1951.

*

 Mildred Edie Brady, freelance journalist whose article “The Strange Case of Wilhelm Reich,” published in 

New Republic

 May 26, 1947, smeared Reich and his work, attacking in particular the orgone energy accumulator.

†

 The science of orgone energy.

‡

 Walter Hoppe, M.D., a student of Reich’s in Israel.

*

 Reich was known as a charismatic speaker.

†

 Reich’s second wife, Ilse Ollendorff.

*

 James Willie, M.D., a student of Reich’s.

†

 The name that Reich gave to the property in Rangeley, Maine, he had purchased in 1942 as a home for his work.

*

 Vacor tubes are vacuum tubes that have been charged with orgone energy.

†

 After Annie and Wilhelm Reich were divorced, she did everything possible to separate their two daughters from him.

*

 Vernon Collins, a Rangeley contractor.

†

 Thomas E. Ross, the caretaker at Orgonon and a loyal friend to Reich.

*

 Mr. Hays responded on 1 July 1948, saying, “Your discoveries are thrilling.” He recommended a New York patent attorney.

*

 Reich refers to the energy field surrounding the planet.

*

 Reich identified “armor” as the sum total of typical character attitudes, which an individual develops as a blocking against his emotional excitations, resulting in rigidity of the body, lack of emotional contact, “deadness.” Functionally identical to muscular armor (chronic muscular spasms).

†

 Philip Gold, M.D. one of Reich’s students

*

 Reich refers to the Orgone Energy Observatory, which was built of stone.

†

 See 

The Bion Experiments

, New York: Farrar, Straus and Giroux, 1979.

‡

 An experiment carried out in 1945 that revealed the organization of plasmatic matter from mass-free orgone energy. See 

The Cancer Biopathy

, Volume 2, 

The Discovery of the Orgone

, New York: Farrar, Straus and Girour, 1973.

*

 Reich and Ilse Ollendorff’s four-year-old son.

*

 A term Reich used to describe activities of the Soviet Union, which he considered to be “organized emotional plague.”

†

 

New Republic

, May 1947.

*

 The orgasm theory evolved from Reich’s clinical research and refers to his discovery that the function of the orgasm is to regulate the organism’s biological energy. If this function is disturbed, there is a damming-up of energy in the organism, creating an energy stasis that becomes the source of disease and irrationalism. This discovery was basic to Reich’s ongoing investigation of energy processes in nature.

*

 The sensations of current that appear with the mobilization of vegetative (biological, sexual, orgone) energy are frequently described as “streamings.”

*

 The name under which Reich conducted his work.

*

 Reich’s biological experiments in Norway, the Bion Experiments, were attacked savagely in the Norwegian press. See 

Beyond Psychology

, New York: Farrar, Straus and Giroux, 1994.

*

 Hays advised against court action.

*

 Lincoln Barnett, 

The Universe and Dr. Einstein,

 New York: William Slone Associates, 1948

*

 

Listen, Little Man!

 New York: Orgone Institute Press, 1948.

*

 A young man who had been recommended to Reich as a possible assistant. He later disappeared under questionable circumstances.

†

 

f

 symbolizes functional identity.

*

 The artist and children’s book author William Steig illustrated 

Listen, Little Man!

 He later played a prominent role in raising money for Reich’s legal expenses and oversaw the publication of his final book. 

Contact with Space

, New York: Core Pilot Press, 1957.

*

 Chester M. Raphael, M.D., a student of Reich’s.

*

 The kr

x

 number system is the geometric progression of the number 4, i.e., 4 is multiplied by a number to produce another number in a sequence, hence kr

x

 numbers include 1, 4, 16, 64, 256, 1,024, 4,096, 16,384, and so forth. Reich explains at the bottom of page 102 in 

Contact with Space

. It figures prominently in the choice of pendulum lengths tested in his pendulum experiments on pages 102–10 in that book.

*

 Grethe Hoff, a Norwegian social worker who came to the United States to study with Reich. She subsequently married Myron Sharaf, one of Reich’s students.

*

 “It was one of the principles of our work that we study only living, motile matter, because it is the changeability, the functioning, and not the static element, not the structure, which are of primary interest,” Reich, 

The Bion Experiments

.

*

 Significant data were collected in the Infant Research Center over a period of two years. Lack of personnel curtailed the center’s growth beyond that time. See 

Children of the Future

, New York: Farrar, Straus and Giroux, 1983.

*

 Margaret Sanger was forbidden by General Douglas McArthur to go to Japan for birth control work.

*

 Peter Mills was attorney for the Wilhelm Reich Foundation, which was formed in 1949 to support Reich’s work.

*

 A student of Reich’s.

†

 Reich refers to the Orgone Institute Press.

*

 See 

Cosmic Superimposition

, New York: Farrar, Straus and Giroux, 1971.

†

 Ola Raknes was a Norwegian student of Reich’s.

*

 Peter Mills wrote to the Atomic Energy Commission enclosing this letter from Reich. He received a reply from Charles Dunham, M.D., Chief, Medical Branch, Division of Biology and Medicine, dated September 29, 1950. It advised him that “until more is known about the true nature of this BEFORE MATTER from of cosmic energy called Orgone, it is my own personal opinion that it would be unwise to try to apply it to human disease. No one in this office feels qualified to pass on its merits.”

†

 American Association for Medical Orgonomy.

*

 Hervey Cleckley, M.D., 

The Mask of Sanity

, St. Louis, Mo: C. V. Mosby Co., 1950.

†

 A Rangeley woman who worked for Reich’s family.

‡

 Tom Ross’s wife Bea.

§

 A Rangeley citizen who spread rumors that Reich was a communist.

¶

 Dr. Willie had taken actions that confused the physicians’ organization AAMO with the functions of the Orgone Institute and the Wilhelm Reich Foundation.

*

 Elsworth F. Baker, M.D., one of Reich’s students.

†

 Reich used this term to signify man’s chronic murder of life and truth. See 

The Murder of Christ

, New York: Farrar, Straus and Giroux, 1971.

*

 Dr. Baker wrote to James C. Auchincloss, M.C., who replied that he had forwarded it to Dr. Leonard A. Scheele, the surgeon general. It is not known if Dr. Scheele responded.

*

 ORgone Anti NUcleaR.

†

 

See appendix

*

 A small accumulator designed to irradiate a limited area.

*

 No. I was designated as a control, to be left untreated.

*

 There is a contrast between “10x,” which appears in Reich’s handwritten manuscript, and “1x,” which is in the printed report.

†

 A room in the students’ laboratory. The walls and floor were layered with organic and metallic materials as an accumulator.

‡

 H. Lee Wylie, M.D., a student of Reich’s working at Orgonon.

§

 Mice that had been in an accumulator.

*

 An accumulator composed of twenty layers of organic and metallic materials.

*

 Eva had given her father a set of oil paints for Christmas 1950.

*

 Myron Sharaf.

*

 Helen MacDonald, Ph.D., biologist and a student of Reich’s.

*

 The coloration of the skin, as noted in the public report, was greenish. T-bacilli are a type of microorganism found in Reich’s earlier experiments from degeneration of cancer tissue or from putrefaction of proteinaceous material. The letter 

T

 refers to the German word for death, 

Tod.

†

 An accumulator comprising a single layer of organic and metallic materials.

*

 Reich refers here to the results of Reich blood tests. This was a series of laboratory tests, which included timing the disintegration of red blood cells into bions, observation of autoclaved blood cells, etc. See C. M. Raphael and H. E. MacDonald, 

Orgonomic Diagnosis of Cancer Biopathy

, Rangeley, Me.: The Wilhelm Reich Foundation, 1952.

*

 “The Orgone Energy Accumulator: Its Scientific and Medical Use,” Rangeley, Me.: The Wilhelm Reich Foundation, 1951

†

 A patent attorney.

*

 In the 1870s, English physician Henry Charlton Bastian engaged in scientific experiments and debates with Louis Pasteur over the question of whether spontaneous generation of life is possible. Pasteur’s public opposition to spontaneous generation was at least in part due to his staunch Catholicism.

*

 Reich and Ilse Ollendorff’s marriage was being dissolved in Arkansas.

*

 Ilse returned on June 9.

*

 The body of knowledge within Orgono my that deals with the economy of the biological (orgone) energy in the organism, with the manner in which the organism regulates its biological energy.

*

 Reich refers to the road leading to the Orgone Energy Observatory, which is on a hill. Since Oranur is understood as a hyperexcited state of orgone energy, as was produced in the Oranur experiment, Oranur can be strong at a particular time and place.

†

 “Radiate” is as measured by Geiger-Müller counter.

*

 The concept of anorgonia encompasses those biopathic conditions that share one common source namely a block in plasma motility. See 

The Cancer Biopathy

, ch. 9.

*

 An accumulator in the shape of a funnel that has been affected by Oranur.

*

 Without warning, Reich was expelled from the International Psychoanalytic Association at its meeting in Lucerne, Switzerland, August 1934.

†

 See 

Reich Speaks of Freud

, New York: Farrar, Straus, and Giroux, 1968.

*

 Deadly orgone, a term first used by Reich to describe unusual black clouds that began to pass over and hover above Orgonon during the Oranur experiment. Later, it was sometimes used more generally to describe stagnant orgone energy. See 

CORE

 6, nos., 1–4 (July 1954), Orgone Institute, Rangeley, Maine.

*

 The rocks in the observatory walls and fireplace developed black spots or blotches that sometimes spread over the whole surface. See 

Orgone Energy Bulletin

 5, nos. 1, 2 (March 1953), Orgone Institute Press, Rangeley, Maine.

†

 Lois Wyvell worked on publishing matters.

*

 Cosmic ORgone Engineering. Reich refers here to a second series of cloudbusting operations.

*

 Biologist, and research associate, University of New Hampshire, had repeated several of Reich’s experiments and become seriously interested in the work. See “Rocky Road to Functionalism,” 

Core

 7, nos. 3–4 (December 1955).

*

 Reich coined the term 

Modju

 from the name Mocenigo, a Venetian nobleman who delivered Giordano Bruno to the Inquisition, and Dzhugashvili, Stalin’s real name. “Modju land” refers to the Soviet Union.

*

 Reich refers to the fact that the FDA has authority over the interstate shipment of medical devices.

†

 H. Green, Dr. Baker’s attorney.

*

 “Einstein succeeded in fascinating the first half of the twentieth century just because he had emptied space. Emptying space, reducing the whole universe to a static nothing, was the only theory that could satisfy the desert-like character structure of man of this age. Empty, immobile space and a desert character structure fit well together. It was a last attempt on the part of armored man to withstand and withhold knowledge of a universe full of life energy, pulsating in many rhythms, always in a state of development and change; in one word, functional and not mechanistic, mystical, or relativistic. It was the last barrier in scientific terms, to the final breakdown of the human armoring.”—WR

*

 One of Reich’s Norwegian students.

*

 Reich refers to a town in eastern Maine that was suffering from drought.

†

 Artist, student of Reich’s, husband of Eva Reich.

*

 Reich had agreed to a payment of $1,000 if he was able to effect rain.

*

 Donald Keyhoe, 

The Flying Saucers Are Real

, New York: Fawcett, 1950.

†

 One of the basic characteristics of the orgone motor was silence.

*

 A Maine lawyer.

*

 Leiv Kreyberg, professor of pathology at Oslo University, student of cancer inheritance in experimental mice, most active scientific opponent of Reich’s bion research in the late 1930s. He continued to slander Reich’s scientific work in Norway for decades thereafter.

†

 J. Berkley Gordon, M.D., director New Jersey State Hospital at Marlboro, president of the New Jersey Neuropsychiatric Association, antagonists to Reich’s work, brought about the dismissal of two physicians because of their interest in it.

*

 Maine senator Margaret Chase Smith.

†

 Senator Joseph McCarthy, the House Un-American Activities Committee.

*

 

Ea

 signified “Energy alpha,” and was Reich’s code word for unidentified flying objects.

†

 This is an example of an orgonometric equation concerning unidentified flying objects. Reich discussed his use of these equations in the 

Orgone Energy Bulletin

 3, no. 2 (April 1951) and 

Contact with Space

.

*

 A local man who worked sometimes at Orgonon.

†

 Reich’s response to the complaint for injunction was not accepted by the court and a decree of injunction, more far-reaching than the complaint, was issued in default on March 19, 1954. 

See appendix

‡

 Reich’s physician students were considering an action to seek revocation of the injunction on the grounds that it interfered with their right to practice medicine as they saw fit.

*

 This is the note that appeared in the American Psychiatric Association newsletter of April 15, 1954: “ORGONE ENERGY DEVICES BARRED FROM INTERSTATE COMMERCE. In March the Federal District Court in Portland, Maine, granted an injunction barring Dr. Wilhelm Reich and his Foundation from distributing ‘orgone energy’ devices in interstate commerce. The Food and Drug Administration estimated that more than 1000 of these devices had been sold or rented at prices ranging from $15 to $225 each. In addition the Court decree banned distribution of labeling claiming that orgone energy exists and called for destruction of all promotional material containing instructions for the assembly and use of the devices. The defendants must also recall all orgone energy accumulators now rented to out-of-state (Maine) practitioners and patients. Dr. Reich did not appear in court to argue against the action. The Acting Medical Director of the Federal Food and Drug Administration has expressed his Agency’s appreciation for APA’s help in the successful development of its case.”

*

 Lawyer Haydon had been retained by Orgone therapists to challenge the injunction.

*

 Ilse Ollendorff was no longer living with Reich; and Grethe Hoff’s marriage to Myron Sharaf had foundered. She and Reich had become intimate at this time, when he was preparing an expedition to Arizona to study conditions of desert development.

*

 Reich refers to his wall painting of a leaping man carrying a torch. He called it 

The Messenger.

†

 Reich was accompanied on this trip by his daughter and son, Eva and Peter, and by Eva’s husband, William Moise.

*

 Greta and Myron Sharaf lived in Boston and had a young son named Peter.

*

 “Energy alpha,” signifying unknown flying objects.

*

 The name Reich gave to the Tucson operation base.

*

 Reich’s term signifying “Hoodlums in Government.”

*

 

Martin Luther

, 1953 film directed by Irving Pichel.

†

 “Hoodlums Outside Government.”

‡

 Reich had no previous knowledge of Dr. Silvert’s action and questioned its wisdom.

§

 Grethe’s father.

*

 Grethe and her child had joined Reich in Arizona.

*

 See 

The Murder of Christ

, New York: Farrar, Straus and Giroux, 1971, chap. 1.

†

 A Chinese tea house in Tucson.

*

 Grethe Hoff went to Norway on 22 July 1955. She did not return to the United States.

†

 The physicians’ appeal to the Circuit Court of Appeals for the Eastern Circuit had been denied in May 1955.

*

 Reich refers to the possibility that communists were trying to kill his work in the United States while using it in the Soviet Union.

*

 A Boston lawyer.

†

 This letter was not sent.

*

 James St. Clair, an attorney.

†

 This telegram was not sent.

*

 A person who was enthusiastic about Reich’s work but who thought he had overlooked extensive materials dealing with “Prana” and the “Aura.”

†

 On the worst Europe an winter of the century.

*

 Kari Homestead, Steig’s wife.

†

 Judge Clifford had been replaced by Judge Sweeney.

*

 

Conspiracy: An Emotional Chain Reaction,

 a compilation of materials regarding attacks on Reich in the United States.

*

 Edward J. Ruppelt, 

The Report on UFOs

 New York: Doubleday Co., 1956.

*

 William Steig was sending Reich reports on weather conditions worldwide.

†

 Reich refers to the manuscript for 

Contact with Space

, which was being published by Core Pilot Press under Steig’s direction.

*

 Reich was deeply offended and concerned by the many distortions of his work that were spread in the Greenwich Village area of New York City, where Steig lived.

*

 Aurora Karrer, a woman with whom Reich had a personal relationship prior to his imprisonment. While in prison, he referred to her as his wife.

*

 No change was made to Reich’s will.

†

 Reich refers to the book 

Contact with Space

, which was published during his imprisonment.

*

 The prison allowed inmates to correspond with only three people. Reich specified Eva, Peter, and Aurora Karrer.

†

 As a young girl, Eva had been psychoanalyzed by Berta Bornstein, a friend of her mother’s, who made every effort to convince the child that her father was insane.

‡

 Rangeley carpenter.