Anthology  of  Russian  Literature 
from  the  EarUest  Period  to 

Leo  Wiener 


HARVARD 
COLLEGE 
LI B  RARY 


IVAN  SERGVEEViCH  TURGENEV 

In  clays  of  (Jf)iihl,  m  days  .i:iL;uishccJ  tliou^ht  over 
ihc  fute  of  my  native  land,  you  alone  are  my  -taff  and 
my  support,  O  great,  niij^hty,  true  and  frcr  Ku^-ian 
lani^ua<;e  !  Were  it  not  for  you.  how  could  one  help 
(Jesjjairing'  at  the  bii^'ht  6f  udiat  i;?  taking  place  at  home? 
Hut  it  is  unthinkable  that  such  a  language  should  not  be 
given  tu  a  great  natiuu.  ' 

'       '  '    ■  TURGENEV. 


Digitized  by  Google 


,  Anthology  of  Russian 

Literature 

From  the  Earliest  Period  to  the  Present  Time 


By 

Leo  Wiener 


IN  TWO  PARTS 

N^PART  II// 
The  Nineteenth  Century 


G.  P.  Putnam's  Sons 

New  York  and  London 

Ube  Knicfcerbocitec  press 
1903 


0' 


ComxoaT,  vn 

BT 

WIBN9R 


nMiilMd1f«tih.i9ais 


Digitized  by  Google 


TO  MV  PRIBNO  AND  COIXBAGim 
ARCHIBALD  GARY  COOUDGG 
THIS  WORK  IS 
GRATBFULLY  DEDICATED 


PREFACE 


CONSIDERATIONS  of  space  compel  me  to  give  but 
a  small  selection  of  authors  from  the  last  two  dec- 
ades of  the  nineteenth  century,  while  some  of  the  writers, 
here  omitted,  of  the  beginning  of  this  period  have  been 
previously  treated  in  the  first  volume  of  the  Anthology. 
For  the  intermediate  time,  the  material  here  offered  will  be 
found  sufi5ciently  complete,  while  the  essays  of  Byelinski, 
Dobrolydbov,  Pisarev,  and  Merezhkdvski  illustrate  the  evo- 
lution of  Rnfldan  litenture  in  the  nineteenth  oentury,  as 
vieivod  by  the  Roflrian  criticB  tfaemadves. 

The  introductory  sketch  is  not  intended  as  a  pfdiminary 
exposition  of  the  Anthology,  bnt  as  a  t&umk  of  all  the  mat- 
ter contained  there;  it  therefore,  be  best  perused  after 
the  extracts  and  bicigraphical  sketches  of  the  separate  authors 
have  become  familiar  to  the  reader.  Td  avoid  nndue  anno- 
tations, literary  allnsions  have  not  been  mentioned  in  the 
footnotes;  they  may  readily  be  discovered  by  taming  to  the 
Index,  where  all  cross  references  are  given. 

Dnring  the  preparation  of  the  second  volume,  the  interest- 
ing discovery  was  made  that  not  Sir  John  Bowring,  but 
William  D.  Lewis,  an  American,  was  the  first  to  render 
Russian  poetry  into  English;  thus,  the  Stanzas  given  on  p. 
394  of  vol.  i.  originally  appeared  in  the  National  Gazette 
and  Literary  Register  of  Philadelphia,  on  January  31,  1821, 
while  other  poems  seem  to  have  been  translated  by  him 
much  earlier. 

I  again  wish  to  express  my  thanks  to  the  authors  and  pub- 
lishers by  whose  permission  translations  are  here  reproduced, 
and  to  ray  colleague,  Prof.  F.  N.  Robinson,  who  has  patiently 
read  through  these  pages  and  given  me  his  advice. 


CONTENTS 


A    Sketch  of   RHSSIAN    LlTER^A-TtntE   in  rttK  NlKgTEENTH 

Century    i 


The  Ninbtbenth  Chnturv   ajs 

Karamzin  (1766- 1826)   27 

Letters  of  a  Russian  Traveller  .  .  .  .  .  28 

Tver   28 

On  the  French  Tragedy   30 

On  Shakspere   31 

London   32 

The  Churchyard   33 

Poor  Liza  ..........  34 

History  of  the  Russian  Empire.    Introduction      .      .  37 

Kryl6v  (1768-1844)   4r 

The  Ass  and  the  Nightingale   41 

The  Quartette   43 

Damian's  Fishsoup  .   44 

The  Swan,  the  Pike,  and  the  Crab   4S 

The  Lion  and  the  Wolf   45 

The  Cloud   46 

The  Shipwrecked  Sailor  and  the  Sea      ....  46 

Izmdylov  (1779-1831)   46 

The  Drunkard's  Vow   47 

The  Canary  and  the  Nightingale   47 

The  Two  Cats   .      .      .    48 

Naryfahny  (i 780-1825)   4g 

The  Two  Ivdns  ;  or,  The  Passion  for  Litigation    .      ♦  49 

Zhuk6vski  (1783-1852)   54 

Svyetl&na   55 

The  Minstrel  in  the  Russian  Camp   63 

gozl6v  (i779-'84o)   67 

Solitude   68 

Kfev   69 

The  Black  Monk   70 

vii 


viii  Contents 

PAOB 

Bityushkov  (1787-^855)   73 

The  Friend's  Shadow       .   7;^ 

The  Dying  Tasso   75 

Gliuka  (1788-1880)   78 

Moscow                                                    •       .      »  79 

The  Search  for  God   80 

Prince  Vydzemski  (1792-1878)   81 

The  Samovdr   82 

To  My  Three  Absent  Friends   84 

Death  Reaps  the  Harvest  of  Life   85 

Ryly^ev  (1706-1826)   86 

Voynar6vski                                                             .  87 

Iv&n  Sus^nin   88 

Griboyddov  (1795-1829)   92 

Intelligence  Comes  to  Grief  »  93 

Bestiuhev  (Marlinski)  (1797-1837)  ......  102 

Ammaliit  Bek   102 

Lazh^chnikov  (1794-1869)      .......  iii 

The  Heretic  «II2 

Baron  D^lvig  (1798-18.^1)   120 

Gloomy  Thoughts   I20 

Sang  a  little  bird,  and  sang   121 

Ah,  you  night,  you  little  night   122 

Piishkin  (1799-1837)   122 

The  Captain's  Daughter   125 

Evg<^ni  Ony<^giti.    Tatyina's  letter       ....  I.^I 

The  Bakhchisardy  Fountain    ......  133 

The  Poison-Tree   135 

The  Bird   I36 

The  Prophet   137 

The  Talisman   138 

The  Lay  of  the  Wise  Ol^g   139 

To  the  Slanderers  of  Russia   142 

Boris  Goduu6v   143 

Demons   147 

Baratyn ski  (1800-1844)   149 

Finland   150 

Spring   LSI 

Troth   151 

Yazykov  (1803-1846)   152 

The  Sailor   153 

The  Storm   154 

To  the  Poet   155 

LdrmoDtov  (1814-1841)   155 


Contents  ix 

PAGB 

A  Hero  of  Onr  Times.   Maksim  Maksimych  .      .      .  157 

The  Demon   i6.'> 

Dispute   167 

Alone  I  wander  out  along  the  road        ....  170 

The  Sail   171 

The  Prayer   171 

The  Branch  of  Palestine  172 

Remember'st  thou  the  day  when  we      ...       .  173 

At  a  Ball   174 

Dream   17 

Kolts6v  (1808-1842)   176 

First  Love   176 

The  Abundant  Harvest   177 

The  Forest   179 

Betrayed  by  a  Bride   181 

The  Mower   l8a 

G^ol  (1809-1852)   185 

The  Dnieper   187 

The  Re^^^6^   188 

Dead  Souls.    Mrs.  Kor6bochka   199 

Byelinski  (1811-1848)   aos 

The  Natural  School   206 

AksAkov  (179^-1859)   216 

The  Family  Chronicle     .......  217 

Khoniyak6v  (1804-1860)   229 

To  My  Children   230 

The  Eagle   231 

Kiev   232 

Ty6tchev  (1803-1873)   234 

Scarce  cooled  from  midday  heat     .....  234 

The  Spring-Storm   235 

I  suffer  still  from  anguished  longing      ....  235 

Sunrise   235 

G€rtsen  (Ilerzen)  (1812-1870)   236 

Slavophiles  and  Panslavism   237 

Ogar^v  (1813-1877)   242 

To  Iskdnder   242 

Monologues   244 

The  Village  Watchman   244 

Count  A.  K.  Tolst6y  (181 7-1875)   245 

Prince  Ser^bryany   246 

The  Death  of  IvAn  the  Terrible   2.S.S 

The  Knrg&n   2.S7 

Gonchar6v  (1812-1891)   259 


X  Contents 

PAOX 

Obl6mov   360 

Dobrolyubov  (1836-1861)   271 

What  is  Obl6movi8m?   272 

Tnrg^nev  (1818-1883)   280 

Fathers  and  Sods   282 

Poems  in  Prose.    Natnre   295 

Grigcr6vich  (1822-1900)   296 

The  Fishermen   297 

Pol6nski  (1820-1898)   303 

The  Birds   303 

Night  in  the  Crimea   304 

Love  scared  thee  not   3Q5 

Musician  Grasshopper   305 

Pisemski  (1820-1881)   310 

The  Old  Proprietress   31 1 

ShenshiD  (Fct)  (1820-1892)   319 

When  deeply  musing  in  the  silence  of  the  night  .  .  3ao 
Every  feeling  at  night  to  me  becomes  clearer  and 

deeper                                           «      .      .      .  320 

Stay  here  awhile,  'tis  good   321 

Night,  then  art  so  blest  with  odours  sweet  and  strong  .  331 

Tryst   322 

Dostoevski  (1821-1881)   32a 

Crime  and  Punishment   323 

v^.  N.  Mdykov  (1821-JS98)   339 

~  The  Peris   340 

Who  Was  Hf  ?    34 1 

The  Marble  Faun   342 

Three  Deaths.   The  Death  of  Seneca  and  of  Lncins      .  344 

jJekr&sov  iiii2i-i877)   347 

Red-nosed  Frost   3A8 

A  Moral  Man   Vi2 

Who  Lives  in  Russia  Happily   353 

The  Unniown  Strip   359 

A  Mother's  Tears   360 

^  Nikiiip  (1S24-1861)   361 

Burldk   361 

The  Gaffer   364 

Pleshch^ev  (1825-1894)   365 

Forward   366 

My  Country   367 

A  Legend   367 

Spring   368 

06tr6vski  (1823-1886)   369 


L'lLjki^uu  Ly  Google 


Contents  xi 

The  Storm   369 

Saltyk6v  (Shchedrfn)  (1826-1889)   379 

Beyond  the  Border   380 

Plsarev  (1841-1868)   i8a 

Flowers  of  Harmless  Humour   386 

Count  L.  N.  Tolst6y  (182S-      )   391 

Anna  Kar^nin   392 

War  and  Peace  .........  401 

Usp^nski  (1840-1902)   408 

The  Power  of  the  Land.   Ivdn  Petr6v    ....  409 

Levitov  (1842-1877)   417 

Shoemaker  Cock-of-the-Boots   417 

Zlatovrdtski  (1845-       )   427 

Old  Shadows   428 

Korol^nko  (1853-       )   43^ 

The  Old  Bell-ringer   437 

Garshfn  ( 1 855-1 888)   443 

That  wniich  Was  Not   443 

PotApenko  (1856-       )   448 

A  Thousand  Talents  ........  448 

Nddson  (1862-1887)   457 

My  Friend,  My  Brother !   458 

Poetry   458 

Pity  the  stately  cypreas  trees   459 

Chekhov  (i860-      )   459 

In  the  Court-room   460 

P>'eshk6v  (G6rki)  (1871-       )   467 

In  the  Steppe  468 

Merezhk6vski  (186.S-       )   4S2 

From  an  Essay  on  "  Pushkin  "   483 

Index   495 


Google 


A  SKETCH  OF  RUSSIAN  LITERATURE  IN  THE 
NINBTBBNTH  CENTURY 


Digitized  by  Google 


A  SKETCH  OF  RUSSIAN  UTERATU&B  IN  THE 
NINBTBBNTH  CENTURY 


I 

WERE  we  to  oompm  Engliah  litefatare  to  the  staiied 
heavens  with  their  galaxies  and  their  permanent  con- 
stellations of  wying  magnitudes*  Russian  literature  would 
xepiesent  itself  to  us  as  the  darkling  sky  which  is  now  il- 
Itonined  by  the  refracted  glamour  of  the  aurora  hocealis*  now 
by  the  iUosive  flashes  of  shooting  meteocs»  and  now  again 
by  the  steadier  briUian^  of  some  errant  comet,  by  the  side 
of  which  stars  seem  pale  and  insignificant.  In  England,  as 
with  the  other  great  nations  of  the  West,  there  have  been 
temporary  suspensions  of  literary  activities,  bat  with  every 
new  unshionding  the  ancient  combinations  gleam  forth  in 
the  azure  vault  in  untarnished  brilliancy,  even  though  new 
stars  may  obtrude  themselves  to  view.  Not  thus  in  Russia. 
After  every  short  period  of  celestial  fireworks  the  heavens 
are  suddenly  merged  into  palpable  darkness,  to  dazzle  us 
once  more  with  an  entirely  new  display  of  unwonted  splen- 
dour. 

Such,  at  least,  is  the  aspect  Russian  literature  bears  in  the 
nineteenth  century.  Though  Ptishkin's  poetry  was  naturally 
the  crowning  glory  of  the  incipient  reign  of  Nicholas  I.,  it 
bears  but  a  faint  resemblance  to  the  lacrimose  verses  of 
Karamzfn,  or  to  the  elegant  imitations  and  patriotic  ebulli- 
tions of  Zhuk6vski  of  the  previous  two  decades,  and  yet 
Karamzfn  lived  till  Fdshkin  reached  man's  estate,  while 
Zhok6v8ki  was  still  active  after  his  death.  P<bhkin  and 
bis  contemporaries  are  dasBed  separately  torn  I«6miontov, 

3 


4       A  Sketch  of  Russian  Literature 


Uioogh  but  fifteen  ymn  lie  between  their  falffha  and  only 
fbar  between  their  deaths.  No  new  division  is  made  for 
poetry  since  the  days  of  Ltoioatov,  though  in  the  light  of 
Nekrtenr's  realism,  who  began  writing  in  184s*  the  poets 
of  pore  art,  M&ykov,  Poldnski,  Ty^tchev,  Fet,— all  of.tfaem 
bom  long  befoce  Pt&shkin's  demise,— were  reviled  by  the 
democratic  critics  and  suffered  more  or  leas  complete  oblivion 
after  the  fifties.  StOl  more  pathetic  is  the  £ate  of  Vydzenuki 
who,  reared  in  the  school  of  Karamzin,  had  the  misfortune 
of  surviving  to  a  vigorous  old  age:  he  bitterly  fielt  the  living 
literary  death  to  which  he  was  doomed  for  moce  than  a 
quarter  of  a  century. 

The  vicissitudes  of  prose  have  been  even  more  varied. 
Karamzin  had  barely  established  the  new  style  of  writing, 
based  on  French  and  English  writers,  still  struggling  with 
the  reactionary  tendency  of  Shishk6v,  whose  antiquated  style 
is  prominent  in  Griboyedov's  comedy,  when  a  whole  school 
of  Romanticists,  beginning  with  Bestuzhev-Marlinski  and 
Irazh^chnikov,  and  ending  with  Pdshkin  and  L^rmontov, 
evolved,  under  the  influence  of  Walter  Scott,  the  Russian 
novel.  It  is  a  far  cry  from  Karamzfn's  L(2a  to  Pushkin's 
Captain  s  Daughter  and  to  L^rmontov's  Hero  of  Our  Time, 
Yet,  within  less  than  a  decade  after  the  latter  had  charmed 
the  public,  Gogol's  Dead  Sauls  completely  obliterated  the 
fame  of  all  its  predecessors,  and  Byelinski's  dietiim  in  r^ud 
to  die  Natttial  Schooi  at  oooe  set  the  pace  for  an  entirdy 
new  set  of  writen,— the  novdiats  of  the  forties.  Turg^nev, 
Qondiarfrv,  Tolst6y,  Dostoevski,  PfBemdd,  were  tiained  in 
that  school  and  wrote  their  first  productions  in  the  lifetime 
of  G6goL  Yet  after  the  memorial  year  1848  a  reaction  set 
in  in  literature  as  wdl  as  in  affidrs,  and  the  fifties,  ex- 
cept for  rare  flashes  of  genius  from  Turg^nev  and  Tdsl6y, 
were  one  barren  waste.  Of  G6got'8  example  and  Byelfnski's 
injunctions  hardly  a  trace  was  left  Then,  during  the  reign 
of  Alexander  II.,  the  atmosphere  was  again  cleared,  and  the 
sixties  produced  that  wonderful  series  of  writings  for  which 
Russia  is  mainly  known  abroad.  And  yet,  in  1862,  Turg^ev 
proved  by  his  Faiken  and  Sons  that  he  was  no  longer  in 


Digitized  by  Google 


A  Sketch  of  Russian  Literature 


5 


tondi  with  Rtmian  reality;  and  a  few  yeafs  later,  after  Tbl- 
8t6y  had  written  hia  War  and  Peace  and  Anma  ITatMa,  be- 
gan TdlatAy'a  laiiid  depaitnie  from  all  reality. 

In  the  mrantime  the  critics,  from  the  master  Byelinski 
down,  through  Dobroly^bov,  PliMiev  and  Chernysh^vaki, 
peached  the  ne  plus  ultra  of  negation,  and  with  them  rose  a 
new  set  of  authors,  wha  returned  to  the  lowest  elements  of 
society  for  their  themes, — ^to  the  peasants.  Grigor6vich, 
Pomyal6vski,  Usp^nski,  and  a  whole  host  of  minor  writers, 
many  of  them  riotous  in  the  absence  of  style,  produced  a  vast 
amount  of  literature.  Dostoevski,  revelling  in  excruciating 
psychological  analyses,  wrote  his  best  work,  Crinu  and 
Punishment,  in  1865.  No  wonder,  then,  that  after  such  a 
concentrated  creative  period  there  should  follow  a  decade  of 
impotence,  in  which  the  only  relief  was  afforded  by  the  older 
writers,  who  occasionally  lighted  up  the  darkness  with  their 
pho^horescence.  Then,  since  the  eighties,  there  has  been 
a  November  abower  of  novelists,  Korol^nko,  Potiipenko, 
Cb^fcboT,  Boborykin,  and  many,  many  more,  and  but  latdy 
a  new  comet  has  loomed  up  in  the  horizon  in  the  person  of 
Makafm  GdrU. 

The  perioda  of  distinct  literaxy  ideala  are  ao  short,  their 
activitiei  ao  varied,  that  one  feels  tempted  to  treat  the  nine- 
teenth century  by  decades,  or,  to  avoid  embanaaaing  reanlta 
from  a  pnrdy  mechanical  anangement,  to  survey  each  field 
of  belles-lettres,  poetiy,  drama,  proae^  in  its  evolution  from 
Karamsfri  to  the  present.  Neither  method,  however,  is  free 
fiom  aerious  objections,  and  it  will  be  found  more  convenient 
to  regard  the  literary  movement  under  each  reign,  especially 
since  the  Decembrist  revolt  at  the  end  of  the  rule  of  Alexan- 
der I.,  the  Crimean  War  under  Nicholas  I.,  and  the  death 
of  Alexander  II.  mark  real  epochs  in  the  intellectual  move- 
ments of  Russia.  Each  reign,  in  its  turn,  is  by  some  his- 
torical event  divisible  into  two  parts,  the  first  of  which 
coincides  with  aspirations  and  vigorous  activities  in  litera- 
ture, the  second  with  relaxation  and  indifference.  Such 
events  were  the  year  181 2  and,  in  a  higher  measure,  the  year 
1848. 


6 


A  Sketch  of  Russian  Literature 


It  would,  however,  be  incorrect  to  identify  the  various 
periods  with  the  political  changes  of  the  Empire.  Though, 
naturally,  a  new  impetus  may  be  given  at  the  beginning  of 
a  new  reign,  or  a  great  national  calamity  may  rouse  the 
dormant  literary  powers  of  the  people,  yet  the  accessions  to 
the  throne  of  the  successive  rulers,  and  their  policies,  do  not 
sufficiently  account  for  the  shortness  of  each  separate  period 
and  their  apparently  abrupt  cessations;  just  as,  on  the  other 
hand,  the  political  changes  themselves  are  frequently  only 
the  reflex  of  the  antecedent  literary  movement  with  the  pro- 
nounced public  opinion  which  is  based  upon  it.  Thus,  for 
example,  the  emancipation  of  the  serfs,  with  its  tremendous 
political  and  social  consequences,  was  not  merely  an  arbi- 
trary act  of  the  monarch,  but  the  logical  culmination  of  the 
litemry  propaganda,  with  Turg^nev  and  his  Memoirs  cf  a 
Humtsman  at  its  head,  which  had  preceded  it 

Nor  can  governmental  policy  and  severity  of  oensonhip 
be  made  aooonntable  for  the  ahort-Uved  litenuy  influence  of 
each  individual  author,  for  the  early  maturity  of  genius,  and 
the  wide  chasm  between  the  anthor'a  sunny  srouth  and  his 
old  age  in  the  rare  instances  when  he  hss  lived  beyond  his 
forties.  At  forty  years  of  age,  rather  earlier  tiun  later,  all 
Russian  writers  have  reached  their  apogee.  Most  attthon 
have  gained  their  reputation  long  before  that,  and  tlietr  old 
age  passes  by  unnoticed  or  in  mystic  abstractions,  and  in 
nearly  all  cases  out  of  tune  with  the  realities  of  the  day. 
And  how  appallingly  large  is  the  number  of  those  whose 
career  was  brought  to  an  untimely  end  before  they  had 
reached  forty,  either  by  violent  means,  as  that  of  Pushkip. 
and  L^rmontov,  or  through  insanity,  as  that  of  Garshin,  or 
through  disease,  frequently  as  the  result  of  dire  wretched- 
ness in  youth,  or  of  intemperance,  as  that  of  ByeUnski, 
Dobrolytibov,  Pfsarev,  Nikftin,  Nddson,  and  many  others! 

The  peculiar  conditions  of  Russian  literary  life  are  the  re- 
sult of  the  whole  social  structure  of  the  country.  Here  we 
shall  find  an  answer  to  the  many  perplexing^  questions  that 
the  foreigner  must  necessarily  put  to  himself  as  he  contem- 
plates, not  only  the  peculiar  course  of  Russian  belles-lettres 


Digitized  by  Google 


A  Sketch  of  Russian  Literature 


7 


and  their  artistic  and  political  maxims,  but  also  the  exag- 
gerated relation  that  Ruasian  men  of  letters  bear  to  the  po- 
etical life  of  the  nation. 

The  literate  class  of  the  people  of  Russia  is  at  the  present 
time  but  a  small  part  of  the  total  population,  and  the  cultured 
elements  of  society  form  but  a  small  percentage  of  all  those 
who  can  read  and  write  Russian.  The  conditions  were, 
naturally,  much  more  unfavourable  for  education  in  the  be- 
ginning of  the  nineteenth  century.  The  Western  civilisa- 
tion  wlddi  had  tpraad  over  Russia  since  the  days  of  Peter  the 
Great  had  not  penetrated  deep:  it  had  not  touched  the  coie 
of  things,  had  not  dianged  much  in  the  semi-barbaric  home 
life  of  the  gtatty  and  even  of  the  higher  nobility.  Bdow 
these  daaaes  it  was  practically  non-existent  A  desire  for 
learning  there  mm,  and  the  fethers  who  wished  to  have  their 
childven  benefited  by  the  blessings  of  an  edneatioa  had 
either  to  fall  back  on  foreign  tutors,  or  to  send  them  to  the 
schools  maintained  at  Moscow  and  St.  Petersburg.  The  Ly- 
ceum at  Ts^bnkoe-Sel6  was  the  chief  seminary  of  learning 
for  the  sons  of  the  nobility.  The  sons  were  just  as  eager  to 
acquire  the  lustre  of  the  foreign  culture,  but  they  invariably 
understood  this  European  learning  merely  as  a  counterac- 
tion to  the  brutal  surroundings  of  old  Russia.  They  brought 
with  them  no  home  traditions  of  refinement,  no  settled  po- 
litical and  social  views.  At  their  schools  the  young  men 
were  banded  together  by  common  interests  of  progress 
against  the  world  without,  and  they  felt  that  the  future  of 
Russia  depended  upon  them  as  an  intellectual  force.  Had 
the  next  generation  of  students  been  recruited  exclusively 
from  the  sons  of  men  who  had  enjoyed  school  advantages 
before,  there  would  have  been  a  nndens  for  traditfonal 
coltnre.  But,  in  the  nature  of  the  case,  ever-new  elements 
wiere  availing  themselves  of  the  higher  schooling,  and  the 
younger  generation  was  as  mudi  lom  out  of  its  barren  stir- 
xomidings  as  the  young  men  at  the  beginning  of  the  cent- 
ury. Th^,  too^  were  the  chosen  few,  and  upon  them,  they 
knew,  devolved  the  t^  of  regenerating  their  coimtiy.  Un- 
fortunatdiy  they  lacked  not  only  traditions  of  culture  in  their 


8 


A  Sketch  of  Russian  Literature 


fiuniliea,  bnt  tbe  school  had  not  been  able  to  tnmamit  any 

other  positive  tradition  than  the  gencfal  desire  for  mental 
training  and  literary  brilliancy.  The  ethical  principle  of 
cnitnre  was  but  weakly  developed,  and  the  absence  of  stated 
maxims  of  liie  made  philosophic  moderation  impossible.  If 
the  older  generation  had  been  carried  away  by  the  prevailing 
French  taste,  or  by  Byron's  enticing  poetry,  or  by  the  power- 
ful Romanticism  of  Germany,  without,  however,  grasping 
the  underlying  philosophy  of  either,  or  making  it  its  own, 
the  youths  of  the  thirties  sat  at  the  feet  of  the  German  phi- 
losophers, and  with  the  enthusiasm  of  new  converts  trans- 
ferred their  tenets  into  their  whole  view  of  life  and  letters, 
however,  by  first  eliminating  from  it  the  essence  of  methodi- 
cal thinking,  which  alone  would  have  assured  any  perman- 
ency to  the  Russian  ecstasy. 

Since  culture  was  confined  chiefly  to  the  higher  dasses  of 
•odety,  there  was  dowly  growing  up  a  aelect  drde  of  culti- 
vated men  who^  while  not  chaiacteriaed  by  the  stability  of 
the  German  intdlectnal  daaa  or  the  dignified  refinement  of 
the  English  ariatocmcy,  atoned  fior  the  snperfidality  of  their 
learning  by  a  saperabmidance  of  yonthfolenthnsiaani.  Bnt, 
before  the  gentry  had  any  time  to  clystillise  into  an  intd- 
lectual  class,  the  doors  of  schools  were  thrown  open  to  the 
nation  at  large,  and  the  middle  daases  began  at  once  to  avail 
themselves  of  the  privilege.  There  was  a  new  infltix  of  men 
without  A  tradition,  and  the  work  of  intellectualiaing  had  to 
be  begun  once  more.  The  vigorous  burghers  had  not  the 
wealth  and  position  of  their  noble  predecessors  to  distract 
their  spiritual  energies,  and  to  them  the  pursuit  of  learning 
was  a  very  serious  matter.  But  their  efiforts  were  often 
thwarted  by  a  struggle  against  all  kinds  of  adversities,  and 
they  frequently  succumbed  in  body  and  mind  to  the  effects 
of  poverty  and  persecution.  If  the  sons  of  the  gentry  in  the 
previous  generations  stood  out  as  a  protest  against  their 
fathers,  the  young  men  now  added  to  it  a  protest  against 
the  higher  classes,  and,  as  is  natural  in  a  state  of  chronic 
protests,  they  rapidly  reached  the  negation  of  everything. 
Russian  literature  passes  all  the  stages  of  negation,  firamtlie 


Digitized  by  Google 


A  Sketch  of  Russian  Literature 


9 


critidms  of  Cbitdd  in  Gfttx^^dov's  comedy  to  the  COD* 
BsSooB  aapefkwity  of  Bazirov  in  Tnrg^nev's  FMert  mid 
Sms,  and  from  die  critiques  of  BycHnaki  to  the  negation  of 
ait  and  literature  in  the  acrid  aolvent  of  Pisarev's  reviewa 
and  in  the  latter-day  liteiaiy  pioductiona  ol  the  maater- 
artist  Tol8t6y. 

The  aalotary  effects  of  the  renewal  of  the  intellectual 
classes  with  every  generation  have  been  in  the  extreme  de- 
mocratisation  of  Russian  society,  and  in  the  frequent  and 
varied  evolution  of  talent, — artistic,  musical,  literary,  po- 
litical. But  the  democracy,  lacking  the  moderation  of  estab- 
lished procedure,  too  often  loses  itself  in  mazes  of  inactive 
speculation,  and,  lacking  historic  perspective  and  philosophic 
precision,  is  vacillating  in  its  ultimate  ends;  while  the  same 
causes  militate  against  a  concentration  of  talent,  and  rather 
disperse  its  strength  and  nullify  its  effects.  Hence  the  apt 
classification  of  the  heroes  of  Russian  novels  as  so  many 
Obl6movs,  which  Dobrolylibov  has  made  in  his  review  of 
Gonchar6v's  famous  work.  It  is,  indeed,  a  notable  fact  that 
Russia  has  not  produced  a  single  philosopher  worthy  of  the 
name,  and  a  late  attempt  at  diioovering  Tke  FMhs€phie 
Tmdmdis  im  Htudaa  /Mty  has  leaidted  in  a  meagie  work 
nhidi,  though  interesting  for  the  poets  it  harbonn,  ia  con- 
^knoos  ibr  the  absence  of  that  philosophy  whidi  it  sets  oat 
to  find* 

Fhilosoplqr  csn  have  fine  sway  only  where  there  is  cehn 
reflection;  and  reflection  lies  at  the  base  of  sctiotts  only  wliere 
ideslsof  lifeareftnnedat  amatnreage.  Unfintnnately  Ibr 
Russia,  young  men  have  stood  behind  the  culttual  move- 
ments, snd  by  "  yoang  men  "  are  in  Russia  understood  those 
who  hum  not  yet  readied  the  age  of  thirty.  In  the  Anglo- 
American  civiliaation  men  between  thirty  and  fifty  are  sup- 
posed to  be  young  men,  men  of  action,  which  view,  having 
its  origin  in  the  conservative  spirit  of  Anglo-Saxon  institu- 
tions, more  than  anything  else  assures  a  cautious  progress. 
In  Russia,  we  have  seen,  the  task  of  fostering  progress  has 
hJHen  on  school-lads  and  university  students.  The  conse- 
quence has  been  disastrous.  Russian  yonths  have  tried  to 


lO 


A  Sketch  of  Russian  Literature 


carry  high  the  banner  of  progress,  and  one  cannot  help 
but  admire  the  courage  with  which  they  have  upheld  their 
cause,  the  enthusiasm  with  which  they  have  advocated  their 
tenets,  the  sacrifices  which  they  have  ever  been  ready  to 
bring.  At  the  same  time  it  must  be  evident  that  their  cour- 
age liaa  frequently  been  ill<4Mlvi8ed,  tbelr  enthafliasm  btittte 
becauie  not  tempered  by  ddUcxperienoe*  and  their  sacrifioes 
vain  and  uadcas.  There  liaa  been  no  bond  of  i^mpatliy  be- 
tween the  sons  and  their  fiithers,  and  the  enthusiaam  of  one 
generation  has  not  been  bequeathed  in  its  turn  to  the  next. 

Aa  long  aa  eflferveaoent  youth  haa  laated,  Ruaalana  have 
not  hesitated  to  throw  their  whole  souls  into  their  cause.  In 
Piishkin's  days  th^  aurpaaaed  Byron  in  the  recklessness  of 
their  youthfol  excesses,  and  would-be  Manfreda  could  be 
met  with  in  the  flesh.  As  Slavophiles  they  were  willing  to 
forego  the  fruits  of  Western  civilisation,  and  gloried  in  their 
unwieldy  native  costume.  As  Soilers  and  Populists  they  re- 
nounce the  society  of  their  likes,  and  buried  themselves  in 
the  deadening  wildernesses  of  distant  villages.  Even  if  the 
Government  had  not  nipped  their  efforts  by  exile  and  prisons, 
their  fate  could  not  later  in  life  have  been  happy.  When 
their  first  fervour  had  evaporated,  and  they  were  brought 
face  to  face  with  actualities,  the  discrepancy  between  theories 
and  practices  of  necessity  produced  a  revulsion.  The  stout 
of  heart  maintained  their  cherished  hopes,  but  their  minds 
became  variously  affected  by  quiet  sorrow,  melancholy,  de- 
spair. The  men  of  ooaiaer  textuie  turned  liberal  opportnn- 
istBi  tempodaec8»  or  downright  denieri  of  all  their  previous 
thoughta  and  acta.  The  Government  abaocbed  theae  aa 
officiala  In  varioua  capadtiea,  and  thua  the  better  dementa» 
through  their  abhorrence  of  compromise,  have  generally 
been  loat  to  the  State. 

The  same  disenchantment  is  noticeable  in  the  life  of  every 
man  of  letters.  Iriterature  haa  been  in  Russia  the  field  in 
which  all  the  battlea  of  progress  have  been  fought.  As  there 
does  not  exist  a  representative  government,  where  political 
opinions  may  struggle  for  recognition,  and  as  there  cannot 
exist  a  public  opinion  based  on  tradition  and  class  interests^ 


Digitized  by  Google 


A  Sketch  of  Russian  literature 


II 


literature  alone  appears  as  the  medium  for  advancing  social 
and  political  ideas;  and  since  scientific  treatises  reach  but  a 
vanishing  proportion  of  the  nation,  belles-lettres  proper  have 
in  Russia  become  the  means  for  inculcating  and  propagating 
truths.  In  the  beginning  of  the  nineteenth  century  this  was 
not  yet  so  apparent,  and  literature  for  art's  sake  could  hold 
its  own.  But  with  the  advancing  democratisation  of  society, 
literature  gathered  ever  more  around  camps  with  definite 
ideas,  and  literary  art  receded  more  and  more  and  lived  out 
its  day  in  obUvion.  The  indivldiul  autliofs  liave  always 
been  oooadous  of  tlidr  high  calling,  and  in  their  yimth 
have  devoted  themselves  with  fervour  to  thehr  tasks;  but  in 
middle  life  th^  generally  have  been  chilled  by  the  actoal 
conditions  of  life,  and  have  fallen  a  prey  to  disappoint- 
ment* the  effects  of  which  were  mysticism,  tenondation,  op- 
portnnism,  as  the  case  might  be. 

Thas»  also^  there  has  followed  a  period  of  comparative 
stagnation  and  even  retrogreaaion  after  every  decade  of  con- 
centrated production.  The  men  whom  common  interests 
had  brought  together  in  Utetaiy  emulation  had  passed  their 
perihelion,  and  another  generation  had  not  yet  reached  ma- 
turity; and  in  the  interim  the  discordant  notes  could  be 
heard  more  clearly.  In  the  last  twenty  years,  however,  a 
marked  change  has  taken  place  in  Russian  literature.  While 
there  has  not  risen  an  author  of  the  first  magnitude,  there 
has  been  no  lack  of  writers  and  poets  of  the  second  rank, 
and  the  reactionary  element  has  been  well  kept  in  abeyance. 
Russian  critics  stigmatise  this  period  as  one  of  mediocrity, 
and  despair  of  the  future,  since  never  before  has  there 
been  so  long  a  time  without  some  author  of  strong  personality 
and  influence.  In  reality,  the  symptoms  are  very  encourag- 
ing. It  is  evident  from  the  long  duration  of  the  smoulder- 
ing literary  life  that  sodety  is  becoming  more  stable,  even 
though  temporarily  leas  deep,  and  that  literary  sentiment 
snd  cnltnie  is  gaining  in  breadth.  The  next  outburst  of 
litenuy  activities  will  unquestionably  be  greater  than  any 
that  have  preceded  it 


12      A  Sketch  of  Russian  Literature 


n 

The  gloom  which  had  spread  over  literature  at  the  end  of 
Catherine's  reign  was  lifted  at  the  very  opening  of  the  nine- 
teenth century  by  the  accession  of  the  liberal  Alexander  I. 
Instead  of  continuing  the  persecution  of  the  Free  Masons 
and  suppressing  literature,  the  Emperor  himself  favoured  all 
kinds  of  mystic  societies,  and  carried  his  liberalism  to  the 
greatest  extreme.  He  associated  with  Quakers,  and  Jesuits 
were  left  unmolested  in  the  capital.  He  proposed  to  re- 
organise the  country  on  Western  models,  and  did  not  think 
it  tmwiae  to  aak  Thomas  Jefferson  for  a  sketch  of  the  Ameri- 
can Coofltitixtioii.  He  surrounded  himadf  with  men  of  pro- 
aomiQed  progresdve  tendendefl^  ind  licsped  lumoiui  on  the 
autiior  of  the  Jimmey  from  St,  Pdar^bufg  $o  Momw^  whose 
advanoed  Ideas  had  ao  di#plfaiwd  Catfacrfne. 

Yd  only  the  end  of  his  lelgn  saw  the  fraitikm  of  the  new 
spirit  in  Itteimtaie,  when  Pdshkin  with  his  mighty  genius  for 
ever  settled  the  direction  Russian  letters  were  to  take.  There 
could  have  been  no  sudden  change.  No  new  ideals  had  taken 
the  place  of  the  litefary  tiaditicns  of  the  eighteenth  cent- 
ury, wfaidi  looiked  upon  antlionhip  as  a  plessant  pastime 
and  profitable  exerdse  of  wit,  but  did  not  invest  the  authors 
with  the  dignity  of  social  factors.  Though  Romanticism 
wss  rapidly  displacing  the  older  pseudo-claasidsm,  many 
aulhon  of  the  former  style  were  still  active  among  the 
changing  surroundings.  6zerov  produced  his  thunderous 
dramas  and  found  a  ready  audience,  and  Derzhdvin  not  only 
continued  his  writing  of  odes,  but  was  able  to  maintain  a 
coterie  of  literary  men  who  would  not  listen  to  the  innova- 
tions of  Karamzin. 

The  most  persistent  stickler  for  the  old  conventions  was 
Shishk6v.  He  had  no  ear  for  the  subtler  beauties  of  verse, 
and  identified  poetry  with  high-sounding  epithets  and  well- 
turned  phrases.  His  admiration  for  the  older  bards  led  him 
to  seek  in  their  language,  with  the  strange  admixture  of 
Church-Slavic  words,  the  proper  norm  for  all  time,  and  to 
abhor  the  introduction  of  foreign  words,  which  Karamzin  so 


A  Sketch  of  Russian  Literature 


13 


deacterooaly  tqiplled  In  his  fofmaticMi  of  a  new  Utecaxy  style. 
As  FMident  of  the  Ruaaiaii  Academy  Shishktfv  esecdaed  a 
certain  influence,  and  the  diactusioa  of  the  two  styles  agi- 
tated aodety  for  some  time.  There  was  just  a  spaikol  troth 
in  his  cootentioQ.  Like  Shcherb6tov  before  him,  and  the 
Slavophiles  thirty  years  later,  he  was  anxious  to  see  a 
greater  approach  to  the  natiimal  spirit  Like  his  prede- 
oesBor,  he  did  not  fidl  to  fieoogniae  that  the  colourless  imita* 
tion  of  foreign  models  was  not  bringing  literature  any 
nesier  to  the  people,  and,  like  the  older  historian,  he  receded 
as  far  as  possible  into  tbe  past  in  his  search  for  native  ele- 
ments. Writers  were  at  that  time  not  yet  prepared  to  look 
for  a  common  bond  with  the  people  in  a  living  intercourse 
with  them. 

In  the  meanwhile  Karamzin  proceeded  to  find  his  models 
for  composition  in  the  West,  and  to  base  his  literary  style 
on  a  close  imitation  of  French  and  English  writers.  He 
freely  introduced  such  words  and  turns  as  would  mould  Rus- 
sian into  a  simpler  and  more  harmonious  instrument.  His 
example  has  been  followed  ever  since.  He  was  led  by  per- 
sonal predilection  and  a  natural  pensiveness  to  father  that 
sentimentalism  which  had  found  such  a  ready  soil  in  Europe. 
How  unnatural  for  Russian  that  sentimentalism  was,  may 
be  seen  in  the  gentle  transformation  the  peasants  have  suf- 
fered in  his  novds.  Bot  in  hia  day  no  one  took  exception 
to  sodi  a  treatment,  and  many  a£Eected  that  exotic  sentiment 
tbemadveSi* 

In  geneialf  the  particolar  directional  any  anther  was  very 
mnch  a  matter  of  chance.  Not  the  neoeasities  of  the  time, 
not  the  apiiitnal  needs  of  any  class  of  society  decided  what 
the  poet  was  to  sing  and  the  novelist  was  to  write  shoot, — 
indeed,  society  had  not  yet  risen  to  a  wdl-defined  apiritnal 
life^ — bat  the  temporary  whim  of  the  anthor,  the  accidental 
acquaintance  with  this  or  that  manifestation  in  the  foreign 
liteiatures  were  the  only  reasons  for  transplanting  the  for- 
eign modeto  upon  Russian  soil.  The  adroitness  with  which 
extraneous  themes  have  been  handled  by  many  of  the  writ- 
en  is  truly  remarkable.  In  B^Ltynahkov  it  readied  masteiiy 


14 


A  Sketch  of  Russian  Literature 


pcffectkm.  Having  tried  lunudf  in  Imitations  of  Gennan, 
Fxench,  and  dawical  modds*  his  interest  finally  oentxed  on 
the  Italian  poets,  especially  Tasso.  The  result  of  his  especial 
predilection  was  that  faultless  poem,  TkeDfnitg'  Tasso,  which 
combines  epic  calm  and  majesty  of  language  as  probably  no 
other  pfodnction  in  Russian  literature.  Bnt  he  had  no  con- 
temporary audience  that  could  follow  him  in  his  exquisite 
interpretation  of  the  Italian  classical  spirit,  just  as  Gny^dich, 
the  famous  translator  of  the  Iliad,  felt  aggrieved  at  the  in- 
difference with  which  society  met  his  great  undertaking. 

While  a  select  number  of  authors,  separating  themselves 
from  the  life  that  surrounded  them,  found  inspiration  in  the 
distant  past,  Zhuk6vski  devoted  himself  to  familiarising  his 
nation  with  the  productions  of  the  German  Romantic  Muse. 
But,  while  in  Europe  Romanticism  was  the  logical  outcome 
of  the  period  of  storm  and  stress  through  which  it  had  just 
passed,  it  bore  no  relation  to  actual  spiritual  needs  in  Russia. 
Consequently  only  the  external  form  and  the  technique,  and 
not  the  inner  meaning  was  transplanted  by  Zhuk6vski  to  his 
native  soil.  It  is  true,  he  all  the  time  preached  a  high  ideal 
for  poetry,  but  that  ideal  was  only  superficially  related  to 
the  fiishionaUe  Romantic  verse  in  which  he  enunciated  it. 

More  original  than  these  was  Kryl6v  who,  basing  his 
&hles  on  those  of  I«a  Fontaine,  dad  them  in  an  idiomatic 
form  and  adonied  them  with  an  art  peculiarly  his  own.  It 
would  be,  however,  a  mistake  to  suppose  that  he,  at  least, 
fell  back  on  the  native  dement  for  hia  subjects.  There  is 
absdutdy  nothing  Russian  in  his  &bles.  Kot  only  do  the 
popular  animd  stories  differ  widely  £ram  those  employed  by 
him  for  illustration,  but  he  did  not  hesitate  to  introduce 
daaaical  allusions  whenever  a  chance  offered  itsdl  The 
same  method,  though  in  a  coarser  vdn,  was  dsn  pursued  by 
Izm^ylov. 

Theyear  X8i2  had  its  immediate  effects  upon  literature. 
It  gave  rise  to  patriotic  songs,  like  Zhukdvaki's  In  th^  Camp 
of  Russian  Warriors,  and  to  the  patriotic  series  by  Ryly^v. 
It  led  to  a  closer  study  of  Russian  history,  and  Karamzfn's 
monumental  work  could  not  have  come  at  a  more  auspicious 


L.iyu,^uu  Ly  Google 


A  Sketch  of  Russian  Literature  15 


period.  The  oonsequeaoes  were  even  greater.  Many  young 
olBcera  wlio  had  lonned  their  ideals  of  life  through  the  uni- 
tatioiia  of  fheir  nativo  litefatnre  took  part  in  the  campaign 
in  Germany  and  France,  and  there  came  in  contact  with  all 
the  living  movements  that  agitated  the  best  minds.  They 
brought  home  wtth  them  a  new  enthusiasm,  ^nrmed  secret 
societies  in  imitation  of  the  German  Tugendbund,  and 
dicamed  ol  a  violent  reorganisation  of  Russia.  All  the  best 
young  forces  were  directly  or  indirectly  affected  by  the  new 
adeaL  In  the  meanwhile  the  Government  entered  into  its 
phase  of  reaction,  and  obscurantism  became  rampant.  Uni- 
versity professors  were  watched  by  the  secret  police,  and 
instruction  was  carried  on  under  great  difficulties.  The 
slightest  expression  of  independence  or  freedom  led  to  ban- 
ishment and  imprisonment.  The  strained  relations  between 
the  youthful  idealists  and  the  reactionaries  culminated  in 
the  unfortunate  and  impossible  Decembrist  conspiracy  in 
1825,  when  Ryly^v,  among  others,  paid  the  penalty  of 
death  for  his  rashness. 

But  the  accumulated  literary  force  could  no  longer  be  dis- 
persed. A  galaxy  of  poets  had  with  wonderful  skill  repro- 
duced every  imaginable  aspect  of  Etu-opean  verse,  even 
though  they  did  not  enter  into  a  full  understanding  of  the 
meaning  and  duty  of  their  art.  The  language  had  been 
polished  by  Kaiamzin  and  his  followers  to  its  utmost  extent 
sndwasnowcapableof  every  literary  form.  It  only  needed 
a  subtle  genius  to  breathe  n  soul  into  fhat  Mr  body.  That 
genins  was  Pushkin. 

m 

A  period  rich  in  literary  ei^ericnce  and  new  modes  of  es* 
piesrion  does  not  necessarily  presage  the  coming  of  a  genius 
who  will  unify  the  unrelated  modes  into  a  symmetric,  in- 
trinsically artistic  whole.  But,  given  an  ardent  poetic  soul 
and  a  time  when  the  minds  of  men  are  agitated  by  high 
aqrirations  and  hopes,  the  opportunity  is  favourable  for  that 
sonl  to  become  the  iocns  of  all  the  tendencies  of  the  day,  and 


i6      A  Sketch  of  Russian  Literature 


to  reflect  the  accumulated  force  as  one  bright  light  for  long 
years  to  come.  The  conditions  could  not  have  been  more  aus- 
picious for  giving  direction  and  meaning  to  Pdshkin's  genius. 
Not  only  Derzhdvin,  Karamzfn,  Dmftriev,  Zhuk6vski,  Bdt- 
yushkov,  and  Kryl6v  furnished  him  in  his  youth  with  varied 
poetical  productions  for  his  imitation,  but  a  large  number 
of  minor  poets,  trained  in  the  traditions  of  the  eighteenth 
century,  Merzlyak6v,  Neledinski-Mel^tski,  DolgoriUd,  were 
still  active  dtiring  the  fomiative  time  of  his  genius.  And  not 
only  the  carternsl  fimns  oC  vtam  had  been  cuiied  to  a  liis^ 
perfectioii  In  liis  schooldays.  The  liberslism  of  the  Govern* 
ment  in  the  beginning  of  Alexander's  xeign,  the  stirring 
patriotism  of  the  nation  consequent  upon  the  events  of  the 
year  1812,  the  crass  obscoxantisni  and  reaction  from  above, 
and  the  secret  organisations  of  the  youthful  idealists  which 
soon  after  superseded  the  open  progress  of  the  previooa 
decade, — all  that  combined  to  inspire  the  younger  generatUm 
of  poets  with  the  seriousness  and  dignity  of  their  mission. 

In  his  evolution  Pdshkin  passed  through  several  stages. 
In  Rusldn  and  LyudmUa,  which  he  wrote  in  1820,  the 
year  of  his  first  exile,  he  attempted  to  treat  a  popular  subject 
in  the  Romantic  style,  but  there  is  little  of  a  native  element 
in  it.  During  his  banishment  to  the  south  he  came  under 
the  influence  of  Byron,  and  began  his  EvgSni  Onyigin,  the 
first  real  Russian  novel.  In  Boris  Godun6v  he  came  under 
the  spell  of  Shakspere. 

In  the  beginning  of  the  new  reign,  Pushkin's  genius  was 
clearly  defined  and,  departing  from  the  Byronism  of  his 
former  productions,  became  completely  original.  At  the 
same  time  he  renounced  the  easy  libeialism  of  his  younger 
days,  and  placed  himself  in  the  service  of  the  IW.  Since 
he  withdrew  from  the  communion  with  the  masses  and 
preached  an  aristocratism  in  letters  as  well  as  life,  his  real 
importaooe  in  Russian  literature  has  been  obscnxed  by  the 
more  democratic  G6gol.  The  doctrine  which  he  taught,  that 
art  is  to  be  exercised  for  art's  sake  and  not  polluted  by  con- 
tact with  the  vulgar,  found  no  ready  response  in  the  troubled 
years  of  the  second  half  of  the  century.  Only  now,  when 


Digitized  by  Google 


A  Sketch  of  Russian  Literature  17 


the  battle  for  the  maaaea  has  been  fotight,  and  litenttue  is 
bcginirit>g  to  toae  its  didactic  and  politioal  value,  there  is  to 
be  noticed  a  growing  tendency  to  torn  back  to  Pushkin  as 

the  fountain  head  of  Russian  poetry.  This  jnst  renewal  of 
the  cult  of  Pushkin  has  already  had  the  marked  effect  of  re- 
diacovering  and  bringing  to  public  notice  the  excellent  crea* 
tions  of  the  poets  of  his  school,  Tsrf^tchev,  Fet,  Mkykav, 
Pol6nski,  and  others,  and  of  stimulating  the  youngest  gen- 
eration  of  poets,  whose  names  are  just  beginning  to  be  heard, 
to  higher  efforts. 

Many  contemporary  jxjets  were  inspired  by  the  master. 
D^vig,  Ryly^ev,  Baratynski,  Venevitinov,  Yazykov  came 
under  his  influence,  but  they  were  not  able  to  follow  him  in 
his  eagle  flight,  and  stopped  at  the  earlier  stages  of  his  de- 
velopment. There  were  others  who  showed  more  indi- 
viduality, or  even  opened  up  new  avenues  in  literature. 
Griboy^dov's  Intelligence  Comes  to  Grief  stood  out  as  the 
most  remarkable  drama  that  had  till  then  appeared  in  Russia, 
aa  it  had  seized  with  great  deamess  the  contradictory  and 
indefinite  tendencies  of  society,  and  indicated  the  ooming 
conflict  between  Westerners  and  Slavophiles.  But  the  in- 
definite tendencies  <rf  the  time  were  reflected  with  far  greater 
power  in  I^dnnontov* 

I^teioatoT's  Jfetv  ^Owr  Time  is,  to  a  certain  extent,  an 
autobiography.  It  is  of  the  same  spiritual  fimdly  as  Bvgini 
Onyigtn^  but  the  greater  indefiniteness  and  disenchantment 
of  its  hero  supply  a  true  portrayal  of  the  men  of  the  thirties 
who  had  not  yet  come  to  have  any  w^-defined  aims  in  life. 
Men  were  dissatisfied  with  the  past,  saw  all  the  misery  and 
wretchedness  that  surrounded  them,  and  wished  for  some- 
thing better  to  come,  but  did  not  have  the  energy  to  rise 
above  their  surroundings  and  so  lost  themselves  in  contra- 
dictions and  Byronic  despair.  The  same  subjective  tone 
runs  through  all  his  shorter  poems  and  through  The  Demon, 
that  most  precious  flower  of  the  whole  Romantic  school. 
Such  is  the  sweetuess  of  his  verse  and  the  wealth  of  his 
imagery  that  he  is  preferred  by  many  foreign  readers  even 
to  Pilshkin. 


iS      A  Sketch  of  Russian  Literature 

More  original  than  I^mumtOV  was  his  contemporary 
Kolta6v.  His  middle-class  surroundings  had  brought  him 
in  much  closer  contact  with  the  people  than  Pushkin,  and 
his  neglected  early  education  operated  in  favour  of  his  poetic 
genius  inasmuch  as  it  kept  him  free  from  any  traditional 
associations.  When  his  talent  became  apparent  to  him,  he 
for  a  short  time  tried  his  strength  in  the  customary  rhymed 
verses,  esp>ecially  of  the  type  of  Pushkin,  whom  he  greatly 
admired  and  understood  as  few  poets  after  him  have  done. 
But  soon  bis  native  feeling  asserted  itself,  and  he  began  to 
draw  his  inspiration  from  popular  songs.  A  number  of  poets 
before  him,  especially  Delvig,  had  attempted  this  kind  of 
composition,  Imt  none  ol  thsm  lisd  even  diatsntly  bix>ught 
to  bear  tlie  same  tslent  upon  it  as  Koltadv,  and  none  after 
him  have  equalled  him. 

While  Romantidam  was  aooiing  its  greatest  sdcceases^  and 
a  novd-reading  poUic  was  gdng  into  ecstasies  over  the  im* 
passioned  stories  of  Bestfizhev-Marlihski,  G6gol  evolved  his 
series  o£  naturalistic  stories,  rising  by  pyramidal  steps  to  his 
immortal  Dead  Souls,  which  appeared  in  the  very  year  that 
I«drmontov  and  Koltsdv  died.  A  new  chord  was  struck,-* 
one  that  reverberates  even  now  through  all  Russian  litera- 
ture. The  foundation  was  placed  for  a  Russian  school  of 
belles-lettres,  the  first  in  its  annals.  All  the  peculiarities  of 
Russian  literature  for  all  time  to  follow  are  the  direct 
outcome  of  the  tradition  which  begins  with  G6gol.  His 
appearance,  though  startling  and  unexpected,  was  not  un- 
prepared. There  has  always  been  a  strong  element  of  sound 
naturalism  in  the  Russian  character.  It  shows  frequently 
through  the  Byzantine  shroud  in  the  earliest  times;  it  re- 
freshes us  in  many  a  simple  folktale;  it  is  a  pre-cmuieiit 
characteristic  of  the  thoughts  and  acts  of  Peter  the  Great ; 
it  craves  expression  in  the  exotic  psendo-dassic  rhetoric  of 
the  dghteenth  century;  it  comes  to  the  surface  in  Pddikin'a 
best  pcodactioos.  G6gol  had  even  a  duect  ptedecessor  in 
the  manner  of  his  stories  in  the  person  of  Nary^zhny  who^ 
being  bom  in  the  same  locality  with  him,  had  fallen  tMck  on 
the  same  rich  narrative  material  of  his  native  I^ittle-Rnssia. 


Digitized  by  Google 


A  Sketch  of  Russian  Literature  19 


Bat  in  G6gol  this  aaturalism  was  for  the  fint  time  deaily 
CTprewcd  and  completely  freed  from  all  foreign  contamina- 
tion. Not  at  once,  however.  He  made  his  d^nt  with  a 
Romantic  idyl,  and  all  his  earlier  pcodnctions  are  still  tinged 
with  the  conent  mannerism.  Only  in  1836  appeared  his 
the  prototype  of  all  later  Rosaian  novels.  He  was 
not  at  once  accepted  by  the  public,  so  daring  were  his  in- 
novations, so  disenchanting  his  realism,  so  appalling  the 
wretchedness  of  Russia  which  he  laid  bare.  He  did  not 
himself  proceed  consciously  upon  the  new  path,  but  by  the 
inspiration  of  bis  genius.  I,ater  in  life,  therefore,  when  a 
reaction  set  in  in  his  thoughts,  he  deeply  regretted  his 
earlier  activity.  But  there  was  no  retracing  his  steps.  The 
critic  Byelinski  had  subjected  him  to  literary  analysis,  and 
had  pronounced  him  the  father  of  the  new  school.  It  seemed 
to  him  as  if  there  had  not  even  existed  a  literature  before 
G6gol,  and  all  previous  writers  henceforth  barely  eked  out 
an  anthology  existence. 

The  oonsdons  tendency  towards  realism  in  Russia  was  doe 
to  another  fact.  The  predilection  for  the  encyclopedic  know- 
ledge of  Pranoe  and  its  literatare  had  oome  to  an  endin  the 
thirtifw.  Young  men  had  became  acqnaintcd  in  Geimany 
with  the  philoaophy  of  Schdllng  and  Hegel,  and  the  circles 
of  Moscow  were  ever  more  familiarising  themselves  with  the 
more  serions  aspects  of  German  science.  Those  who  were 
not  forgetful  of  their  obligations  to  Europe  gathered  around 
Byelfnski  in  their  advocacy  of  a  greater  appraadi  to  Western 
ideals.  Others,  again,  inspired  by  the  conceptions  of  no* 
titrn,  national  spin'f,  national  desHny^  which  the  German 
philosophers  had  evolved,  were  led  to  seclude  themselves 
from  all  foreign  influence  by  advocating  the  narrow  tenets 
of  Slavophilism.  The  Slavophiles  have  not  produced  one 
great  author,  for  Khomyak6v  is  better  known  for  his  theo- 
logical writings  than  for  his  poetry,  and  Aksdkov,  who  had 
received  his  training  before  the  thirties,  wrote  his  Family 
Chronicle  in  his  old  age,  evidently  under  the  influence  of 
G6gol.  All  the  great  writers  who  are  honoured  abroad, 
Turgenev,  Tolst6y,  Dostoevski,  have  issued  from  the  camp 


20 


A  Sketch  of  Russian  Literature 


of  the  Westerners,  and  had  received  their  impetus  in  the 
thirties  and  early  ia  the  forties. 

After  the  year  1848  a  reaction  set  in  in  letters,  under  the 
inflaenoe  of  the  political  gloom  that  had  been  out  over 
Borope,  but  especially  over  Rnasia.  The  oenaocahip  became 
mofe  oppfeasive  than  ever,  and  a  general  apathy  took  pos- 
aemlon  of  aodety.  Periodicalaceaaed  toemat,  or  werecolour- 
less  and  pedantic.  The  flimsiest  society  novela  had  poshed 
all  the  gxeat  literature  of  the  previoos  decade  into  the  back- 
gronnd.  The  gloom  hung  over  Russia  until  the  end  of  the 
reign  of  Nicholas  I.,  lighted  up  only  by  the  flashes  of  the 
great  authom  who  wece  paaaing  through  their  apprenticeship. 

IV 

G6gol  more  appropriately  euds  the  old  series  of  authors 
than  begins  the  new.  His  powerful  genius  raised  him  above 
his  predecessors,  but  the  absence  of  a  definite  political  or 
social  tendency  in  his  works  makes  hira  more  akin  to  the 
writers  of  pure  art.  In  the  forties,  a  5'ouDger  generation  of 
writers  was  trained  in  the  philosophical  conceptions  of  Ger- 
many, and  the  democratic  spirit  that  swept  over  Europe 
affected  them  in  favour  of  the  people.  It  became  incumbent 
on  these  authors,  not  merely  to  amuse  by  their  productions, 
but  to  teach  and  propagate  definite  social  ideals,  to  become 
the  protagonists  in  the  batUe  for  human  liberties.  At  the 
same  time  the  vast  abyss  whidi  lay  between  thehr  theoriea 
and  tlie  disheartening  reality  about  them«  the  unmooring 
from  all  the  traditions  of  the  past,  and  the  hopelessness  of 
the  future  developed  in  them  a  strain  of  sceptidam  and  aelf- 
analysis  that  sooner  or  later  led  to  pessimiam. 

The  oldest  of  these  new  authors^  Turg^v,  who  was  the 
first  to  express  his  interest  in  the  people,  remained  all  his 
life  an  advocate  of  a  peaceful  progress  on  the  basis  of  a  cau- 
tious adoption  of  Western  ideals.  In  style  he  was  a  realist 
of  a  pronounced  type,  but  his  genius  saved  him  from  carry- 
ing his  naturalism  to  the  appalling  extent  to  which  the 
French  novelists  have  carried  it.  In  1S47  he  bec^^n  to  at- 
tract attention  by  his  sketches  from  peasant  life,  but  in  the 


Digitized  by  Googlc 


A  Sketch  of  Russian  Literature  21 


sixties  he  depicted  the  condition  of  the  intelligent  classes  as 
affected  by  the  emancipation  of  the  serfs.  The  keynote  to 
the  conception  of  his  heroes  is  struck  in  an  article  of  his  on 
HamUt  and  Don  Quixote,  in  which  he  expresses  the  thought 
that  aU  people  belong  to  one  of  these  two  types,  but  that  in 
hb  days  there  was  a  predominanoe  of  Hamlets,  that  is,  of 
such  as  are  prone  to  analysis  and  scepticism. 

Goiidiar6ir,  in  his  OAfitaMv,  has  given  tis  a  type  of  a 
passive  man  who  lacks  every  initiative,  and  has  generalised 
in  his  hero  all  Russians  as  by  nature  incapable  of  active 
progress;  but  Tolst^  very  early  began  to  carry  his  analysis 
to  the  farthest  extent  and  not  only  assumed  a  negative  atti- 
tude towards  all  the  questions  of  the  day,  but  soon  reached 
the  negation  of  all  progress  in  general,  and  sought  refuge 
from  the  world  without  in  a  dose  communion  with  the  peo- 
ple. He  is  less  careful  about  style  and  artistic  perfection  of 
his  productions  than  Turg^nev,  but  in  the  portrayal  of  sepa- 
rate incidents  and  in  analysis  of  character  he  often  rises  to 
the  highest  art.  In  the  second  half  of  his  life,  but  especially 
since  the  eighties,  Tolst6y  has  carried  negation  to  the  im- 
possible point  of  non-resistance,  thus  repeating,  though  not 
in  an  identical  form,  the  experience  of  G6gol. 

Dostoevski,  born  and  bred  in  the  city  under  distressing 
circumstances,  appropriated  for  himself  the  analysis  of  the 
lower  elements  of  the  population  of  the  towns.  His  long 
imprisonment  in  Siberia  acquainted  him  with  the  mental 
and  moral  life  of  the  criminals,  and  his  own  epileptic  and 
extremely  nervous  condition  made  it  possible  for  him  to  pry 
into  the  recesses  of  the  diseased  and  depraved  mind.  His 
democratic  love  for  the  subjects  he  described,  and  the  psy- 
chological analysis  to  which  he  submitted  them,  however 
startling  and  unttsual  they  are  in  his  case,  are  in  keeping 
with  the  traditions  of  the  men  of  the  finties. 

No  new  school,  no  new  tendency,  has  since  supplanted  the 
democratic  school  of  analysis  which  these  authors  had  in- 
augurated  nearly  half  a  century  ago.  Nearly  all  authora 
have  taken  the  people  for  their  motto.  The  question  has 
only  been  to  decide  what  really  constitutes  the  people.  Just 


22 


A  Sketch  of  Russian  Literature 


before  and  aoon  after  the  emsndpatioii  the  peaaanta  came  in 
for  the  laigiest  share  of  attention.  At  first  ihdr  raal  oon- 
dition  was  not  clearly  understood,  and  they  were,  on  the 
one  hand,  idealised,  and,  on  the  other,  represented  as  objects 
worthy  of  ridicule.  In  the  meanwhile  the  Slavophiles,  in 
their  attempt  to  discover  the  national  spirit,  did  a  great  deal 
to  study  their  customs  and  their  oral  literature.  Thus,  by 
degrees,  a  proper  understanding  of  the  real  life  of  the  peasant 
was  po^ble,  and  the  novelists  of  the  people  were  able  to  treat 
them  with  greater  objectivity  and  truth.  Among  these 
writers  of  one  class  or  other  were  Danildvski,  Ryesh^tnikov, 
Levftov,  Glyeb  Uspenski,  and  Zlatovrdtski. 

Others,  again,  proceeded  to  busy  themselves  with  the  in- 
telligent class,  pre-eminently  with  the  negative  sides  of  their 
existence.  Pisemski  painted  them  in  the  blackest  colours, 
while  8altyfe6v  applied  his  great  aatitieal  talents  more  espe- 
dally  to  the  diadosore  of  all  the  wretchedness  and  dishonesty 
of  tbe  middle  and  the  official  strata  of  society.  Ostr6¥dd, 
ag«in,  took  fbr  his  dramas  the  Moscow  merchant  dass  whidi 
stood  on  the  border  of  the  old  Russian  dvilisation,  and 
treated  it  ideally,  apdogetically,  or  negativdy  at  varions 
stages  of  his  development.  In  poetry  the  democratic  spirit 
of  the  fiorties  is  best  reflected  in  Nekr&lov  and  in  a  much 
lesser  degree  in  Nikitin.  Though  theae  writers  are  related 
to  Koltadv  in  the  treatment  of  popular  themes,  they  differ 
vastly  in  the  application  of  the  democratic  motive  from  their 
more  artistic  predecessor. 

In  the  seventies  there  was  the  usual  reaction  in  literature 
as  well  as  in  the  political  life  of  the  nation.  Since  then  a 
large  number  of  novelists  and  poets  have  been  endeavouring 
to  reproduce  the  currents  of  modern  society.  The  back- 
ground of  all  this  new  literature  is  still  the  democracy  of  the 
forties,  but  the  centre  of  interest  has  shifted  from  the  peasant 
and  the  intdlectual  class  to  the  large  burgher  population  in 
its  undefined  tendency  to  form  a  substantial  middle  class. 
There  are  no  pronounced  ideas  which  these  writen  fed 
themselves  called  to  propagate  or  defend,  hence  their  tadt: 
is  oompantivdy  more  difficult  than  that  of  the  previous 


Digitized  by  Google 


A  Sketch  of  Russian  Literature 


23 


SenentiotL.  They  are  oooadoos  of  thia,  and  when  accused 
of  aeatteriog  thdr  enetgies  and  not  xiaing  to  the  high  pointa 
of  the  men  of  the  fortiea^  th^  have  j  nstly  answered  that  they 
are  at  a  loaa  to  discover  any  positive  tendencies  in  the  nation 
to  reprodnoe.  In  the  external  technique  of  their  worka^ 
however,  there  ia  a  decided  improvement  over  the  generation 
which  has  just  passed  away,  and  the  works  would,  no  doubt, 
greatly  interest  foreign  readers  if  they  did  not  aomndl  apr 
proach  well-known  models  of  the  West. 

In  this  greater  cosmopolitanism  of  the  newer  Russian 
literature,  in  the  broadening  of  the  intellectual  horizon, 
even  though  the  literary  life  is  more  shallow,  lies  the  hope 
of  Russia's  future.  Life  is  readjusting  itself  on  a  more 
stable  basis.  The  tendencies  of  society,  though  indefinite, 
are  more  normal.  Hence  didacticism  in  literature  is  rapidly 
passing  away,  and  art,  this  time  tempered  by  the  democratic 
spirit  of  the  age,  bids  fair  to  regain  its  place  in  letters.  Two 
illustrations  will  suffice  to  make  this  clear.  G6rki,  who  by  his 
private  life  and  the  influence  of  the  democratic  school  has  been 
led  to  descend  to  the  lowest  dregs  of  society  for  his  subjects, 
ahaolntdy  refrains  from  inculcating,  directly  or  indirectly, 
any  aodal  or  political  tenet  Whatever  he  painta,  he  paintt 
with  tttt  conaununate  akill  of  the  artiat  for  the  aake  of  art 
If  eiezbk6v8ld,  who  haa  not  yet  entirely  paaaed  hia  apprentice- 
ahip  in  letten,  ia  trying  to  hridge  over  the  democratic  cpodi, 
whidi  he  abhors,  and  aspirea  Ibr  the  laurela  of  Pushkin. 

Oompaied  with  ita  humUe  beginninga  in  1800,  Russian 
Uteratnre  haa  made  a  wonderful  record  in  the  nineteenth 
century.  The  Russian  language  has  been  moulded  into  an 
instrument  of  great  perfection:  it  is  melodious^  and  capable 
of  all  ahades  of  ezpreaaion  and  allliterary  fonna.  The  great 
authors  of  its  literature  have  become  Ibe  possession  of  all 
nations.  Intellectual  Russia  no  longer  stands  aloof.  It  is 
an  important  and  valuable  member  of  the  great  nations  of 
the  world.  From  the  steady  progress  in  the  past,  frequently 
under  the  most  trying  opposition,  must  be  prognosticated  a 
still  gjeater  advancement  in  the  future.  It  has  well  learned 
its  lessons  from  the  West;  it  may  yet  become  its  teacher. 


THE  NINKTBKNTH  CENTURY 


Digitized  by  Google 


THE  NINETEENTH  CENTURY 


Mikolfty  MikbAytovidi  Karaaufn.  (1766-1836^) 

Kanumfn  wu  bom  in  the  Gomnment  of  Slmbtnk.  At  fomteeii 
jean  of  age  lie  entend  PrafeMor  Sduden's  fchool  at  Hoaoov,  and  • 

later  he  attended  the  nnivereity.  In  ifB$  he  settled  in  St.  Petersburg 
where  he  began  his  literary  career  in  conjunction  with  his  friend 
Dmltriev  (sec  vol.  i.,  p.  428  ei  seq.) ;  he  entered  the  army  for  a  short 
time,  and  spent  the  next  year  in  his  native  place.  After  that  he  was 
taken  to  Moscour  by  L  P.  TmsT^nev,  a  friend  of  Ndvikov  (see  voL  i., 
pp.  32  and  327),  and  was  brought  by  him  under  the  edneational  infln- 
ences  of  the  Masonic  Society,  which,  however,  he  never  joined  him- 
self. He  devoted  himself  to  the  study  of  the  German  language, 
from  which  be  translated  much,  and  acquainted  himself  with  £ng- 
lidi  literatnie.  In  1789  he  tnvdled  eztensiTety  throng  Germany, 
Svitieiland,  Prance,  and  England,  meeting  wherever  possible  the 
famous  men  of  letters.  Upon  his  return  he  edited,  among  other 
periodicals,  the  Moscow  journal,  in  which  had  app>eared  his  Letters 
of  a  Russian  Traveller.  These  differ  immensely  in  tone  and  literary 
execution  firdm  tite  similar  compositions  by  Pon-Vfzin  (see  vol.  i.,  p. 
355  «#4iy.y,  and  indicate  tfie  great  stride  made  in  the  inteUectnal  ad- 
vancement of  Rnsilain  tbeahort  period  of  one  decade.  They  created 
a  sensation,  not  only  on  account  of  the  pleasing  and  novel  manner 
in  which  he  treated  serious  subjects,  but  in  a  greater  measure  on  ac- 
cotrntofthe  strong  element  of  sentimeutal  optimism  that  pervaded 
them.  His  aentimentalism  is  even  more  pronounced  in  poems, 
and  in  his  novels  Poor  LiMO,  NaS^ya,  tie  Biiuidf*s  Daughiert  and 
Bufgontisiress  M&rfa. 

In  1803  Karanizin  was  appointed  historiographer,  and  he  began  to 
busy  himself  with  Russian  antiquity.  After  twelve  years  of  labour 
appeared  the  fint  e^ht  volnmea  of  Us  Hisiofy^  the  JtusHam  Sm- 
pifie.  In  iridch  be  cootinned  the  sentimental  idealisatioa  of  the 
Russian  past.  Though  extolled  by  his  contemporaries,  and  even 
later,  as  the  first  real  history  of  Russia,  it  differs  from  those  of  his 
predecessors,  the  Russians  Sbcherbitov  (see  vol.  i.,  p.  287)  and 
Tatishchev  {id.t  p.  218),  and  the  German  historians  in  Russia,  not  by 

«7 


t 


Digitized  by  Google 


28  The  Nineteenth  Century 


any  scientific  method,  but  by  its  literary  exposition,  which  served  as 
a  model  for  a  generation  of  historical  novelists.  Karamzfn's  greatest 
desert  consists  in  having  purified  the  Russian  language  from  the 
droM  of  Chutli-SIaTje  wocdi  and  cooilnctkHW,  bjr  botrowing  fitely 
firom  ttie  ftoteof  the  spoken  langiMge,  and  1>y  following  the  simpler 
constructions  and  the  shorter  sentences  of  the  French  and  the  Eng- 
lish languages.  This  innovation  involved  him  in  a  long  controversy 
with  the  adherents  of  the  old  style,  of  which  Admiral  Shisbk6v  was 
the  heed,  bat  he  came  onk  irictoriotiB,  and  ever  eatatWilied  the 
Itosaian  llteiaty  nwuL 

There  are  several  translations,  or  rather  paraphrases,  of  Kannufn'a 
stories,  and  one  of  his  Travels,  in  English :  Russian  Tales,  .  .  . 
translated  into  English  by  J.  B.  Elrington,  London,  1803;  !/ulia, 
translated  from  the  Russ  into  French  by  M.  du  Bonllier,  and  from 
tiie  French  Into  English  by  Ann  P.  H.[awkui8],  St.  Feteniburg,  1803  ; 
Tkksjivm  ikt  Rtunan  of  NkoUti  Kanmuim  [translated  tqr  A.  A. 
Pddboig],  London,  1804 ;  TVmods  from  Moscow,  through  Prussia, 
Germany,  Switzerland,  France,  and  England  .  .  .  translated  from 
the  German  [by  A.  A-  Feldborg],  3  vols.,  London,  1803.  A  few  of 
his  poems  are  given  in  Sir  John  Bowling's  Specimens  of  the  Russian 
/Mr,  Fsrt  I. :  Tk$  Song  of  BOmMm,  Tkg  Chtunkyard,  Auimmm, 
Lilea,  To  Nitamier:  and  in  Part  U. :  Rmssa,  Tka  fiavm,  Soi»gtf 

the  Good  Tzar,  7b  ,  To  the  Nightingale,   An  epigram  is  trans> 

lated  by  V.  E.  Marsden  in  The  Anglo-Rnssian  Literary  Society,  No. 
9,  and  there  is  also  a  version  of  The  Churchyard  by  W.  H.  Dole 
(publication  not  ascertainable). 

LBTTBRS  OP  A  RUSSIAN  TRAVELLBR 

TVBK,  May  x8,  1789. 

I HAVE  departed  from  yoti,  my  dear  ones,  I  have  de- 
parted !   My  heart  is  attached  to  you  with  all  its  tender- 
est  feelings;  and  heie  I  am  getting  ftuther  and  farther  away 

from  you! 

O  heart,  heart !  Who  knows  what  you  want  ?  For  how 
many  years  travel  has  been  the  fondest  dream  of  my  imagina- 
tion !  Did  I  not  in  rapture  say  to  myself:  "At  last  you  will 
start "  ?  Did  I  not  awaken  joyfully  in  the  morning,  did  I 
not  fall  asleep  with  pleasure,  thinking:  '*  You  are  going  to 
travel"?  How  long  I  could  think  of  nothing  else,  busy 
myself  with  nothing  else  except  the  journey!  And  did  I 
not  count  the  days  and  hours  ?   But  when  the  desired  hour 


Digitized  by  Google 


Nikol&y  Mikh&ylovich  Karamzfn  29 


anived,  I  gtew  aomwf  ul,  for  I  came  to  the  fint  vivid  leali- 
satioo  that  I  was  about  to  part  from  the  dearest  people  in 
the  world*  and  from  all  that,  so  to  say,  entered  into  the  com- 
pofiition  of  my  moral  existence. 

Whatever  I  looked  at,  whether  at  the  taMe  upon  which  I 
had  for  years  committed  my  unripe  thoughts  and  feelings  to 
piqser ;  at  the  window  under  which  I  used  to  sit  dolefully  in 
my  fits  of  melancholy,  and  where  the  rising  sun  found  me  ao 
often ;  at  the  Gothic  house,  the  favourite  object  of  my  eyes 
in  the  nocturnal  hours, — in  short,  everything  that  came 
within  my  vision  was  for  me  a  precious  monument  of  the 
bygone  years  of  my  life,  rich  not  in  deeds,  but  in  thoughts 
and  feelings.  I  bade  farewell  to  inanimate  things  as  to 
friends;  and  while  I  was  overcome  and  dispirited,  my  serv- 
ants came,  and  began  to  weep  and  entreat  me  not  to  forget 
them  and  to  take  them  back  upon  my  return.  Tears  are 
contagious,  my  dear  ones,  especially  in  such  circumstances. 

But  you  are  the  dearest  to  me,  and  I  had  to  part  from 
you.  My  heart  was  so  full  that  I  forgot  to  speak.  But 
why  should  I  tell  you  that  ?  The  moment  when  we  bade 
each  other  good-bye  was  such  that  a  thousand  agreeable 
minutes  of  the  future  will  scarcely  repay  me  for  it. 

Dear  Petrdv  accompanied  me  to  the  toll-gate.  There  we 
endxaoed  each  other,  and  for  the  first  time  I  observed  his 
tears;  thcie  I  seated  myself  in  the  kibftka,*  glanced  at  Mos- 
cow, where  I  left  behind  ao  much  that  was  dear  to  me,  and 
said:  Good-byei  >*  The  bells  jing^,  the  horses  galloped 
away, — and  your  friend  was  orphaned  in  the  world,  and  his 
sool  was  orphaned! 

The  whole  past  is  a  dream  and  a  shadowl  OhI  where  are 
the  hours  when  my  heart  was  so  at  ease  among  yon,  my  dear 
ones?  If  the  future  were  suddenly  revealed  to  the  most 
fortnaate  man,  his  heart  would  congeal  with  terror,  and  his 
tongne  would  grow  dumb  the  very  moment  in  wliich  he 
deemed  himself  the  happiest  of  mortals. 

Upon  my  whole  journey  not  one  cheering  thought  entered 
my  mind.   At  Uie  last  station  in  Tver,  my  melancholy  had 

*  Native  vehicle. 


30  The  Nineteenth  Centuiy 


80  lacraaed  that,  standing,  in  the  Tillage  tavern,  befete  the 
caricatures  of  the  French  Queen  and  the  Roman  Emperor,  I 
fdt,  as  Shakspere  says,  "my  blood  weeping  finm  my  heart*' 
All  that  I  had  left  bdiind  appeared  to  me  in  such  a  tonching 
aspect.  But  enough,  enough!  I  am  again  growing  very 
sad.  Good-bye!  May  Godcoosole  you!  Bemember  your 
friend,  but  without  any  grievoua  feeling! 

om  Twt  ntSNCH  tsagbdt 

In  the  so-called  French  Theatre  they  play  tragedies, dramas, 
and  large  comedies.  I  have  not  changed  my  opinion  of  the 
French  Melpomene.  She  is  noble,  majestic,  beautiful,  but 
she  never  will  touch  and  stir  my  heart  as  does  the  Muse  of 
Shakspere  and  of  a  few  ('t  is  true,  a  very  few)  Germans. 
The  French  poets  have  a  delicate,  refined  taste,  and  may 
serve  as  models  in  the  art  of  writing.  Only  in  the  matter  of 
invention,  warmth,  and  deep  sentiment  of  Nature, — forgive 
me,  sacred  shades  of  Comeille,  Racine,  and  Voltaire! — they 
must  concede  the  supremacy  to  the  English  and  the  Ger- 
mans. Their  tragedies  are  filled  with  artistic  pictures  in 
which  the  cokmrs  and  ahades  are  akilfnlly  matched;  but  I 
generally  admire  them  with  a  odd  heart.  There  is  every- 
where a  mixture  of  the  natural  with  the  ftmantie;  every- 
where "mes  fcux,"  "ma  fbi*';  everywhere  Greeks  and 
Romans  h,  la  Jram^aise^  who  are  dissolved  in  amatory  rapt- 
ures, who  sometimes  philosophise,  express  one  thought  in 
a  variety  of  choice  words,  and,  losing  themselves  in  a  maze 
of  eloquence,  forget  to  act  The  public  demands  here  of  the 
author  beantifnl  verses,  ** des  vers  \  retenir these  make  a 
play  famous,  and,  consequently,  the  versifiers  use  all  their 
efforts  to  multiply  their  number,  and  are  more  concerned 
about  them  than  about  the  importance  of  the  plot  and  the 
new,  extraordinary,  yet  natural  situations,  forgetting  that 
character  is  revealed  in  these  unusual  occurrences  and  that 
the  very  words  obtain  their  strength  from  them. 

To  be  short,  the  creations  of  the  French  Melpomene  are 
glorious,  aud  will  always  be  glorious,  by  the  beauty  of  their 


Digitized  by  Google 


Nikol&y  Mikh&ylovich  Karamzin  31 

• 

diction  and  briUunt  verses;  but  if  a  tragedy  is  deeply  to  stir 
our  hearts  or  to  terzify  our  aouls^  Voltaire's  countrymen 
have,  probably,  no  more  than  two  real  tragedies,  and 
D' Alembert  very  justly  remarked  that  all  their  dramas  have 
been  oompoaed  tat  leading  rather  than  for  the  theatre. 

ON  SHAKaPKBK 

In  dramatic  poetry  the  English  have  nothing  remarkable, 
except  the  works  of  one  author,  but  that  author  is  Shak- 
spere,  and  the  English  are  rich! 

It  is  easy  to  make  light  of  him,  not  only  with  the  mind  of 
a  Voltaire,  but  also  with  the  most  ordinary  mind.  I  do  not 
wish  even  to  dispute  with  him  who  does  not  feel  his  g^eat 
beauties.  The  amusing  critics  of  Shakspere  resemble  those 
naughty  urchins  who  in  the  stxeet  surround  a  strangely 
dressed  man  and  cry  out:  "  What  a  ftanny  lellow!  What  a 
fltvuigelieilofvr!'* 

^ery  antbor  is  marked  with  the  stamp  of  his  age. 
Shakspeie  wished  to  please  his  contemporaries^  knew  their 
taste,  andsatisfied  it.  What  seemed  to  be  witty  then  is  now 
wcazisome  and  xeptdshre;  this  is  the  result  of  the  evdution 
of  the  mind  and  taste,  with  which  even  the  greatest  genius 
csnnot  count  «But  every  real  talent  creates  for  eternity, 
though  paying  the  tribute  to  his  age:  the  contemporary 
beauties  disappear,  and  the  common  ones  that  are  based  on 
the  human  heart  and  on  the  nature  of  things  preserve  their 
strength,  in  Shakspere  as  in  Homer.  The  grandeur  and 
truthfislness  of  the  characters,  the  attractiveness  of  the  plot, 
the  revelation  of  the  human  heart,  and  the  great  thoughts 
that  are  scattered  in  the  dramas  of  the  British  genius  will 
always  keep  their  magic  charm  for  people  who  are  endowed 
with  sentiment.  I  know  no  other  poet  who  has  such  an  all- 
embracing,  fertile,  inexhaustible  imagination, — and  you  will 
find  all  kinds  of  poetry  in  Shakspere' s  works.  He  is  the 
favourite  son  of  the  goddess  Fancy  who  surrendered  to  him 
her  magic  wand,  and  disporting  in  the  luxuriant  gardens  of 
the  imagination  he  creates  miracles  at  each  step. 


32  The  Nineteenth  Century 


London,  September,  1790. 

There  was  a  time,  when  I  had  hardly  seen  any  English- 
men, when  I  went  into  ecstasy  over  them,  and  imagined 
England  to  be  of  all  countries  the  most  agreeable  to  my 
heart.  With  what  delight,  being  a  boarding  pupil  at  Pro- 
fessor S's,  I  used  to  read  during  the  American  war  the  reports 
of  the  victorious  British  admirals!  Rodney,  Howe,  did  not 
leave  my  tongue ;  I  celebrated  their  victories  and  invited  my 
young  schoohnates  to  my  room.  It  seemed  to  me  that  to  be 
an  Bngliahman  was  to  be  brave,  alao  magnanimous,  senti- 
mental, and  true.  If  I  am  not  miataten,  novels  were  the 
chkf  fonndatumforthiaopinkMi.  KowIaeetheBttglialiat 
doae  range,  and  I  do  them  jnstioe  and  praise  them,  but  my 
pcaiae  is  as  odd  as  they  themselves  are. 

Above  all,  I  should  not  like  to  pass  my  life  in  England  on 
account  of  its  damp,  gloomy,  sombre  dimate.  I  know  that 
one  may  be  happy  even  in  Siberia  when  the  heart  is  satisfied 
and  joyful,  but  a  cheerful  climate  makes  us  more  cheerful, 
and  here  one  feels,  in  a  fit  of  pining  and  melancholy,  more 
than  elsewhere  like  committing  suicide.  The  groves,  parks, 
fields,  gardens, — all  that  is  beautiful  in  England;  but  it  is  all 
covered  with  fogs,  darkness,  and  coal  smoke.  The  sun  rarely 
peeps  through,  and  then  only  for  a  short  time;  but  without 
it  life  upon  earth  is  not  a  pleasure.  "  Give  my  regards  to 
the  sun,"  someone  wrote  from  here  to  his  friend  in  Naples; 
"I  have  not  seen  him  for  a  long  time."  The  English  \Wnter 
is  not  so  cold  as  ours;  but  we  have  at  least  beautiful  days  in 
winter,  which  are  uncommon  here  even  in  summer.  How, 
then,  can  an  Englishman  keep  himself  from  looking  like 
September  ? 

In  the  second  place,  their  cold  natures  do  not  please  me 
in  the  least  "It  is  a  snow-covered  volcano,"  a  French  emi- 
grant said  of  them  smilingly  to  me.  But  I  stand,  watch,  see 
no  flame,  and  meanwhile  freeze.  My  Russian  heart  loves 
to  bubble  in  a  sincere,  lively  conversation,  loves  the  play  of 
the  eyes,  the  rapid  changes  of  the  face,  the  cxpieasivt.  mo- 
tion of  the  hands.  The  Bnglishman  is  reticent,  indifferent, 
and  speaks  as  he  reads,  without  ever  expressing  those  snd- 


Digitized  by  Googlc 


Nikoliiy  Mikhiiylovich  Karamzin  33 


den  mental  convulsions  that  electrify  our  whole  physical 
system.    They  say  he  is  profounder  than  others.    Is  it  not 

rather  that  he  seef?is  profounder  ?  Is  it  not  because  his  thick 
blood  moves  more  slowly  in  him,  and  gives  him  the  aspect 
of  being  deep  in  thoughts,  though  he  often  has  none  ?  The 
example  of  a  Bacon,  Newton,  Locke,  Hobbes,  proves  no- 
thing. Geniuses  are  born  in  all  lands;  the  universe  is  their 
country,  and,  then,  can  it  be  said  in  justice  that,  for  example, 
Locke  is  deeper  than  Descartes  and  Leibnitz  ? 


THE  CHURCHYARD 


FIRST  VOICB 

How  frightful  the  grave!    How  deserted  and  drear! 
With  the  howls  of  the  storm- wind,  the  creaks  of  the  bier, 
And  the  white  bones  all  clattering  together! 


SECOND  VOICE 


How  peaceful  the  grave!    Its  quiet  how  deep! 
Its  zephyrs  breathe  calmly,  and  soft  is  its 
And  flowerets  perfume  it  with  ether. 


FIRST  VOICE 

There  riots  the  blood-crested  worm  on  the  dead, 
And  the  yellow  skull  serves  the  foul  toad  Uk  a  bed. 
And  snakes  in  its  nettle-weeds  hiss. 


SECOND  VOICE 

How  lovely,  how  lone  the  repose  of  the  tomb! 
Ko  tempests  are  there,  but  the  nightingales  oome 
And  sing  their  svreet  choms  of  bliss^ 


FIRST  VOICE 

The  ravens  of  night  flap  thdr  wings  o'er  the  grave: 
*T  is  the  vulture's  abode;  't  is  the  wolf's  dreary 
Where  they  tear  up  the  earth  with  their  (angs. 


VOU.  II.— 3. 


34  The  Nineteenth  Century 


SBCOND  VOZCB 

There  the  coney  at  evening  disports  with  his  love, 
Or  Mflts  on  the  sod,  while  the  turtles  above 
Repoie  on  the  bough  that  o'erhangs. 

FIRST  VOICE 

There  darkness  and  dampness  with  poisonous  breath 
And  loathsome  decay  fill  the  dwelling  of  death. 
The  trees  are  all  barren  and  bare. 

SBCOND  VOICB 

Oh,  soft  are  the  breezes  that  play  round  the  tomb, 
And  sweet  with  the  violet's  wafted  perfume, 
With  lilies  and  jessamine  fair  I 

FISST  VOICB 

The  pilgrim  who  reaches  this  valley  of  tears 
Would  fain  hurry  by,  and  with  trembling  and  feais 
He  is  launched  on  the  wreck-covered  river. 

SBCOND  VOICE 

The  traveller  outworn  with  life's  pilgrimage  dreary, 
Lays  down  his  rude  staff,  like  one  that  is  weary, 
And  sweetly  reposes  for  ever. 

—"Btom  Sit  John  Bowring's  S^efditems  ike 
Russian  Psets^  Part  I. 

POOR  UZA 

Peidiance  none  of  those  who  live  in  Moscow  know  the 
aorroiindings  of  that  city  so  weU  as  I  do^  because  nobody  Is 
oftener  in  the  open  than  I,  nobody  oftener  wanders  about, 
planlessly,  aimlessly,  whither  his  eyes  carry  him,  thxoogh 
meadows  and  groves^  over  hills  and  vales.  Every  summer 
I  discover  new  places  of  delight,  or  new  beanties  in  those  I 
already  know. 

But  most  pleasant  to  me  is  the  place  where  rise  the  sombre 


Digitized  by  Google 


Nikoliiy  Mikhiiylovich  Karamzin  35 


Gothic  towers  of  the  monastery  of  St.  Simeon.  Standing  on 
that  mound,  you  survey  upon  your  right  nearly  all  of  Mos- 
cow, that  enormous  mass  of  houses  and  churches,  that  pre- 
sents itself  to  the  eyes  in  the  form  of  a  majestic  amphitheatre, 
— a  superb  picture,  especially  when  the  sun  shines  upon  it, 
when  his  evening  rays  gleam  on  the  innumerable  gilded 
cupolas  and  the  innumerable  crosses  that  tower  to  heaven ! 

Below%  stretch  the  luscious,  dark-green,  blossoming  fields; 
beyond  them,  there  flows  over  the  yellow  sands  the  limpid 
river,  stirred  by  the  light  oars  of  fishing-boats,  or  splashing 
under  the  prows  of  freighted  barges  that  oome  ftom  the  more 
fertile  parts  of  the  Ruasiaii  Bmpire  and  supply  hungry  Mos- 
cow with  gnun.  On  the  other  side  of  the  river  there  is  seen 
an  oak  grove,  and  near  it  graze  numerous  flocka  There 
young  ahepheida^  sitting  in  the  shade  of  trees,  sing  simple^ 
doleful  songs,  and  thus  shorten  the  monotonous  summer 
days.  A  little  farther  off,  in  the  dense  verdure  of  ancient 
elms,  gleams  the  gold-domed  monastery  of  St.  Daniel's:  still 
farther  away,  almost  on  the  verge  of  the  horizon,  loom  the 
bine  outlines  of  the  Sparrow  Hills.  To  the  left  appear  vast, 
grain-covered  fields,  groves,  three  or  four  villages*  and,  in 
the  distance,  Kol6mna  with  its  high  palace. 

I  often  repair  to  that  spot,  and  nearly  always  meet  spring 
there;  thither  I  also  repair  in  the  gloomy  days  of  autumn, 
to  mourn  together  with  Nature.  The  winds  moan  terribly 
within  the  walls  of  the  deserted  monastery,  in  the  rank  grass 
of  the  graves,  and  in  the  dark  corridors  of  the  cells.  There 
I  lean  against  the  ruins  of  the  tombstones  and  hearken  to  the 
hollow  groan  of  Time,  the  groan  of  those  swallowed  by  the 
abyss  of  the  past,  which  makes  my  heart  flutter  and  tremble. 
At  times  I  enter  into  the  cells,  and  I  picture  to  myself  those 
who  have  lived  in  them,^4ad  pictures!  Here  I  see  a  grey- 
haired  old  man  bending  his  knee  before  the  cmdfiz  and  im- 
idoiing  a  swift  liberation  from  his  earthly  fetters,  for  all 
pleasures  of  life  have  left  him,  all  his  feelings  are  dead,  except 
the  feeling  of  ill-health  and  weakness.  There  a  youthful 
monk,  with  pale  face  and  languishing  glance,  looks  threogh 
the  latticed  window,  sees  the  merry  birds  that  fiedy  swim 


36  The  Nineteenth  Century 


in  the  aerial  ocean, — sees  them,  and  bitter  tears  issue  from 
his  eyes.  He  pines,  withers,  dries  up, —  and  the  dismal 
sound  of  a  bell  announces  to  me  his  untimely  death. 

At  times  I  scan  on  the  doors  of  the  sanctuary  the  repre- 
sentation of  miracles  that  have  taken  place  in  this  monas- 
tery: there  fishes  fall  from  heaveu  to  appease  the  hunger  of 
the  denizens  of  the  cloister  that  is  besieged  by  a  multitud- 
inous host;  here  the  image  of  the  Mother  of  God  puts  the 
enemy  to  flight.  All  that  xefieahea  in  my  mind  the  histocy 
of  oar  ooontiy, — the  sad  history  of  those  times  when  the 
savage  Tartan  and  I^ithuaniana  with  fire  and  awocd  laid 
waste  the  aarroondinga  of  the  Rnaaian  capital,  and  when 
luckless  Moscow,  like  a  defimoeless  widow,  awaited  fiom 
God  alone  sooooiir  in  her  dire  distress* 

Bat  most  fireqoently  of  all  I  am  attracted  to  the  walls  of 
St.  Simeon's  monastery  by  the  memoiy  of  the  tearful  fiite  of 
I^za,  poor  Liza.  Oh!  I  love  thoee  objects  that  touch  my 
heart  and  cause  me  to  shed  tears  of  tender  sorrow! 

Some  five  hundred  feet  from  the  cloister  wall  there  stands, 
near  a  birch  grove,  amidst  a  green  field,  a  deserted  hut  with- 
out doors,  without  windows,  widlOlit  a  floor;  its  roof  is  de- 
cayed and  has  fallen  in  long  ago.  In  that  hut  there  lived, 
some  thirty  years  a^o,  lovely  Liza  with  her  old  mother. 

Lfza's  father  was  a  fairly  well-to-do  peasant,  for  he  loved 
work,  carefully  tilled  the  soil,  and  always  led  a  sober  life. 
But  soon  after  his  death  his  wife  and  daughter  fell  into 
poverty.  The  indolent  hand  of  the  hired  servant  ploughed 
the  field  carelessly,  and  the  grain  began  to  give  diminished 
returns.  They  were  compelled  to  let  their  land  to  a  tenant, 
at  an  inconsiderable  income.  At  the  same  time  the  poor 
widow,  who  continuously  shed  tears  for  her  deceased  hus- 
band,— for  peasant  women  also  know  how  to  love, — grew 
weaker  and  weaker  from  day  to  day,  and  finally  could  not 
work  at  all.  Lfza  alone,  who  was  fifteen  years  old  at  her 
iatfaer'a  death,— Uza  akme  did  not  spare  her  tender  yonth 
nor  her  rare  heauty,  and  laboured  day  and  night:  she  wove 
hempen  doth,  knit  stockings;  in  springtime  picked  flowers^ 
and  in  winter  berries,  and  sold  them  in  Moscow.  Seeing  the 


Nikoliy  Mikhiylovich  Karamzin  37 


indefetigableness  of  her  daughter,  the  sensitive,  gentle  old 
ivoman  frequently  pressed  her  to  her  feebly  beating  heart, 
cttUfid  lier  "  divine  gxaoe^  piotector,  conaolgtion  of  my  old 
age,"  and  prayed  to  God  to xewaid  her  for  all  she  did  £or  her 
mother* 

"  God  gave  me  hands  to  work,"  I^fsa  would  say.  "  Yon 
noorished  me  at  your  breast,  watched  me  in  my  childhood. 
Now  it  is  my  torn  to  look  after  yon.  Only  atop  grieving, 
itopweepingl  Onr  tears  will  not  bring  &ther  to  life." 

Bnt  often  gentle  I4za  oonld  not  restrain  her  own  tears, 
for  oh!  die  recalled  that  she  had  had  a  father,  and  that  he 
was  no  more;  but  tocomfort  her  mother  fdie  tried  to  hide 
the  grief  of  her  heart,  and  to  appear  calm  and  gay. 

"  In  the  world  to  come,  beloved  Liza,"  the  sorrowing  old 
woman  answered,  "  in  the  world  to  come  I  shall  cease  to 
weep.  There,  they  say,  we  shall  all  be  happy;  I  shall  cer- 
tainly be  happy  when  I  see  your  father  again.  But  I  do  not 
wish  to  die  now,  for  what  would  become  of  you  without  me  ? 
To  whom  could  I  leave  you  ?  No,  God  grant  me  first  to  see 
you  provided  for!  Maybe  some  good  man  will  be  found  for 
you.  Then  I  will  bless  you,  my  dear  children,  will  make 
the  sign  of  the  croas,  and  willingly  will  lie  down  in  the  damp 
earth." 

FROM  THE  "HISTORY  OF  THE  RUSSIAN 

EMPIRE" 

INTRODUCTION 

History  is  in  a  certain  sense  the  sacred  book  of  the  nations, 
their  most  important  and  indispensable  book,  the  minor  of 
thdr  being  and  activities^  the  tables  of  their  revdatkm  and 
of  their  laws,  the  injtmctioo  of  the  anoestois  to  their  poater- 
i^,  the  complement,  the  exposition  of  the  present,  and  the 
frampile  for  the  fhtnre. 

Rnlera  and  lawgivers  act  acoofding  to  the  leasoos  of  liis> 
toiy,  and  look  npon  its  pages  as  the  mariner  looks  upon  his 
ooesa  diarts.  Hnmanwiadomisinneedof  esperieno^  and 
life  is  short.  It  is  necessary  to  know  how  xiotons  paaaions 
have  of  yore  agitated  dvil  society,  and  in  what  manner  the 


38  The  Nineteenth  Century 


bencfioeiit  domiiuoii  of  teMoit  has  bridtod  fts  tempeitnoofl 
otiniflh,  In  Older  to  entaWWi  ofder,  harmooiae  tbe  intenats 
of  men,  and  give  tfaem  the  beat  attainable  hapinneaa  upon 
earth. 

But  even  a  aimple  citizen  mnat  read  hiatoiy  •  It  reoondlea 
him  to  the  Imperfecdon  of  the  vlaible  order  of  things  aa  to 
a  common  phenomenon  in  all  agea;  oonaoles  him  in  hia 
oonntxy'a  calamities,  by  certifying  to  former  atmllar,  even 
more  ominous  miafortnnea,  by  which  the  country  did  not 
perish;  it  fosters  a  moral  sense,  and  by  its  equitable  judg- 
ment inclines  the  soul  to  justice,  by  which  OUT  well-being 
and  the  concord  of  society  are  confirmed. 

Such  is  its  usefulness,  and  many  are  the  pleasures  of  heart 
and  mind  that  are  derived  from  it.  Curiosity  is  an  innate 
feeling  with  the  man  of  culture  and  with  the  savage.  At  the 
famous  Olympic  games  the  noise  died  down,  and  the  masses 
preserved  silence  around  Herodotus  reading  the  traditions  of 
the  ages.  Even  before  knowing  the  use  of  letters,  the  na- 
tions love  history :  the  old  man  points  out  to  the  yonth  the 
elevated  tomb  and  narrates  to  him  the  deeds  of  the  hero 
reating  in  it.  The  first  experimenta  of  onr  anoeatota  In  the 
att  of  writing  were  devoted  to  religion  and  hiatocy ;  ahmtded 
by  a  denae  dond  of  ignonmoe.  the  people  listened  eageily  to 
the  aoooonta  of  the  dironidera.  Even  fiction  pleaaea^  bat 
to  get  a  full  pleasure  out  of  it  we  mnst  deodve  onradves 
and  imagine  that  It  la  true.  By  opening  the  graves,  raising 
the  dead,  patting  life  into  thdr  hearts  and  words  npon  their 
lips,  by  recreating  kingdoms  from  the  dnat  and  preaenttng 
to  the  imagination  a  aeries  of  the  ages  with  their  several 
paaidnmay  cnatoma,  acts, — ^histofy  expands  the  limits  of  oar 
own  existence.  By  its  creative  power  we  live  with  the  men 
of  all  times,  see  and  hear  them,  love  and  hate  them;  before 
we  think  of  usefulness,  we  revel  in  the  contemplation  of  the 
various  occurrences  and  of  the  characters  that  entertain  the 
mind  or  nurture  our  sensibilities. 

If  ever>'  historj-.  even  the  in  artistically  written,  may  be 
pleasing,  as  Pliny  says, — how  much  more  that  of  our  native 
land!   A  true  cosmopolite  is  a  metaphysical  being  or  so 


Digitized  by  Google 


Nikol&y  Mikhiylovich  Karamzfn  39 


flimsiial  ft  pfaencmenoii  thftt  there  is  no  need  of  speaking 
ol  him,  netUier  to  praise  nor  to  ooodemn  him.  We  are  all 
dtisenSi-HUi  Bnrope  and  in  India,  in  Mexico  and  in  Abys- 
sinia; tiie  peraonality  of  each  is  closely  boimd  up  with  his 
conntry:  we  love  it  because  we  love  ourselves.  The  Greeks 
and  the  Romans  may  captivate  our  imagination:  they  belong 
to  the  family  of  the  human  race  and  are  no  strangers  to  us 
in  their  virtues  and  in  their  weaknesses,  in  their  glory  and 
in  their  calamities;  but  the  name  of  a  Russian  has  a  special 
attraction  forus:  my  heart  beats  more  strongly  for  Pozhdrski ' 
than  for  Themistocles  or  Scipio.  Universal  history  by  its 
great  recollections  embellishes  the  world  in  our  eyes,  but 
Russian  histor^^  embellishes  our  country  in  which  we  live 
and  feel.  How  attractive  are  to  us  the  banks  of  the  V61- 
khov,  Dnieper,  Don,  when  we  know  what  has  taken  place 
upon  them  in  remote  antiquity!  Not  only  N6vgorod,  Kiev, 
Vladimir,  but  even  the  cabins  of  El6ts,  Koz^lsk,  Gdlich,  be- 
come interesting  monuments,  and  mute  objects  grow  elo- 
quent. The  shadows  of  bygone  centuries  everywhere  draw 
pictures  before  us. 

Outside  of  their  special  value  for  us,  sons  of  Russia,  its 
annals  have  an  universal  interest.  Let  us  cast  a  glance  at 
this  uniqne  Bmpire:  thooght  staggers!  Rome  in  all  her 
majesty,  niling  from  the  Tiber  to  the  Csncasus,  to  the  ^be 
and  to  the  Afiiean  sandSi  conld  never  equal  it.  Is  it  not 
wondeifiil  how  a  land  that  is  disrupted  by  eternal  barrienof 
Nataxe»  by  immessnnUe  deserts  and  impenetrable  forests,  by 
odd  and  hot  elimates»  how  Astrakhan  and  Lapland,  Siberia 
and  Besaarabia,  could  have  formed  one  empire  with  Moscow  ? 
And  is  that  mixture  of  its  inhabitants  less  wondeifiil,  that 
composite  and  heterogeneous  mass  of  varying  degrees  of 
civilisation?  Like  America,  Russia  has  its  savages;  like 
other  countries  of  Bnrope,  it  displays  the  fruits  of  a  pro- 
tracted civil  existence.  One  need  not  be  a  Russian,  one 
need  only  think,  in  order  to  read  with  curiosity  the  tradi- 
tions of  a  nation  that  by  daring  and  coorage  has  obtained 

■  The  libemtor  of  RoiBis,  during  the  intenqpnim  of  the  Bidie 


40  The  Nineteenth  Century 


the  dominion  over  the  ninth  part  of  the  world,  has  discovered 
countries,  heretofore  unknown,  has  entered  them  in  the 
universal  system  of  geography  and  history,  and  has  en- 
lightened them  through  God-sent  faith,  without  violence, 
without  atrocities  practised  by  the  other  devotees  of  Christ- 
ianity in  Europe  and  America,  but  merely  by  dint  of  good 
example. 

We  shall  admit  that  the  deeds  described  by  Herodotus, 
Thucydides,  Livy,  are  in  general  more  interesting  to  others 
than  to  Russians,  representing  as  they  do  more  force  of  char- 
acter and  a  mora  vivid  play  of  the  passions,  ^noe  Gxeeoe 
and  Rome  were  fvorld  po>weni  and  mote  enlightened  than 
Ruasia;  yet  we  may  boldly  assert  that  certain  inddentSi 
pictures,  diaracters,  of  our  history  are  not  less  carious  than 
those  of  antiquity.  Sndtaietheesploitsof  SvyatoaUhr,  the 
scourge  of  Baty,  the  popular  rising  under  Donsk^y*  the  ML 
of  Ndvgocod,  the  taking  of  KmbSoIi,  the  victoiy  of  the  dvic 
virtues  in  the  time  of  the  tnterregnnm.  The  giants  of  the 
early  dawn,  01^  and  the  son  of  Igor;  the  simple-minded 
knight,  blind  Vasflko;  the  friend  of  his  country,  virtuous 
Monomdkh ;  the  brave  lAstisldvs,  terrible  in  war  and  an  ex- 
ample of  meekness  in  peace;  Mikhail  of  Tver,  so  famed  for 
his  magnanimous  death;  the  ill-fated,  truly  courageous 
Aleksdndr  N^vski;  the  youthful  hero,  the  vanquisher  of 
Mamiy, — the  slightest  sketch  of  them  acts  powerfully  on 
the  imagination  and  on  the  heart.  The  reign  of  Ivdn  III. 
alone  is  a  rare  treasure  of  history;  at  least  I  know  of  no 
monarch  more  worthy  to  live  and  shine  in  its  sanctuary. 
The  rays  of  his  glory  fall  upon  the  cradle  of  Peter,  and  be- 
tween these  two  autocrats  are  the  remarkable  Ivdn  IV.  and 
Godun6v,  who  merited  his  good  fortune  and  his  reverses; 
the  strange  False  Demetrius;  and,  after  a  host  of  valiant 
patriots,  boydrs,  and  citizens,  the  mentor  of  the  enthroned. 
Patriarch  Filardt  with  his  august  son,  the  light-bearer  in  the 
darkness  of  our  country's  woes;  and  Tsar  Alexis,  the  wise 
father  of  the  Emperor  whom  Europe  has  called  the  Great. 
Either  all  modem  history  must  be  silent,  or  that  of  Russia 
has  a  right  to  be  heard. 


uiyiu^-CU  Ly  Google 


Iv&n  Andrievich  Kiyl6v  41 


Mm  Andrtericli  KiylAr.  (i768-i844,) 

Kfyldv't  Uograph J  it  not  Mtitfactory.  It  is  known  that  lie  mm 

the  son  of  a  poor  army  o£5c«r,  and  that  he  lost  his  father  early  in 
life.  He  received  only  the  scantiest  education,  and  while  still  a  boy 
became  acquainted  with  practical  life.  He  served  in  various  capaci- 
ties in  the  government  offices  of  St.  Petersburg  and  the  province. 
Tlicn  lie  disappeaxcd  from  public  view  fat  a  nnmber  of  years,  though 
it  is  sonnised  that  be  pmtmA  nocli  of  that  time  gamUing  at  esids,  to 
irtdch  be  was  passionately  addicted.  In  1812  he  received  an  appoint- 
ment at  the  Imperial  (later  the  Public)  Library,  which  gave  him 
ample  leisure  to  devote  himself  to  literature,  though  his  innate  lazi- 
ncas  made  him  very  unproductive.  Kryl6v  first  entered  the  literary 
caieer  belbte  the  age  of  tvicnty,  by  a  leriea  of  mediocfe  comedieB. 
From  1789  he  edited  a  nnmber  of  periodicals,  the  first  of  which,  TUs 
^irii  Post,  was  in  the  manner  of  the  older  satirical  journals.  It  was 
here  that  he  began  to  develop  the  fine  satirical  vein  for  which  his 
fables  later  became  so  famous.  In  1809  appeared  the  first  small 
ooOcctioo  of  his  faUes.  Host  of  his  sabjects  he  borrowed  from  the 
older  writen»  especially  from  La  FontainOp  hot  he  not  only  gave  tibem 
•  Rnasian  surrounding,  but  invested  them  with  such  an  artistic  at- 
mosphere  as  to  make  them  the  possession  of  all  times  and  all  nations. 
His  iables  have  been  translated  into  all  the  European  and  aome  of 
the  Asiatic  languages. 

There  are  several  tnwislations  of  Eiy16v  in  Bnglish :  KHkf  and 
kis  FableSy  by  W.  R.  S.  Ralstoo,  London,  1869  (4th  edition,  1883 ; 
several  of  the  poems  had  been  published  before,  in  1868  and  1870,  in 
Good  Words) ;  Krilofs  Fables^  Illustrating  Russian  Social  Life^ 
translated  from  the  Russian  for  the  Calcutta  Weekly  "  Englishman  " 
[by  J.  Long],  Cslcntta,  1869;  KrUajps  OrigimU  Mies,  ttandated 
brf  I.  H.  Harrison,  London,  1883.  Separate  fiibles  have  been  trans- 
lated by  Sir  John  Bowring  in  his  Speamms  of  the  Russian  Poets, 
Part  I.  (from  the  manuscript  furnished  him  by  Kryl6v) ;  three  poems, 
given  below  [by  W.  D.  Lewis]  in  the  National  Gazette  and  Literary 
Register,  Philadelphia,  1S25 ;  in  Rmskm  FkMists,  wUh  Sipedmims, 
in Flraaef^ Magaiine»  1839 and  184a;  in  Chambenk*s  Joomal,  vol.  t., 
x$56 ;  by  Sutherland  Edwards,  in  7^e  Russians  at  Home,  London, 
1861 ;  by  R.  Gamett,  in  The  University  Magazine,  1879  {Fables frmn 
Krilof);  by  C.  T.  Wilson,  in  Russian  Lyrics,  London,  1887;  by  John 
Pollen,  in  Rhymes  from  the  Russian,  London,  1891. 

THIS  ASS  AND  THE  NIGHTlNOAI<B 

Clmiiciiig  a  Nightingale  to  nwel, 
Thus  did  an  Aas  tlie  aopgetwaB  greet:— 


42 


The  Nineteenth  Centuiy 


Whither  in  such  a  hurry  winging  ? 
I  *m  told,  my  dear,  you  're  fiuned  for  aitiging. 
My  cnrioeity  I  fain  would  aatiafy. 
So  if  yon  '11  condeaoend  to  gratify, — 
Come!  for  a  apedmen  of  your  lave  ddll, 
And  let  me  hear  how  featly  you  can  trill! " 
Forthwith  the  Nightingale  began, 
And  through  her  cadences  she  ran, 
Now  tender  and  most  soft, 
Anon  her  voice  she  raised  aloft; 
While  all  around  in  silence  hushed 

Listened  to  her  melting  strain. 
As  its  music  sweetly  gushed, 

And  floated  over  dale  and  plain ; 

Hardly  breathed  the  enraptured  swain 
As  drank  his  ear  of  sound  the  stream, 
And  as  he  mused  on  the  var^'ing  theme. 
Ceased  the  songstress,  the  critic  Ass 
His  sentence  thus  began  to  pass: — 
*'  Upon  my  word,  't  is  not  amiss! 
Yet  you  should  hear 
Friend  Chanticleer. 

From  him  some  lessons  you 'd  do  wdl  to  take. 
His  mode  of  singing  well  I  know, 
Nor  can  there  finer  be,  I  trow. 
Yea!  Ho  is  clever; 

And  yon,  my  dear,  should  by  all  means  endeavour 
I4ke  him  to  crow! 
He  has  a  vdce— a  shake- 
That  really  keeps  folks  quite  awake. 
Yet  after  all  you  do  not  sing  amisa." 
On  hearing  this, 
Far  away  the  song-bird  flew. 

—From  Hussion  Fabulisis,  with  Specimens,  in 
Frsser's  Magazine^  i&|2. 


Iv*in  Andreevich  Krylov  43 


THE  QUARTETTE 

Tlie  tricksy  Monkey,  the  Goat,  the  Ass,  and  bandy-leggped 
Iflihka  the  Bear,  determine  to  play  a  quaitette.  They  pro- 
vide themadves  with  the  neoeaaary  pieoea  of  mnaic-^with 
two  fiddle^  and  with  an  alto  and  Goonter-baaa.  Then  they 
alt  down  on  a  meadow  under  a  lime-tree,  prepared  to  enchant 
the  world  by  their  akiU.  They  work  away  at  their  fiddle- 
aticka  with  a  will;  and  they  make  a  nolae,  bat  there  ia  no 
mnaiclnit. 

"Stop,  brotherB,  atop!*' cried  the  Monkey,  "waitalittle! 
How  can  we  get  onr  music  right  ?  It  'a  plain,  yon  moat  n't 

sit  as  yoa  are.  Yon,  Mfahka,  with  your  counter-bass,  face 
the  alto.  I  will  sit  oppoaite  the  fiddle.  Then  a  different 
aort  of  music  will  b^;in:  we  ahall  aet  the  very  hilla  and 

forests  dancing." 

So  they  changed  places,  and  recommenced;  but  the  music 
is  just  as  discordant  as  ever. 

*'  Stop  a  little!  "  exclaims  the  Ass;  *'  I  have  found  out  the 
secret  We  shall  be  sure  to  play  in  tune  if  we  ait  in  a 
row." 

They  follow  its  advice,  and  form  in  an  orderly  line. 
But  the  quartette  is  as  unmusical  as  ever.  Louder 
than  before  there  arose  among  them  squabbling  and 
wrangling  as  to  how  they  ought  to  be  seated.  It  hap- 
pened that  a  Nightingale  came  flying  that  way,  attracted 
by  their  noise.  At  once  they  all  entreat  it  to  solve  their 
difficulty. 

"Be  ao  kind,'*  they  say,  '*a8  to  bear  with  ua  a  little,  ui 
Older  that  our  quartette  may  come  off  properly.  Muaic  we 
have;  inatruments  we  have:  tell  ua  only  how  we  ought  to 
ptaoeooiaelvea." 

But  the  Nightii^  repliea: 

"T^  be  a  muaidan,  one  muat  have  a  quideer  intdUgenoe 
and  finer  ear  than  yon  poaaeaa.  You,  my  firiends^mayplaoe 
yonradvea  just  as  you  like,  but  you  will  never  become 
muflicians*" 

— Pkom  W.  R.  S.  Ralston'a  KHkfmid  kis  Fables. 


44  The  Nineteenth  Centuiy 


DAM IAK*S  FISHSOUP 

*•  Well,  neighbour,  now  you  are  a  brick  1 

Come,  tr>'  some  more." 
"  Neighbour,  I  'm  bursting  quite."—"  No  humbug,  quick — 

One  plateful  let  me  pour: 
Real  fishsoup,  see  what  soup,  done  to  a  — 
. "  But  that 's  my  third." — *'  Hush!  here  we  count  nor  plates 

nor  glasses — 
With  a  good  appetite  all  passes: 
Digestion  's  good  for  sleep,  you  see. 
*T  is  tempting,  't  is  a  very  jelly; 
Look  at  the  amber  that  its  surfiMe  coats, 

Indulge,  old  chtun,  imto  thy  heart's  comtentl 
See  theie,  't  is  bream,  here  sterlet  choioe  that  floatsi 

That  liver  there  for  thee  was  meant 
Another  qioonfnl  I^Wife,  thy  xeverenoe  mokel — 
One  small  one  more,  and  for  my  sakel " 
Thus  feasted  Damian  once  his  old  friend  Neddy; 
No  time  to  breathe  or  talk,  kept  to  it  steady. 
Down  Neddy's  face  had  long  been  trickling  rain. 
But,  yielding  unto  fate,  his  plate  he  hands  again; 
And,  summoning  his  strength  remaining, 

He  swallows  all. — "  Now,  that  a  friend  I  call," 

Exulting  Damian  cries;  "why  on  excuses  fall 
To  spare  my  cheer  ?  Then  once  more  show  your  tndningi " 
Then  hapless  Neddy,  who 
Doted  on  fish,  at  this  aggression  new. 
Seizing  his  coat. 
Stick,  and  capote, 

Ran  straight  and  swiftly  to  his  own  street  door. 
And  ne'er  set  foot  in  Damian' s  parlour  more. 

Good  author,  happy  thou  in  gift  beyond  diqiute; 
Bnt,  if  thou  hast  not  learned  yet  to  be  mnle^ 
Boring  unwilling  ears  to  suit 
Nor  time  nor  place,  be  sure — thy  verse  or  prose 
More  sickening  e'en  than  Damian's  fishsoup  grows. 

—From  I.  H.  Harrison's  Krilqff's  Onginal  Fabiis. 


Digitized  by  Google 


Ivim  Andr^evich  Kryl6v  45 


THE  SWAN,  THB  PIKB,  AND  THE  CRAB 

Whene'er  companions  don't  agree, 

They  work  without  accord ; 
And  naught  but  trouble  doth  result, 

Although  they  all  work  hard. 

One  day  a  Swan,  a  Pike,  a  Crab, 

Resolved  a  load  to  haul. 
All  three  were  harnessed  to  the  cart, 

And  pulled  together  all. 
But  though  they  pulled  with  all  their  might, 
That  cait'toad  on  the  bank  stuck  tight. 

The  Swan  pulled  upwuds  to  the  akies, 

The  Crab  did  backwards  crawl. 
The  Pike  made  for  the  water  stndght: 

This  proved  no  use  at  aH 

Now,  which  of  them  waa  most  to  blame 

'T  is  not  for  me  to  aay, 
But  this  I  know,— the  load  ia  there 

Unto  this  very  day. 

— ^Prom  J.  PoUen'a  Rhymes  from  iht  Russuuu 

THK  WON  AND  THE 

A  hungry  Lion  on  a  lamb  was  feeding. 

When  a  poor  dog  passed  by, 
And,  with  a  patient  look  of  meekness  pleading, 
Shared  in  the  banquet,  while  the  royal  beast 
Smiled  at  his  ignorant  simplicity. 
A  Wolf  hx^Eed  on,  and  said:  "  And  surely  I 
May  have  a  portion  of  the  prey,— at  least, 
Iiideed,  I  'U  try." 
He  came,— came  boldly :  when  the  I<fon  aaw 
His  purpose,  he  npraiaed  his  kingly  paw. 
Smote  him  to  earth,  and  left  him  there  to  die. 


4^  The  Nineteenth  Century 


There 's  some  excuse  for  inexperience; 
But  none  for  daring,  insolent  pretence. 

— From  National  Gazette  and  Literary  Register, 
Philadelphia,  September  s,  1825. 

THE  CLOUD 

Over  the  thirsty  plains  a  pragnant  CkMd 

Rolled  on  its  forward  way; 
Scorning  the  clifFs  whoae  aummit  pioiid 

Beneath  it  lay; 
While  to  the  overflowing  sea 
It  poured  its  waters  forth  rejoicingly. 
"  Am  I  not  liberal  ? "  to  the  Mountain  cried 
The  Cloud,  while  the  swift  torrents  swelled  the  tide. 
**  Liberal  !   The  panting  field  and  sun-dried  plain 
Asked  for  one  drop,  one  single  drop,  in  vain," 
Exclaimed  the  Mountain;  *'  liberal,  indeed. 
To  those  who  asked  no  fiKvonr,— felt  no  need  I " 

THE  SHIPWRECKED  SAILOR  AND  THE  SEA. 

The  vnLvtB  had  whelmed  the  ^entmoas  bark, 
And  dashed  the  shipwrecked  seaman  to  the  shore; 
He  turned  himself,  impatient  at  the  roar, 
And  cried,  "  Perfidious  Sea! 
Why  didst  thou  lure  me,  smiling  tranquilly. 

To  such  a  £ate,  so  desolate  and  dark  ?  " 

The  Ocean-god  awoke,  and  frowning  said: 

"  Hurl  not  thy  vain  reproaches  at  my  head; 
My  waters  calmly  ebb  and  flow. 
Till  the  land-warring  tempests  break  their  rest, 
Go!  to  the  storm-winds  be  thy  plaints  addressed, 
Go  I  to  the  whirlwind,  go! " 

AleksAndr  Efimovich  IsmAyloT.  (x779-x8t3Z.) 

Izm&ylov  was  for  a  short  time  vice-governor  of  Tver  and  Arkb&n> 
gelak.  Be  pabliabed  several  periodical^  to  which  he  coatribated 


Digitized  by  Google 


Aleksiuidr  Efimovich  Izm&ylov  47 


senthnental  novels  in  Karamzin's  style.  He  wrote  a  nnmber  of 
fables  in  a  somewhat  coarse  nuMoer,  which  earned  £ot  him  the  title 
of  "  an  anthor  not  for  ladies." 

Tke  Vrttukartts  Vow  is  given  in  Jiusstan  Fa6iUitis,  in  Fraaer's 
Magwine^  zxv.,  1849;  Tk^  /hmttktmPs  Answer,  Tk€  Ladder^ 
Tk4  DtmJUy  mid  the  Horse  are  given  in  Wilson's  Russian  Lyrics. 
An  epigram  is  translated  by  V.  K.  Maiadea  in  The  Anglo-Rmtian 
Iiitexary  Societj,  Ma  9. 

THE  DRUNKARD'S  VOW 

A  toper  made  a  solemn  vow  he  never  more  would  touch, 
Or  punch,  or  grog,  or  spirits  mixed,  or  any  compounds  such. 
Yet  though  to  make  t  was  easy,  to  keep  so  strict  a  vow, 
To  prove  an  easy  matter  was  not  likely,  you  'II  allow. 
Soon  after  was  our  tippler  seen  reeling  'long  the  street. 
*'  How  noir I "  a  ndghbonr  cried, ' '  why,  yott  scarce  can  keep 
jroor  leQf. 

I  tlionght  yoti  bad  fonwocn  for  ever  punch  and  grog  ? 
"  And  80 1  haw,  nor  do  I  now  touch  either,  ytm  dull  dog; 
But  I  keep  my  vow  nnbfoken  by  drinldog  spirits  nnU.** 
—From  RttstUm  FuhUisis,  in  Fiaser's  Magadne, 
vol.  zxv. 

THE  CANARY  AND  TH£  NIGUTINGAI3 

In  a  beautiful  cage  near  the  window  In  the  garden  was  a 
Canary  who  sang  the  livelong  day  alone.  At  some  distance^ 
where  an  avenue  of  birches  led  to  a  bramble  bush,  a  lonely 
Nightingale  sang  throngb  the  nights  and  early  In  the  morn- 
ings. Both  man  and  beast  and  bird,  and  all  that  have  blood, 
fed  all'powerM  love  In  spring.  The  two  singers  made 
cadi  other's  acquaintance,  and  forthwith  the  Canary  forgot 
the  naughty  Parrot  in  his  foppish  green  uniform  for  the  sake 
of  the  Nightingale.  No  sweeter  bird,  in  all  the  world,  for 
her  than  the  Nightingale,  and  what  a  charming  voice  he 
bad! 

The  Nightingale,  the  favourite  of  the  roses,  frequently  left 
at  night  his  frag^nt  birches,  and  flitted  near  the  window 
over  the  flower  bed,  and  in  the  hope  of  a  reward  serenaded 
ber  in  the  lilac  bushes,  for  he  loved  the  Canaiy  with  all  his 


Digitized  by  Google 


48  The  Nineteenth  Century 


heart.  At  first,  like  the  artist  he  was,  he  appeared  awk- 
ward and  timid,  but  at  last  he  made  up  his  mind  and,  sigh- 
ing, explained  his  burning  passion  for  her.  The  sentimental 
daughter  of  the  Canary  Islands,  who  was  yellower  than 
straw  and  lemons,  blinking,  sang  out  in  semitones  that  the 
best  of  singers  was  dear  to  her.  The  lovers  agreed  to  fly 
into  the  distant  forest  (they  had  forgotten  to  close  the  cage) ; 
so,  the  Iwftvemi  fmuziiig  fhem,  the  Inidegfoain  mad  bride 
started  for  the  wished-for  woods.  They  flew  for  a  long 
whiter  and  at  last,  Uite  in  the  evening,  alighted  in  a  flildcet; 
they  kissed  each  other  and  began  to  sing, — ba%  they  had 
not  eaten  sinee  morning.  So  the  bride  said  to  her  husband: 

"  How  nice  it  is  to  listen  to  your  singing!  Bnt,  could  I 
not  have  a  bite  of  something  ?  " 

"Right  away,  my  angel!"  and  the  Nightingale  flew 
away,  as  if  pursued  by  a  hawk,  and  returned  a  minnte  later: 

"  O  friend  of  my  aooll  Here  are  little  ants^  th^aie  very 
good!    Here  are  some  ant  eggs  '* 

"  Sir,  that  is  no  food  for  a  bird  brought  up  in  the  capitall 
Bring  me  crackers  and  candy!  " 

*'  Alas,  there  are  none  in  the  woods! " 

**  No  ?    Do  you  expect  me  to  starve  ?  " 

*'  Maybe  I  shall  find  some  kernels  in  the  field!  " 

"  What  ?    Do  you  expect  me  to  peck  kernels  ?  " 

And  she  began  to  scold  her  husband,  broke  her  relations 
with  Iiim,  and  transferred  herself  to  the  Parrot  in  the  garden. 

Inexperienced  bridegrooms!  If  you  are  charmed  by  a 
aUUvtUed  maiden  who  has  never  been  away  from  the  luxuri- 
ous capital,— read  with  her  my  verses;  if  will  agree  to 
^/wg€i-m€-noi  soup,  you  may  safely  marry  her. 

THE  TWO  CATS 

V^hika  the  Cat  and  V^bka  were  two  brodiers;  thqr  were 
both  bom  and  lived  in  the  same  house.  V&nka  was  so  lean 
tliat  it  would  frighten  you  to  look  at  him,— in  truth,  he  was 
not  rounder  than  a  plank ;  whereas  Vdska  was  as  fat  as  the 
steward,  and  could  barely  waddle  on  account  of  his  obesity; 
his  fur  had  the  sheen  of  velvet. 


Digitized  by  Google 


Vasili  Trofimovich  Narydzhny  49 


"We  have  not  the  same  luck,  though  we  are  of  one 
mother,"  said  the  skeleton  to  him.  "  You  know  no  cares; 
you  are  never  without  meat,  not  even  on  week-days.  You 
are  free  to  eat  meat,  while  with  me  it  is  always  Lent;  you 
sleep  long,  while  I  hardly  know  of  sleep,  preserving  the 
whole  house  from  mice  and  rats, — ^yet,  with  all  my  zeal,  I 
am  hungr>'  ** 

"  And  stupid !  "  the  fat  one  interrupted  him.  "  Brother, 
come  to  your  senses!  Take  me  for  an  example,  if  you  want 
to  be  fatter." 

"Pray,  whatam  Ilodo?*' 

"  Amuse  your  master,  walk  on  your  hind  legs  in  his  pre- 
senoe,  danoe,  leap  over  bis  ann  when  he  stretches  it  ont,  and 
learn  all  my  amusing  tricks.  Believe  me,  yon  will  be  loved 
as  well  as  have  your  htmger  satisfied.  Know,  silly  one,  that 
he  who  pleases  people  in  trifles  and  fixdish  things  never  loses 
fay  doing  so;  tmt  he  who  labooxs  Ibr  thtir  benefit  and  passes 
topless  nights  often  stays  hungry." 

Vasfli  Trofimovich  Naiy^sluiy,  (1780-183S) 

Nary^zhny  waa  bora  bat  a  abort  dirtatice  from  O^Sgol'a  native 
place.  In  1801  ha  gndnated  from  the  Moscow  University,  and 
entered  the  army.  After  that  he  served  in  various  departments,  ris- 
ing to  the  post  of  Chief  of  Department.  He  wrote  a  tragedy,  Thf 
False  DemeiriuSt  which  was  pnbliahed  in  1804 ;  in  1814  appeared  the 
fiitttiiKewilaiBMof  71#J0!i»fANi  GU  ^<fi»  .*  the  hwt  three  imlttmes 
did  not  get  tiie  centor's  imprimator.  There  is  much  in  the  manner 
of  this  Little>Ra88ian  author  that  reminds  of  G6gol,  who  availed 
himself  not  only  of  the  genre  of  his  predecessor,  but  also  of  the  very 
subject-matter  for  his  clasaical  creations.  The  very  titles  of  Nar- 
y^zhny*fl  later  wotki(  TV  Semimanst:  A  Liitle-Jimssiam  Stoty,  and 
Tke  7\Bolsimtf  TV  Aj»iw>!irZi%8lf0a»teeiviaafliodified 
form  in  G6gol's  worka.  It  was  only  a  short  time  ago  that  thit  tda- 
tion  of  the  two  anthon  was  pointed  out, 


FROM  "THE  TWO  IVANS;  OR,  THE  PASSION 

FOR  LITIGATION" 

The  day  was  inclining  to  its  fall,  but  the  merriment  in  the 
house  of  the  hospitable  liOBt  did  not  abate.  A  huge  niimber 

TOt.  II.— 4- 


Digitized  by  Google 


50  The  I^ineteenth  Century 


of  visitors  were  not  a  burden  to  him.  He  feasted  the  men, 
and  his  wife  the  women.  Pan  Kharit6n  took  the  guests 
around  in  the  garden,  though  the  September  winds  had 
already  brought  half  of  the  leaves  to  the  ground;  to  the 
barn,  where  he  figured  out  how  much  brandy  every  stack  of 
rye  would  give  him;  to  the  cattle  yard,  where  he  had  occa- 
sion to  boast  of  his  bulls  and  cows,  goats  and  wethers.  His 
spouse  showed  her  friends  from  the  window  the  flocks  of 
chickens,  geese,  ducks  aud  turkeys,  telling  them  in  detail  of 
the  peculiarities  of  every  cock  and  hen.  Is  not  that  charm- 
ing? 

Wlien  aU  liad  gatliered  again  in  the  foom,  whm  tlie  table 
was  set  with  eartlm  wine-jugs  filled  with  ateaming  spioed 
bnmdy,  and  the  hoat  and  gueata  had  pUwed  their  capa  at 
random  before  them,  they  heaxd  in  the  yard  the  rattle  of 
wheels  and  the  tramp  of  honea^  and  aoon  appeared  in  the 
aaaembly  a  thick-aet  man  of  aome  fif^  3rear%  tacganab/^ 
abont  his  abdomen  and  broad  in  his  shonlderB.  Hia  bald 
head  shone  Uke  the  full  moon.  Who  was  that  guest?  The 
scribe  of  the  hnndred-ooort.  Pan  Andri.  All  rose  respect- 
fully, and  the  host  gave  him  a  friendly  embrace,  offered  him 
his  seat,  and  set  before  him  his  cap  id  mulled  brandy.  They 
all  looked  into  his  eyes,  eagerly  caught  every  word  of  his, 
and  laughed  tiproarioualy  when  that  fool  smiled  at  his  own 
witticisms. 

When  three  cups  had  found  their  way  into  his  entrails,  he 
stood  up  akimbo  and  announced:  "  What  will  you  give  me, 
Pan  Kharit6n,  for  the  good  news  which  I  bring  you  from 
town  ?  The  judge  of  the  hundred-court  said  to  me,  as  he 
handed  me  this  batch  of  papers:  *  Go,  my  friend,  and  place 
these  papers  into  the  personal  hands  of  Pan  Kharit6n !  * 
From  this  I  conclude,"  proceeded  Anuri,  "that  they  are 
favourable,  for  I  am  seldom  wrong  in  my  conclusions.'* 

"  I  understand,  I  understand ! ' '  said  Pan  Kharit6n,  and 
went  out  smiling.  Aniiri  had  barely  gotten  away  with  the 
fourth  cup,  when  Pan  Kharit6n  appeared  with  some  gifts 
and  offered  him  a  new  hat  of  the  best  cowhide,  new  boots, 
permeated  by  the  purest  tar,  and  a  day  pipe,  the  wosk  of  the 


Digitized  by  Google 


Vasili  Trofimovich  Naryizhny       5  ^ 


first  PolUva  potter.  Pto  Anfiri  received  the  ofietings  with 
coBdcaceniBon  and  hastened  to  his  two-wheded  cart  to  de- 
posit them  there,  after  which  he  entered  the  room  with  a 
large  seakd  hatdi  of  papers,  handed  it  xespectfiilly  to  Pan 
Kharit6a,  and  seated  himself  in  his  old  place.  PanKharitdn 
cnnKnily  glanced  at  every  paper  and  said:  "After  all  the 
troobles  I  have  had,  my  eyes  have  grown  dim.  Be  so  kind, 
Pan  An6ri,  as  to  read  them.  The  decree  of  the  hnndred- 
court  is  no  secret.** 

Pan  Aniiri  took  the  documents  with  much  dignity,  selected 
from  them  the  judgment,  put  on  his  eyeglasses,  and  began 
to  read:  "Pan  Kharit6n  Zan6za  appears  as  the  plaintiff 
against  Pan  Ivdn  Zubar  and  Pan  Ivan  Khtdra,  claiming 
that  they  had  burnt  down  his  dove-cots  with  all  the  pigeons, 
of  which  there  were  more  than  two  hundred;  the  two  Pans 
Ivdn,  however,  declare  that  the  apiary  of  the  elder  Iv4n,  con- 
taining not  less  than  fifty  hives,  has  been  destroyed. 

**  The  hundred-court,  having  taken  into  couaideratiou  all 
circumstances,  as  is  meet,  decrees: 

X.  "Granting  that  daring  the  fire  of  Pan  Kharit6n's  dove- 
cot all  the  pigeons,  of  which  there  were  more  than  two 
htindred,  two  hwidred  and  one,  have  perished,  and 
eadmating  the  price  of  each  pigeon  at  the  ma-rimnm  of  a 
farthings  hisdsmage  amounts  to  fifty  kopeks  and  a  farthing. 
But  since  the  two  Pans  Ivdn  declare  under  oath  that  they 
have  used  as  find  only  twenty  birds,  the  real  damage  which 
they  have  done  amounts  only  to  five  kopeks;  the  rest  of  the 
pigeons  either  flew  away,  or  were  burnt.  Whereas  nobody 
tied  any  of  the  aforeeaid  pigeons  or  cut  their  wings,  they 
might  have  fiown  away,  and  thus  they  were  roasted  by  their 
own  free  will. 

2.  "Pan  Ivin  the  elder  has  lost  fifty  hives  that  at  the  time 
were  full  of  honey.  Upon  inquiry  it  is  found  that  such  a 
hive  is  worth  sixty  kopeks,  and  thus  his  damage  amounts  to 
thirty  roubles.  Excluding  from  that  sum  five  kopeks.  Pan 
Kharit6n  has  caused  to  Pan  Ivdn  the  elder  a  real  damage  of 
twenty-nine  roubles  and  ninety-five  kopeks,  which  sum  is 
without  delay  to  be  turned  over  within  three  days  to  Scribe 


Digitized  by  Google 


• 


52  The  Nineteenth  Century 

AttiaA.  Of  this  sum  twenty-dglit  roubles  and  ninety-five 
kopeks  will  be  xetalned  for  tbe  necessary  expenses  of  the 
hundred-court;  the  remaining  rouble  is  to  be  turned  over  to 

Pan  Iv&n  the  elder,  he  signing  a  receipt  for  it." 

Who  will  describe  Pan  Kharit6n's  fury!  He  cracked  the 
knuckles  of  his  fingers,  stamped  the  floor  with  his  feet,  and 
rolled  his  eyes  terribly.  Finally  he  jumped  up  like  one  be- 
side himself,  ran  to  the  perplexed  scribe,  grabbed  the  fatal 
judgment  out  of  his  hands,  tore  it  to  shreds,  and  threw  it 
into  the  eyes  of  the  ambassador  of  the  hundred-court.  On  all 
sides  was  heard  a  noise  and  murmuring.  Pan  Kharit6n  paid 
no  attention  to  anything;  he  shouted  to  the  scribe:  *'  Why 
have  you  been  riding  about  upon  my  horses  ?  Eh  ?  Why 
have  you  been  tilling  your  soil  with  my  steers,  and  sowing  it 
with  my  grain  ?  Kh  ?  Why  have  you  been  devouring  my 
flbeep  ud  wethers,  and  making  fur  coats  out  of  their  hides? 
Bh?  Why  have  you  been  taking  my  money,  youdeatgoyeis 
of  souls,  good-for-nothings^  robbers?  Why  have  you  been 
ezlortitig  money  firom  me,  I  say.  If  you  had  no  Intentfen  to 
standbyme?  Bh?" 

With  these  weeds,  to  the  horror  ol  all  the  guests  and  their 
families,— >for  st  the  thunderous  roar  of  Pan  Kharit6n  all 
the  women  and  daughters  of  the  guests  had  made  their  ap- 
pearance,— he  pulled  Pan  An^  by  his  collar,  dragged  him 
out  into  the  yard,  lifted  him  up,  banged  him  into  his  cart, 
jammed  the  rdns  into  his  hands,  gave  him  two  mighty  blows 
in  his  occiput,  raised  from  the  ground  a  birch  dub  and  be- 
gan to  belabour,  now  the  horse,  now  Antiri.  The  poor  animal 
flew  out  of  the  yard  into  the  road  as  fast  as  it  could,  and  Pan 
Kharit6n  ran  out  after  the  cart  and  shouted  to  the  scribe : 
*'  Tell  the  fool  of  a  hundred-judge  and  the  good-for-nothing 
members  of  the  hundred-court  that  they  are  transgressors  of 
the  law,  and  that  I  shall  go  to-morrow  to  Poltdva  to  cite 
them  before  the  regimental  chancery !  ** 

Having  obtained  such  a  famous  victoiy  over  their  wocat 
enemy  in  the  matter  of  the  burnt-down  dove-oot  and  de- 
stroyed apiary,  the  two  Pans  Ivdn  were  travelling  in  tzinmph 


Digitized  by  Google 


Vasili  Trofimovich  Narydzhny  53 


from  the  town  to  their  abode,  when  they  espied  in  the  middle 
of  the  road  near  the  tavern  the  cart,  and  they  immediately 
knew  to  whom  it  belonged. 

"Tb$t  '8  forttmate,**  aaid  Ma  the  dder:  "urt  take 
the  xotible  that  bekmgs  to  us  ftom  AniaA  and  will  ghre  him 
a  good  treat." 

They  entered  the  tavern  and  aue  enough  aaw  Pan  Aniai 
aittingowr  a  cop^hnt  in  a  moat  deeded  attitude.  "What 'a 
the  matter,  Pan  Andri?'*  cried  out  IvAn  the  elder:  "The 
cop  ia  at  ymii  very  month,  and  yon  look  ao  aad,^thoae 
thinga  do  not  fit  together.  Jew,  give  tia  two  more  cups,  of 
anything  you  pleaae^  ao  it 's  of  the  best  spirits!  Really, 
you,  Pan  Andri,  are  a  great  fellow  and  pretty  slick !  Who 
would  have  thought  you  could  manage  in  80  abort  a  time 
that  riotous  head  of  worthless  Zan6za  ?  " 

**  I  should  say  I  did  manage! "  said  Aniiri  with  a  bitter 
smile  and,  filling  his  cup,  drank  from  it  with  unmistakable 
disgust.  The  two  Ivdns  looked  at  his  strange  action  in 
wonderment,  and  pressed  him  with  all  kinds  of  questions. 

Aniiri  told  them  all  in  detail.  Having  listened  with  un- 
disguised attention  to  this  incident  which  had  been  unheard 
of  in  lyittle- Russia  from  its  beginning,  the  two  Ivdns  were 
heartily  glad,  and  the  elder  one  clapped  his  hands.  An^ 
ahowed  a  very  diBoatiified  look  and  asked: 

"  la  it  poasiUe  that  you,  whom  I  regarded  as  my  friends, 
can  rejoice  at  my  having  had  my  occiput  bond  and  at  the 
deaoent  of  fbll'Weis^ited  tdowa  upon  my  back  ?  " 

"  Not  at  aU,"  anawered  Mn  the  elder:  "  we  rgoioe  and 
are  merry  not  because  yon,  our  friend  and  gcvbetween,  have 
received  a  fine  drubbing,  bat  becanae  it  haa  been  adminia- 
tered  to  the  worshipAil  scribe  of  the  hundred-court  by  the 
bold  hand  of  furiona  Zan6za.  We  hope  that  this  wrong- 
doing will  be  his  surer  undoing  than  massacred  coneys, 
maimed  geese,  ducks,  aheep  and,  finally,  the  destroyed 
apiary !  It  is  no  trifling  matter  to  dare  box  the  occiput  and 
warm  up  ten  times  with  a  birch  rod  Pan  Antiri,  a  man  grown 
gxey  and  bald  among  papers,  ink,  and  pens!  " 

"  He  'a  warmed  me  up  just  twelve  times,"  said  Pan  AnCai 


54  The  Nineteenth  Centuiy 


proudly,  "  and  though  he  miased  me  the  thirteenth  time,  it 
ought  to  be  counted  a  blow  all  the  same.  Besides,  he  has 
diflgnced  the  judge  and  the  hundred'>co(irt  with  the  foulest 
cuiaes,  and  in  the  presence  of  an  immense  throng  of  noble- 
men and  ladies;  he  dragged  me  through  the  whole  room, 
which  is  the  same  as  if  he  dragged  me  through  the  whole 
house; — then  by  my  collar  which  reaches  up  to  my  occiput, 
hence  it  is  the  same  as  if  he  had  pulled  me  along  by  my 
hair.  OPansIvdn!  If  you  rejoice  because  Kharit6n  Zan6za 
will  be  repaid  for  this  godless  deed  with  interest,  I  am  glad! 
Oh,  if  he  had  twice  the  prop>erty  he  possesses,  it  would  not 
be  enough  to  pay  me  for  the  disgrace  and  battery.  No!  he 
will  have  to  become  acquainted  with  the  city  prison  and  find 
out  the  taste  of  stale  bread  and  water.  I  give  you  my  hand 
that  this  will  happen,  and  before  longi " 

Vasfli  AndrieTidi  ZbukArskL  (1783-1852.) 

Zhnk6vski  was  the  aon  of  a  landed  proprietor  of  TiUa,  by  the  name 
of  BAaiit,  and  of  a  captive  Tnrlddi  woman,  bat  received  Ida  own  name 

from  his  godfather,  who  happened  to  be  living  at  Bfinin*a  honae. 
After  the  death  of  his  father  he  was  adopted  by  Mrs.  B6nin,  who 
cared  for  hna  as  for  her  own  sou.  He  was  first  educated  in  the  pub- 
lic school  of  Tula,  but  was  requested  to  be  removed  on  account  of 
dnlacM.  He  wm  then  privately  brought  up  in  the  home  of  his  god- 
motlier,  whene,  at  the  age  of  twelve,  he  compoaed  and  aded  two 
dramas — one  of  them  from  Roman  history.  In  1796  he  waa  taken  to 
Moscow  to  be  placed  in  the  boarding-school  that  was  connected  with 
the  Moscow  University.  He  there  came  in  contact  with  a  number  of 
talented  yotug  men  who  later  made  their  mark  in  literature,  and 
under  the  intpiriog  intoeaoe  of  tlie  acliool  began,  at  tbe  early  age  of 
fboiteen,  to  contribnte  poema  to  the  periodical  preaa.  Hit  eariiett 
verses  contained  frequent  references  to  death  and  the  cemetery,  and 
when,  a  few  years  later,  he  lost  a  friend,  he  remembered  him  by 
translating  Gray's  Elegy,  That  was  the  beginning  of  his  literary 
fiune.  He  then  ttandated  a  large  onmber  of  poedeal  produetiooa 
ftom  tbe  Gennan,  Frendi,  and  Baf^h,  invariably  ehooiing  nelaa- 
choly  snbjects,  as  more  adapted  to  his  sentimental,  reflective  nature. 

It  was  chiefly  Zhuk6%'8ki  who  transplanted  the  German  Romantic- 
ism to  Ruasia,  but  bis  deserts  arc  not  only  in  having  abandoned  the 
paendo<laflaic  style  of  poetry  :  he  was  the  first  to  recognise  the  im- 
portent  edncatioml  value  of  poetry,  and  its  moral  povrer,  which  nude 


Digitized  by  Google 


Vasili  Andrtevich  Zhuk6v5ki  55 


it  the  equal  of  religion,  or,  as  Zhnkdvski  put  it,  "Poetry  ia  the  ter- 
restrial sister  of  heavenly  religion,"  and  "  Poetry  is  virtne."  He 
achieved  his  fame  by  his  ballad  Svyeildna.  The  Minstrel  of  the 
Russian  Camp  was  written  by  him  at  the  camptires  during  the  War 
of  i8i3 :  It  pcodaeed  •  tremeiidoiif  ontfmnt  cntiiuriMia  among 
tlie  uliole  axmy.  Ite  toon  tecMac  »  gwit  favourite  at  tt»  Court,  and 
in  1817  was  chosen  as  teacher  of  Russian  to  the  German  bride  of 
Crown  Prince  Nicholas.  In  1841  he  left  Russia  never  to  return, 
and  died  in  Baden-Baden  in  1853.  His  body  «aa  taken  to  RuMia, 
where  he  was  boned  by  the  side  of  Karam^n. 

Sir  John  Bowring  giiwa  in  Spedmtems  ofUig  RmssUun  BsOs^  Bnt  L : 
731^  Mariner^  jEolus's  Harp  Song  {Say,  ye  gentle  breeMS^  say),  RO' 
mance;  in  Part  II.  :  Th^  Minstrel  in  the  Russian  Camp,  Svyetldna 
(under  the  name  of  Catherine),  Thcon  and  Aischines,  The  Bard ;  a 
prose  version  of  Svyetldna,  under  the  name  of  Christmas  Omens,  by 
W.  IX  Lewia,  was  given  In  Tito  Atlantic  Souyenir,  Philadelphia, 
x8a8;  aaothar  tranilation,  wider  the  title  of  The  Bve  pfSU  SUvesier, 
from  the  Russian  of  TEot>ovak  (?),  by  J.  C.  M.,  was  given  in  Dublin 
University  Magazine,  vol.  xxxi.,  1848;  C.  T.  Wilson,  in  Russian 
Lyrics,  gives  The  Flower,  extract  from  The  Minstrel  in  the  Russian 
Camp,  Svyetldna  ;  in  the  Library  of  the  World's  best  Literature  are 
given  N.  H.  Dole's  trandatiotiB  of  Happiness  in  Sbimdtr  and  TUf 
OMmv  Night, 

SVYBTIANA' 

St.  Sihresler's  evetdng  hour 

Calls  the  maidens  round: 
Shoes  to  thsow  behind  the  door, 

Delve  the  snowy  ground. 
Peep  behind  the  window  there, 

Burning  wax  to  pour; 
And  the  corn  for  chanticleer 

Reckon  three  times  o'er. 
In  the  water- fountain  fling 
Solemnly  the  golden  ring, 

Earrings,  too,  of  gold; 
Kerchief  white  must  cover  them 
While  we  *re  clianting  over  them 

Magic  songs  of  old. 

I  Changed  by  Sir  John  Bowring  in  the  poem  to  Catherine. 


56 


The  Nineteenth  Century 


Feebly  thfongh  the  vaponn  diiiie 

Moonbeams  on  tfae  hiU; 
Silently  sat  Catherine, 

Somwfnl  and  atill. 
'*  Maiden,  why  so  pensive  ?  We 

Fdn  fhy  voice  woold  hear— 
Come  and  join  our  revelry ! 

Take  the  ring,  thou  dear  f 
Sing,  '  Make  haste  and  melt,  and  biringt 
Goldsmith!   Come  with  golden  ring. 

Golden  wreath  for  Kate! 
Ring  to  deck  her  hand  of  snow, 
Wreath  to  bloom  upon  her  brow 

At  the  altar-gate.'  " 

"  I  can  sing  no  choral  song 

While  my  love 's  away. 
For  my  days  are  sad  and  long, — 

Gloomier  every  day. 
]>ft  alone,— a  year  is  past, — 

Not  a  line  to  send,— 
Oh,  my  life  is  but  a  waste, 

Severed  from  my  friend ! 
Hast  thou  then  forgotten  me  ? 
Tell  me,  wanderer!  can  it  be  ? 

Where 's  thy  dwelling,  where? 
See,  I  pine  'neath  secret  smart: 
Guardian  angel  I   Watch  my  heart, — 

listen  to  my  prayer! " 

Comfed  with  a  napkin  white, 

Stood  a  taUe  there, 
Where  a  mirror,  clear  and  bright. 

Shone  amidst  the  glare. 
Vacant  seats  for  two  were  placed,— 

"  Look  within,  O  look! 
'T  is  the  hour  of  spirits^— hastel 


Digitized  by  Google 


Vaslli  Andrtevich  Zhukdvski 


Read  Pate's  opemng  book: 
To  the  mirror  tarn  thy  eye, 
And  the  door  shall  sUently 

Open,— liat,  'tiahel 
Gently  sfaaH  thy  lover  glide. 
Seat  him  by  his  maiden's  side^ 

And  shall  snp  with  thee." 

Cath'rine  sat  before  the  glass, — 

AU  alone  waa  ahe, 
Watduog  all  the  ahadea  that  pass, 

Shtiddering  inwardly. 
Bnt  the  j^Iaaa  ia  dark  and  drear, 

Still  aa  death  the  room; 
Scarce  a  fikUng  taper  there 

Flitted  midat  the  gloom. 
Oh,  how  fear  her  boaom  ahookl 
Backwards  then  ahe  dared  not  look  I 

Dread  had  dimmed  her  aight: 
And  the  dying  taper's  noise, 
And  the  cricket's  chirping  voice, 

died,—"  'Tia  middle-nighti " 

Bieathleaa  terror  chilled  her  o'er, 

And  ahe  shades  her  brow: — 
List!  a  knock  ia  at  the  door, 

And  it  opens  now: 
To  the  mirror  then  she  tnmed, 

Stupefied  with  fear; 
There  two  brilliant  eydbaXia  bnmed. 

Ever  bent  on  her. 
Horror  heaved  her  breast,  when  lol 
Gentle  accents,  sweet  and  aiow. 

Glided  on  her  ear: 
"  AU  thy  wishes  are  fulfilled, — 
All  thy  spirit's  sighs  be  stilled,-* 

'T  is  thy  lover,  dear!" 


5« 


The  Nineteenth  Century 


Cafh'rine  looked— lier  low's  ana 

Was  anmnd  her  thrown: 
"Maidenl  BanUh  aU  aloim, 

We  are  ever  one! 
Come !  the  priest  is  waiting  now; 

Life  with  life  to  blend; 
Torches  in  the  chapel  glow, 

Bridal  songs  ascend." 
Cath'rine  smiled, — her  lover  led,— 
O'er  the  snow-clad  court  they  q>ed, 

And  the  portals  gain; 
There  a  ready  sledge  they  found, — 
Two  fleet  coursers  stamp  the  ground. 

Struggling  with  the  rein. 

OnwanU !   Like  the  wind  they  go^ 

When  the  storm  awakes, 
Scattering  round  them  clouds  of  aaow, 

While  the  pathway  shakes. 
All  was  dark  and  wild  as  night. 

Terrible  and  new ; 
Mist- wreaths  dimmed  the  pale  moon's  Ught» 

Plains  were  drenched  in  dew. 
Fear  again  possessed  the  maid, 
And  in  gentlest  tones  she  said, 

'*  Speak,  my  lover  tniel  ** 
He  was  silent  then,  bat  soon 
Tamed  him  to  the  wintiy  mooa,— 

Pale  and  paler  gfew. 

Through  the  snow,  a  mountain's  height. 

Next  the  wild  steeds  passed; 
And  a  church  appeared  in  sight, 

Midst  a  gloomy  waste; 
Then  a  whirlwind  burst  the  door— 

Men  are  there  who  mourn; 
Cloiids  of  incense  ndling  o'er, 


Digitized  by  Google 


Vasili  Andrievich  Zhukdvski 


Wax  and  taper  btini« 
I40I  a  Mack  flepnlehcal  fliiiottd— 
"Dtut  to  diiflt! "  the  prieat  aloud 

Chants, — the  liocsea  flew 
Tow'rda  the  door, — ^her  agony 
Rose,— he  spoke  no  woid,— bat  he 

Pale  and  paler  grew, 

Ckmds  of  snow  aaoend  again^ 

Lo!  the  Gonxaera  fly; 
And  a  raven  00  the  plain 

Croaka  and  paaaes  by; 
'T  waa  an  awfnl»  ominous  sound  I 

And  the  moonlight  wanes; 
Barkneaa  wraps  the  desert  round 

O'er  the  steaming  manes. 
See!  a  glimmering  light  is  theiei 
And  upon  the  heather  bare 

Stands  a  humble  shed. 
Swifter,  swifter  flew  the  car, 
Whirled  the  snow  around  it  far. 

But  no  farther  sped. 

At  the  door  they  stopped  anon. 

There,  a  moment  stood: — 
Steeds,  sledge,  bridegroom,— all  are  gi 

AUissoatude. 
Cath'rine  on  the  waste  was  kfk. 

Midst  dense  clouds  of  snow, 
Of  her  lover  now  bereft. 

To  Gommune  with  woe: 
But  she  hears  a  footstep  now. 
Turns,  and  sees  a  taper  glow, 

Crosses  her,  and  stalks 
Trembling  to  the  door,  and  knocks:— 
Of  itself  the  door  unlocks,— 

In  the  maiden  walks. 


The  Nineteenth  Centuiy 


There,  upon  a  winding-alieet. 

Lay  a  mortal  bier; 
Christ's  bright  image  at  its  feet 

Shone  resplendent  there. 
Whither,  whither  art  thou  oom^ 

Maiden,  all  unblest  ? 
Thou  hast  sought  a  wretched  home. 

Art  a  hapless  guest! 
Cath'rine  to  the  image  flies. 
Wipes  the  snow-dust  from  her  eyes, 

Bends  her  down  and  weeps; 
Presses  to  her  breast  the  cross, — 
Thoughts  of  heaven  her  soul  engross. 

And  she  sQenoe  keeps. 

All  is  still !— The  stonn  is  hushed. 

Faint  the  tapers  beam, 
I«igfat  across  the  diambcar  rushed,— 

Momentary  gleam : — 
AU  is  wrapped  in  silence  de^ 

As  when  visions  come. 
List!  what  gentle  rustlings  sweep 

Through  the  hallowed  room: 
Lo !  a  dart  of  silvery  white, 
Soft  and  still,  with  eyes  of  light, 

Tow'rds  the  mourners  springs: 
For  a  moment  hovers  there. 
Then  upon  her  bosom  fair 

Flaps  its  beauteous  wings. 

Silence  reigned  again. — Can  all, 

AlllUusionbe? 
Lot  the  corpse  beneath  the  pall 

Shudders  fearfully: 
Burst  the  mantling  bier  of  death, 

Throm  his  shiuudiugs  by: 
On  his  brow  he  woce  a  wiuatb, 

Froien  was  his  tyt: 


Vasili  Andrtevich  Zhuk6vski 

From  bis  lips  a  murmur  breaks, 
With  his  hand  a  sign  he  makes, 

Pointitig  to  the  maid : 
Trembling  she, — she  dared  not  move^-* 
But  the  bright  and  stiver  dove 

On  her  bosom  played; 

Panned  her  with  its  gentle  wing 

To  the  dead  man's  breast 
Then  she  saw  her  sweet  dove  spring,— 

There  it  secmeil  to  zest. 
Heaved  the  icy  oorpee  a  sigh, 

As  in  dark  despair. 
Gnashed  his  teeth  in  agony, 

Turned  his  eyes  on  her. 
Paler  waxed  those  lips  so  pale; 
And  the  fixed  eye  told  the  tale 

That  life's  film  was  broke. 
Cath'rine!    Lift  thy  drooping  headi 
All  is  o'er, — thy  lover 's  deadl— 

God! — and  she  awoke. 

Where  ?-^^wifhin  the  adfinme  room 
Where  the  minor  stood: — 

Mom  was  chasing  twilight's  gloom 
With  its  golden  flood; 

C!iflfitfr1*fr  }^iv^  fflftpped  his  wing. 

Sung  his  early  song: 
All  is  bright, — the  matin  rings,— 

Oh,  thy  dream  was  long ! 
Irong  indeed,  and  dreadful  too; 
And  my  spirit  long  shall  rue 

The  dread  prophecy ! 
Tell  me,  Future's  misty  night, 
Shall  my  fate  be  dark  or  bright, 

Blias  or  misery  ? 

Cath'rine  in  the  window  sat. 
Sorrowful  and  still: 


The  Nineteenth  Centuiy 


Tell  me,  tell  me  what  Is  that?— 

Mist-doadonthehUl? 
In  the  sunbeams  shines  the  mum; 

Leaps  the  frozen  dew: 
List!  I  hear  the  bells  below, 

And  the  horses  too. 
Lo !  they  come,  the  sledge  is  near,— 
Now  the  driver's  voice  I  hear,— 

They  have  passed  the  grove: — 
Fling  the  gates  wide  open,  fling — 
Who  's  the  guest  the  coursers  bring? 

Who  ?— 'T  is  thon,  my  love  I 

Catherine,  tdl  me  nowl  The  dxtam^ 

Is  the  dxeam  forgot  ? 
Yonths  may  fidtfaftil  be  who  seem 

Faithless, — may  they  not  ? 
When  the  light  of  love  hath  k&t 

Brightness  to  his  eye; 
When  his  lips  are  eloquent;— 

Timid  maid !    Reply ! 
Open  now  the  temple-gate, 
Spring  on  wings  of  joy  elate. 

Truth,  we  honour  thee ! 
Pour  the  glass,  and  join  the  hymn, 
Ne'er  may  days  of  darkness  dim 

^Youth's  fidelity. 

Thon  dost  amUe^  sweet  maidl  Bat  deem, 

Deem  it  worth  a  thought. 
For  that  memorable  dream 

Stores  of  wisdom  brought. 
Thou  dost  smile  again, — ^bnt  know. 

It  had  lessons  holy: 
Fame,  it  told  thee,  was  but — show; 

Worldly  wisdom — folly. 
This  my  song  was  meant  to  say, 


Vasili  Andr^evich  Zhuk6vski  63 


Hope  and  trust  should  guide  our  way. 

Maid!  there *8 no mfataMng; 
This  the  genuine  moral  seemly 
Miseries  are  only  dreams. 

Joy— is  the  awaking. 

O  my  Cath'xinet  never  dwcU 

On  that  dream  of  gloom: 
Heaven!  build  up  her  dtadd, 

There  may  grief  ne'er  come, 
Not  a  dond  her  Joy  o'enriiade^ 

Not  a  jpy  decay; 
Holy  is  that  gende  maid 

As  the  light  of  day. 
Ne'er  be  it  obscured  hy  woe, 
I^et  her  days  of  comfort  flow 

Like  a  forest  river! 
And  let  joy,  with  smiles  serene^ 
Be  as  it  hath  ever  been, 

Her  bright  guide  for  ever! 

—Prom  Sir  John  Bowring's  SpecimeHS  cf  ike 
Russian  FHfeis,  Part  II. 

THB  MINSTRKI«  IN  THE  RUSSIAN  CAMP 

Now  silenoe  wraps  the  hattlefiddl 

The  tents  with  lights  are  i^eamhig; 
And  lo!  the  bright  moon's  silver  flhidd 

In  the  calm  heaven  is  beaming. 
Pill,  fill  the  glass  of  rapture  yet 

In  unity  full-hearted; 
In  wine  Uie  bloody  strife  forget^ 

The  grief  for  the  departed! 
The  glasses'  ruby  stream  to  drain 

Is  glory's  pride  and  pleasure — 
Wine  I  conqueror  thou  of  care  and  pain. 

Thou  art  the  hero's  treasure. 


Digitized  by  Google 


64  The  Nineteenth  Century 


Now  to  the  warriors  of  old  time, 

The  strong  in  fight  and  glory! 
'  These  warriors  and  their  deeds  sublime 

Are  lost  in  distant  story ! 
The  grave  hath  gathered  up  their  dust, 

Their  homes, — the  storm  hath  razed  them; 
Their  helmets  are  devoured  by  rust. 

And  silent  tlioae  who  praised  them: 
But  in  thdr  diildim  live  thdr  fireSi 

We  tread  the  land  that  bore  them. 
And  see  the  shadows  d  our  aires 

With  all  their  triumphs  o'er  them. 

• 

Oil,  oomel  in  all  yonr  hiightnesi^  come^ 

And  amile  oomplaoent,  near  us; 
I/xdc  finm  your  high  and  misty  home^ 

Encourage  us  and  hear  us. 
O  Svyatosldvl  time's  injured  son. 
Thy  path  an  ei^le'a  flying: 

"  There  is  no  shame  in  dying — On! 

There  is  no  shame  in  dying! 
And  Donsk6y,  thou!  courageous  man. 

Midst  heathen  foes  we  find  thee; 
Destruction  leading  in  thy  van, 

And  naught  but  death  behind  thee. 

Thou,  Peter!  thou,  the  hero's  crown, 

**  Poltdva!  "  is  repeated: 
Thy  foes  have  thrown  their  sabres  down, 

Thee,  all  the  world  has  greeted. 
What?  Robbers,  would  3rou  build  your  throne 

Upon  our  dtiea^  ruin  ? 
Thy  hocae  and  rider  fidl — ^begonel 

For  vengeance  is  pumting. 
Go  hide  thee  in  thy  native  woods» 

There  by  ambition  smother; 
Pale  drives  thee  to  their  solitudei^ 

Yes!  thou,  the  rebel's  brother. 


Digitized  by  GooqIc 


Vasili  Andrievkh  Zhuk6vski 


Wlio  is  tluit  wUte-halred  hao,  who 

That  nofthem  mote  than  Roman  ? 
His  penetrating  glance  looks  tluoiii^ 

The  phalamr  of  the  foeman ; 
Ftom  yonder  clouds  what  shadowy  rows 

Are  tow'rds  his  footsteps  turning  ?  * 
The  spirits  of  the  Alpine  snows 

Are  wailing  loud  and  mourning. 
Franks  and  Sarmatians,  at  his  view, 

Death's  icy  paleness  borrow  ; 
Well  they  may  fear  him,  well  may  nii^— 

It  is  the  great  Snvdrovl 

Hail,  sons  of  ages  long  gone  by! 

Your  glories  are  recorded ; 
We  follow  you  to  victory, 

Like  you  to  be  rewarded. 
We  see  your  ranks, — they  lead  us  on,— 

The  loe  retreats  before  us; 
We  scatter  death,  as  ye  have  done, 

While  ye  sie  smiling  o'er  as. 
Drawn  swovd,  and  flowing  glass,  elate 

We  look  to  onr  Creator! 
"  And  death  for  death,  and  hate  for  hate,  . 

And  coxaes  on  the  traitor." 

This  glass  then  to  oar  coontiy's  jcqrs, 

Ne^er  may  our  hearts  feel  colder; 
The  scenes  of  mirth  while  we  were  hoys. 

Of  love,  when  we  grew  dder! 
Our  countiy's  plains,  our  country's  sky, 

The  streams  that  flow  beneath  it; 
The  memories  of  infancy, 

And  all  the  thoughts  that  wreathe  it 
With  joyous  hopes  and  visions  blest, — 

Dear  shrine  of  our  affection, 
How  glows  our  heart,  how  beats  our  breast, 

When  beams  the  recollection  1 


66 


The  Nineteenth  Centuiy 


That  is  onr  country,  there  our  home^ 

There  wife  and  babes  attend  us; 
And  oft  their  prayers  towards  us  roam, 

And  oft  to  Heaven  commend  us! 
There  dwell  our  plighted,  chosen  ones; 

How  bright  their  memory  flashes! 
Otur  monarchs'  dust,  our  monarchs'  thrones, 

And  there  our  fathers'  ashes. 
For  them  we  fight,  for  them  we  rove, 

For  them  have  all  forsaken; 
And  may  our  land's  undying  love 

In  oar  aons*  bnaats  awakeni 

Now  to  tlie  T»t  that  rules  the  Russ, 

And  be  his  soeptre  glorious; 
His  throne  an  altar  is  to  na^ — 

We  swear  to  be  victorious. 
The  oath  is  heard,— 't  is  stamped  in  bloodt— 

'T  is  sworn, — there 's  no  returning; 
Our  swords  shall  make  our  promise  good, 

Our  hearts  with  love  aie  burning. 
Each  Russ  a  son  of  victory, 

To  duty's  ranks  we  throng  us; 
Let  eveiy  craven  coward  fly. 

For  fear  was  ne'er  among  us. 


One  glass  to  vengeance !   In  the  fray 

"  Heaven  for  the  right!  "  our  voices, 
And  "death  or  victory  I "  proudly  say; 

And  victory's  self  rejoices. 
Oh,  count  not  on  your  numbera,  foe! 

In  vain  ye  boast  your  numbers; 
Our  march  is  like  the  torrent's  flow, 

Whidi  never,  never  dumbers. 
We  have  no  treasures,  but  we  bring 

Our  srrows  and  our  lances. 


Digitized  by  Google 


Ivin  Iv^ovich  Kozl6v 


67 


And  round  us  deaolation  fling, 
And  deatli  is  in  onr  glances. 

The  Robberl  he  had  spread  his  power 

Around  our  Moskvd's  bofdofs; 
And  from  our  Kremlin's  sacred  tower 

He  issued  forth  bis  orders. 
"  I  trample  on  the  base-bom  clay, 

Which  folly's  pride  assembles, 
And  prince  and  subject  both  obey." 

Insulting  one ! — he  trembles. 
For  Vengeance  wakes  her  from  her  res^ 

And  arms  her  with  her  torches, 
Heaves  ruin  on  the  tyrant's  breast, 

And  drives  him  from  our  porches. 

Now  bring  thy  slavish  princes,  now, 

To  oor  ice-gilded  nation; 
And  lead  them  o'er  our  paths  of  snow 

To  horror  and  starvation. 
Corner  Winter!  rouse  tbee  from  thy  bed. 

And  dose  our  country's  portals. 
Oh,  seel  he  strews  the  land  with  deed. 

With  piles  of  freeen  mortsls. 
Now,  Robber!  look  what  thou  hast  done; 

Come,  for  the  strife  prepare  theel 
The  land  we  fight  on  is  our  own, — 

God's  vengeance,  wretch,  is  near  theel 

— From  Sir  John  Bowring's  Spfcimems  ^  the 
Russian  Poets^  Part  II. 

iT&n  Ivdnovich  Kozl6v.  (1779-1840.) 

After  having  served  for  some  time  in  the  army,  Koz]6v  in  1798 
entexed  Hie  Civil  Service,  living  m  Moacow  and  later  in  St.  Feter»- 
tnng.  In  1818  lie  was  struck  by  paxalytis,  wliicli  deprived  Uoi  of 

tbe  use  of  his  legs,  and  three  years  later  he  became  totally  blind. 
Though  he  had  long  been  on  friendly  terms  with  Zhuk6vski,  he 
never  thought  of  devoting  himself  to  literature.  But  the  calamity 
ihaX  had  overtaken  him  compelled  him  to  concentrate  himself  and 


Digitized  by  Google 


68  The  Nineteenth  Century 


the  result  was  the  evolntion  of  his  poetical  genius.  He  had  learned 
Awadi  Mtd  IWUmi  fMim,  aad,  though  blind,  acqnifed  tiie  Gemuw 
■ad  Wngilith  laagnagea  so  perfectly  that  he  coold  recite  by  hwt  whole 
pi^gw  from  the  great  writers,  wiioiil  be  also  translated  into  Russian. 
His  first  poetical  efibrta  were  some  verses  in  praise  of  Zbuk6vski  and 
Byron,  but  he  gained  his  great  reputation  by  his  The  Black  Monk, 
written  in  1824,  which  enjoyed  the  same  popularity  among  the  senti* 
inentd  Midsofthe  twenties  that  iter  AIm  (see  p.  27)  had  had  In  the 
beginning  of  the  century.  This  was  eoon  followed  by  JVimcess  Nat&lya 
Borisovna  DolgoHiki  (see  vol.  i.,  p.  233)  and  a  large  number  of  minor 
poems  that  are  distinguished  for  their  ei^;iac  and  deep  xeligioos 
tone. 

In  W.  IX  Lewitf't  Tlu  BMmawUm  RmMi^  Philadelphia,  1841, 
ia  given  his  Atfted^;  T.  B.  Shmr  tmnslated  hia       in  mackwood'a 

Bdinburgh  Magazine,  1844 ;  in  C.  T.  Wilson's  Russian  Lyrics  are 
given  The  Village  Orphan,  The  Wreck,  The  Dream  of  the  Betrothed^ 
and  Chemetz  ( The  Black  Monk) ;  in  the  Library  of  the  World's  Best 
literature  is  N.  H.  Dole's  translation  of  The  Vesper  Bells. 

SOI/ITUDB 

Upon  a  hill,  which  rears  itself  midst  plains  extending  wide, 
Fair  flourishes  a  lofty  oak  in  beauty's  blooming  pride; 
This  lofty  oak  in  solitude  its  branches  wide  expands, 
All  lonesome  on  the  cheerless  height  like  sentinel  it  stands. 
Whom  can  it  lend  its  friendly  shade,  should  Sol  with  fervoor 
glow? 

And  who  can  shelter  it  from  harm,  should  tempests  rudely 
blow  ? 

No  btishes  green,  entwining  close,  here  deck  the  neighbour- 
ing ground, 

No  titfted  pines  beside  it  sn^*  no  osfen  thrive  ammd. 
Sad  e^en  to  tiees  their  dieeilefls  fate  in  aoUtnde  if  grows. 
And  bitter,  bitter  is  the  lot  for  7011th  to  live  alonel 
Though  gdd  and  silver  rnudi  is  his,  how  vain  the  sdftdi 
pridel 

Though  crowned  with  gloty's  hmidled  wreath,  with  vrfMai 

that  crown  divide? 
When  I  with  an  acquaintance  meet  he  scarce  a  bow  affords, 
And  beauties,  half  saluting  me,  but  giant  some  transient 

words* 


Digitized  by  Google 


Iv&n  Iv&novich  Kozl6v 


69 


On  aome  I  look  myself  ^vith  dread,  whilst  othenfitMn  me  fly, 
But  sadder  still  the  imcheridied  soul  when  Plate's  dark  hour 
draws  nigh; 

Oh!  where  my  aching  heart  relieve  when  griefii  assail  me 

sore? 

My  friend,  who  sleeps  in  the  cold  earth,  comes  to  my  aid  no 

more! 

No  relatives,  alas!  of  mine  in  this  strange  clime  appear, 
No  wife  impart's  love's  fond  caress»  sweet  smile,  or  pttying 

tear; 

No  father  feels  joy's  thrilling  throb,  as  he  our  transport  sees; 
No  gay  and  sportive  little  ones  come  clambering  on  my 

knees; — 

Take  back  all  honours,  wealth  and  fame,  the  heart  they  can- 
not move, 

And  give  instead  the  smiles  of  Mends,  the  tender  look  of 
love! 

— From  W.  D.  lewis's  Tke  Bdtektumn  FdmnUdn, 

KIEV 

O  Kiev !  where  religion  ever  seemeth 

To  light  existence  in  our  native  land ; 
Where  o'er  Pech6rski's  dome  the  bright  cross  gleameth. 

Like  some  fair  star,  that  still  in  heaven  doth  stand; 
Where,  like  a  golden  sheet,  around  thee  streameth 

Thy  plain,  and  meads  that  far  away  expand; 
And  by  thy  hoary  well,  with  ceaseless  motion, 
CMd  Dnfepef's  loming  swdl  twtcpt  on  to  ooaati* 

How  oft  to  thee  in  spirit  have  I  panted, 

O  holy  dty,  country  of  my  hearti 
How  oft,  in  Tiaion,  httve  I  gazed  endumtod 

On  thy  fidr  towers,— o  sainted  thing  thon  art! — 
By  I4vim'«'  walls  or  Dniqier's  wave,  nor  wanted 

Aapcn  to  draw  me  from  this  life  apart; 

>  Name  of  cerUin  monasteries. 


70  The  Nineteenth  Century 


In  thee  my  country  I  behold,  victorious, 
Holy  and  beantif  nl,  and  gxeat  and  gloriooa. 

The  moon  her  soft  ray  on  Pecherski  poureth, 
Its  domes  are  shining  in  the  river's  wave; 

The  soul  the  spirit  of  the  past  adoreth, 
Where  sleeps  beneath  thee  many  a  holy  grave: 

Vladimir's  shade  above  thee  calmly  soareth, 
Thy  towers  speak  of  the  sainted  and  the  brave; 

Afar  I  gaze,  and  all  in  dreamy  splendour 

Breathes  of  the  past, — a  spell  sublime  and  tender. 

Thcfe  fonght  tlie  wairrlofs  in  Ihe  field  of  glory, 
Stiong  in  fhe  fidtb,  against  thdr  oomitry's  foe; 

And  many  a  xcqral  flower  yon  palace  hoaiy, 
In  viigin  loveliness,  hath  seen  to  blow. 

And  Boydn  sang  to  tbemthe  mkHit  stoiy, 
And  secret  faptore  in  their  breast  did  glow; 

Haikl  midnight  sonnds,<— that  hnoen  voice  is  dying,"-> 

A  day  to  meet  the  vanidied  day  is  flying. 

Where  are  the  valiant  ? — the  resistless  lances, — 
The  brands  that  were  as  lightning  when  they  waved? 

Where  are  the  beautiful,  whose  sunny  glances 
Our  fathers,  with  such  potency,  enslaved  ? 

Where  is  the  bard,  whose  song  no  more  entrances  ? 
Ah!  that  deep  bell  hath  answered  what  I  craved: 

And  thou  alone,  by  these  grey  walls,  O  river! 

Mormurest,  Dnieper,  still,  and  flow'st  for  ever. 

— Transl.  by  T.  B.  Shaw,  in  Blackwood's  Edinburgh 
Magazine,  1844  (^o^*  ^^)' 

PROM  "THE  BLACK  MONK" 

I. — THB  MONASTB&Y 

Beyond  Kiev,  where  the  broad  Dnieper  boils  and  booms 
between  steep  banks^  near  a  grove,  upon  a  high  hill,  stands 
the  hermits'  abode.  Around  it  is  a  crenelated  wall,  with 


Digitized  by  Google 


Iv&n  Iv&novich  Kozldv  71 


four  towers  in  the  comers,  and  in  the  midst, — the  temple  of 
the  ItfOfd  with  gilded  cupolas.  A  row  of  cells,  a  dark  corri- 
dor, a  chapel  at  the  holy  gates,  with  a  mirade- working 
image,  and  nearby  a  spring  of  cool  water,  whose  medicinal 
stream  bubbles  under  the  shade  of  a  century  linden  tree. 

The  evening  darkness  is  in  the  misty  field;  the  twilight  is 
dimming  in  the  heavens:  the  song  is  not  heard  in  the 
meadows;  the  flocks  are  not  seen  in  the  vales.  The  horn 
will  not  be  blown  in  the  forest, — no  one  will  come;  only  at 
times  the  bell  tinkles  in  the  distance  upon  the  highway;  no 
fires  are  to  be  seen  upon  the  fishermen's  boats  on  the  Dnieper. 
The  midnight  moon  has  risen,  and  the  bright  stars  are  shin- 
ing; the  clearings,  the  woods,  the  waters  are  asleep.  The 
fiEitefal  hoar  has  struck  upon  the  tower, — ^the  hermitage  is 
iiiei:ged  in  sileep,~-«iid  all  anmnd  is  peace  and  quiet 

II. — THE  CONFESSION  OP  THE  BLACK  MONK 

**  I  teft  my  deserted  ooontsy.  Alooe»  in  deqiair,  in  teax% 
I  wandered  aronnd  witli  my  ofphaned  sonl  in  distant  defiles 
and  woods.  Gloomy  clefts  and  mountains  heaid  my  gnan, 
my  wall,  my  plaints  with  tercor,  for  seven  years.  Sullen,  mel- 
ancholy, ^d,  I  pined  away,  dreaming  an  old  dream,  and 
sobbed  for  what  is  not.  The  shades  of  night,  the  mountain 
tonent,  the  whistling  of  the  storm  and  the  howl  of  the  wind 
secretly  united  with  my  murky  thought,  with  my  unquench- 
able yearning.  And  sorrow  was  a  delight,  a  sacred  relic  of 
former  days;  it  seemed  to  me  that  through  my  SoSeiing  I 
did  not  altogether  part  from  it. 

**  Where  the  heart  loves,  where  it  suffers, — there  is  also 
our  merciful  God ;  He  gives  the  cross,  and  He  also  sends  us 
hope  with  the  cross.  In  these  seven  hard,  stormy  years 
there  has  flashed  for  me  a  consoling  light.  Once,  at  even- 
ing tide,  I  sat  gloomy  near  the  river;  the  star-flaming  vault 
of  heaven,  the  quiet  glimmer  of  the  moon,  the  rustling  of 
the  leaves,  the  plashing  of  the  waves  silvered  by  the  moon, 
Involnntarily  hdd  my  soul  eafitive.  Bversrthing  attnetod 
me  by  its  myaterioaa  beauty  to  a  world  of  bliaB. 


72  The  Nineteenth  Century 


"My  crushed  spirit  awoke:  *  Creator  of  all!  My  babe 
with  my  unforgettable  mate  dwell  in  Thy  holy  abode,  and, 
perchance,  I  shall  be  with  them,  and  they  there  for  ever 
mine!'  Love  understands  miracles:  my  heart  trembled 
hopefully  in  some  mysterious  expectation.  I  lifted  my  eyes 
to  the  skies,  dared  to  implore  them  with  tears, — and  it 
seemed  to  me  that  for  an  answer  was  given  me  that  calm 
ocean  with  its  imperishable  stars.  Since  then,  my  father, 
have  I  found  consolation  in  my  misery  itself,  and  I  have 
boped  by  my  heavy  croas  to  earn  my  union  with  her. 
Though  still,  at  timeSi  I  shed  teaxs,  yet  hope  assuages  them, 
and  quiet  grief  has  taken  place  of  hitter  aonotr.  Flaming 
with  fidth,  I  have  ftcgotten  my  misfortune  and  the  viUam: 
she  with  her  bahe  in  heaven  ^ipeaitd  to  myheazt  i&dieanie 
of  paiadise.  My  soul  rose  to  her,  and  my  mind  was  foil  of 
this:  I  wished  to  he  as  pure  ss  she*  and  I  gladly  bid  life 
faiewelL  But  I  wanted  to  die  in  my  native  hoae.  I  began 
to  pine  away  in  mountains  of  othe;r  lands.  I  wanted  to  csat 
my  last  glance  upon  our  woods  and  our  dales,  to  see  the 
country  which  waa  full  of  her,  and  our  village  hooie,  and 
the  garden,  and  the  blue  waves  of  the  Dnieper,  and  the 
church  upon  the  mound  where  in  the  shade  of  the  birches 
sleeps  their  dust,  and  the  glowing  evening  sky  over  their 
quiet  grave. 

"Ah,  what  happened  to  my  soul  when  suddenly,  in  all  its 
sacred  beauty,  before  me  lay  the  landscape  of  my  native  Kiev 
fields!  As  before  they  were  green,  the  waves  of  the  Dnieper 
boomed  as  formerly,  the  same  forest  lay  dim  in  the  distance, 
the  same  songs  were  sung  in  the  fields,  and  everything  was 
the  same  in  my  native  land,  but  she  alone  was  not  there. 
Bvery  where  fimdHar  valleys,  brooks,  mounds,  and  plains,  in 
an  endianting  quiet,  appeared  to  me  on  all  sides,  and  brought 
badL  my  brighter  yean;  hot  with  a  poisoned  soul,  a  stranger 
in  my  own  hud,  I  greeted  them  with  tears  and  disconaokte 
mdancholy. 

"  I  walked.  The  day  waa  hidhdng  to  the  evening,  and 
•nddenly  a  mitic  temple  of  the  Loid  stood  befi»e  my  fright* 
ened  eyes.  Beside  mysd^  I  appvooched  the  grave  where 


Digitized  by  Google 


Konstantin  Nikoli^evidi  B&tyushkov  73 


1117  flOB,  ^iife» — my  whole  life  lay  bnriedU  I  baidy 
toacfafid  the  ground  with  my  ieet,  as  if  fearing  to  disttnl) 
thdr  eternal  slumber.  I  lepresaed  a  deep  groan  within  my 
breast,  that  their  rest  be  not  broken.  My  saddened  spirit 
dared  not  give  vent  to  my  impassioiied  agitation.  It  seemed 
to  me  that  upon  their  grave  I  breathed  a  sacred  air.  A 
wondrous  feeling  came  over  me,  and  with  an  unearthly  hope 
I  softly  bent  my  knees*  and  prayed,  and  wept»  and  loved." 

Konstantin  NikolAe?idii  B4tyu8hkov.  (1787-1855  ) 

Btftynshkov  recdved  Ubi  cdttcaHon  htthe  hoarding-adiools  of  St. 
PeteiBburg,  from  whidi  he  took  away  a  good  knonledge  of  ftcnch, 

German,  and  Italian,  and  Utfle  die,  especially  since  all  his  schooling 
ended  with  his  sixteenth  year.  He  was  then  ushered  into  the  circle 
of  literary  men  by  a  relative  of  his,  M.  N.  Murav^v  (see  vol.  i.  p.  395), 
who  also  intererted  him  in  the  ancient  classics,  among  whom  fidt- 
yashkov  admiied  noit  and  inriffarl  Hofsoe  and  TIbvllM.  In  x8d6 
Jie  was  sdMd  by  flie  pfevailing  pstriotic  entimdasm,  after  the  dia- 
flfter  of  Ansterlitz,  and  Joined  the  army.  He  was  serionsly  wounded, 
but  in  1813  he  again  took  part  in  the  campaign  against  Napoleon. 
During  his  stay  in  Germany  he  became  intimately  acquainted  with 
the  German  litentnte,  whidi  he  began  to  prefer  to  the  Frendi  and 
LiIIb.  Be  fetnmcd  to  Knuda  ofor  Bngland  and  Sareden.  In.  xSiS 
lie  reodved  a  diplomatic  post  at  Naples,  whidi  gave  him  an  oppor- 
tunity of  making  himself  familiar  with  the  country  of  his  beloved 
author,  Tasso.  He  soon  returned  home,  where  he  was  up  to  his 
death,  for  a  period  of  thirty-three  years,  lost  to  Russian  letters,  hav- 
ing, like  hit  moyier  befeiehlni,  become  hopclewly  inianfc.  No  olher 
poet  had  gtweu  andi  pronite  as  BAtyaahkov,  and  even  Pfishkin  re- 
garded him  as  his  teacher.  His  fame  rests  mdnly  on  his  Dyinif 
Tasso  and  Th^  Friend's  Shadow^  the  Anacreontic  character  of  the 
other  poems  and  the  absence  of  a  Bnssian  motive  having  otherwise 
almost  obliterated  his  fame. 

In  Sir  John  Bowiing**  l^^edmems  of  ike  Jhusiam  IMs,  Fart  I., 
there  is  a  translation  of  his  To  My  Penates,  and  in  Part  H.,  To  F.  F. 
Kokoshkin^  77te  Farewell,  The  Friend's  Shadow,  Love  in  a  Boat, 
The  Prisoner,  To  the  Rhine.  What  purports  to  be  a  translation  of 
his  Dying  Tasso  is  given  in  The  Foreign  Quarterly  Review,  1832. 

THE  FRIBNiyS  SHADOW 

From  Albion's  misty  ide  across  the  waves  I  sped  me: 
It  kxiked  as  if  intened  beneath  a  leaden  sea, 


Digitized  by  Google 


74  The  Nineteenth  Century 


And  gathering  round  our  bark  the  halcyon's  music  led 
While  all  the  crew  rejoiced  in  their  sweet  melody. 
The  dancing  surge,  the  evening  breezes  falling, 
And  through  the  sails  and  shrouds  those  breezes  whistling 
thrill, 

And  to  the  watch  the  active  helmsman  calling, 

The  watch,  who,  midst  the  roar,  sleeps  tranquilly  and  still. 

All  seemed  to  rock  itself  to  gentle  thought; 

Like  an  enchanted  one,  I,  from  the  mast,  looked  forth, 

And  through  the  night  and  through  the  mist  I  sought, 

I  tottght  the  star  beloved  of  my  domestic  north. 

Then  hito  memory  melted  every  feeling, — 

My  aool  had  sanctified  my  home  of  j<qr  and  peace, 

And  the  sea  xaging,  and  the  zephyrs  gently  stealing, 

Covered  my  eydlds  o'er  with  selMbfgetfhlncss. 

Then  dreams  with  other  dreams  were  blended, 

And  lo !— there  stood,  was  it  a  dream  ?-^e  form 

Of  that  dear  friend  who  his  career  had  ended 

Nobly,  amidst  the  thundering  battle  storm. 

He  stood  upon  the  mist,  and  smiled, — ^his  £ue^ 

Fresh  as  the  mom  and  bloodless,  shining 

Like  the  young  spring  in  gaiety  and  grace. 

Even  as  an  angel  from  high  heaven  declining:— 

*'  Comrade  of  better  time!  and  is  it  thou  ? 

And  is  it  thou  ?  "  I  cried,  *'  thou  hero  bright! 

Did  I  not  in  the  fury  of  the  fight 

Attend  thee,  and  when  thou  hadst  fallen  below 

Make  thy  new  grave, — and  on  a  neighbouring  tree 

Write  with  my  sword  thy  feats  of  bravery, 

And  f(^lowed  thy  cold  ashes  to  their  bed. 

And  hsUowed  It  with  prayers,  and  with  tears  watetM? 

Speak,  nnfiwgotten  one,  speak!  Was  it  a  deceit  ? 

Is  all  that 's  past  a  dream,  a  cheating  dream  ? 

A  dream  that  corpse,  a  dieam  that  grave,  that  sheet 

Wrapt  toond  thee,— were  they  not  ?  did  they  hot  seem? 

Oh,  hot  one  woidl  Let  that  tongoe's  melody 

Yet  sweetly  fall  on  my  tranqxMted  ear: 

O  nnfiorgotten  one!  Stretch  ont  to  me 


Digitized  by  Google 


Konstantin  Nikol^vich  B&tyushkov  75 


Tby  old  right  hand  of  friendflhip^  atietch  it  here  t ' ' 
I  apning  towards  him,  — Oh !  the  mists  had  dimmed  my  tyt,^ 
He  vanished  like  a  shade,  a  lock  of  airy  amoke^ — 
Dispersed  in  the  wide  azuxe  of  the  aky, 

And  I,  aroosing  from  my  dream,  awoke. 
Beneath  the  wing  of  Stillness  all  was  sleeping; 

The  very  winds,  the  very  waves  at  rest; 

And  scarce  a  breath  upon  the  sea  was  creeping; 

The  pale  moon  swam  alonj^  upon  the  white  cloud's  breast. 

But  I  was  troubled,  peace  had  left  my  soul, — 

I  stretched  my  hands  tow'rds  him,  whom  I  no  more  could 

I  called  on  him,  whom  I  could  not  control, — 
On  thee,  beloved  one!  best  of  friends,  on  thee! 

— Prom  Sir  John  Bowring's  Spedmma  rfike 
Rmsian  BfOs^  Part  II. 

THB  DYING  TASSO 

What  solemnity  does  ancient  Rome  pf<q)are?  Wliither 
nub  the  nation's  noisy  waves?  For  whom  these  fragrant 

fumes  of  inoense  and  of  mjrrrh,  and  everj'where  the  vases 
full  of  odorous  herbs  ?  Wherefore  above  the  streets  of  the 
universal  dty,  from  the  Tiber's  banks  up  to  the  Capitol, 
midst  flowers  and  laurels,  are  fluttering  costly  carpets  and 

the  purple  ? 

Wherefore  this  noise  ?  Wherefore  the  timbrel' s  sound  and 
thunder  ?  Is  it  of  gladness  or  of  victory  the  herald  ?  Why 
with  the  standard  gains  the  house  of  prayer  the  mitred 
apostolic  vicar  ?  For  whom  this  glittering  crown  he  holds, — 
a  priceless  gift  of  grateful  Rome  ?  For  whom  this  triumph  ? 
For  thee,  immortal  singer,  for  thee  this  gift,  O  singer  of 
*'  Jerusalem.** 

The  din  of  joy  has  reached  the  cell  where  in  death  agony 
Torqnato  lies,  where  o'er  the  sufferer's  immortal  head  is 
home  the  spirit  of  wingM  death.  Neither  tears  of  friend* 
ship,  nor  the  prayers  of  the  monks,  nor  honoois'  tardy  due, — 
these  will  not  curb  indomitable  fiite  that  spares  not  even 


Digitized  by  Google 


7^  The  Nineteenth  Century 


the  great.  Half-ahattered,  he  mm  the  threatening  hour, 
hails  it  with  joy,  and,— alluring  swanl— bids  life  good>bye 

and  utters  these  last  words: 

"  My  friends,  let  me  behold  Rome  the  mag:nificent,  where 
an  untimely  grave  awaits  the  poet,  that  my  eyes  may  see 
your  hills  and  smoke,  O  ancient  hearths  of  the  Quirites!  O 
sacred  ground  of  miracles  and  heroes !  O  glorious  ruins  and 
O  glorious  dust !  Azure  and  purple  of  cloudless  skies,  you 
poplars,  ancient  olives,  and  thou,  eternal  Tiber,  wellspring 
of  all  the  nations,  grave  of  the  bones  of  the  world's  citizens, 
— you,  you  I  greet  within  these  sombre  walls,  where  I  lie 
doomed  to  an  untimely  end ! 

'T  is  donel  I  stand  o'er  the  abyss  of  destiny,  shall  not 
applanded  xwdi  tlie  Cftpitol,  sad  knicls  of  fiune  i^on  my 
ftebfe  head  will  not  aastiage  the  tin^B  bitter  &fte.  From 
earliest  youth  a  shnttleoodc  of  men,  I  was  an  ezOe  finm  my 
very  childhood;  a  poor  wanderer  under  the  voluptuous 
heaven  of  my  Itsly,  I  have  esperienoed  all  vidsBitndea  of 
ftte.  Where  was  my  bark  not  borne  by  the  waves?  Where 
found  it  rest  ?  Where  wet  I  not  my  daily  bread  with  tean 
of  grief?  Sorrento  !  cradle  of  my  luckless  days,  where  in 
the  night,  like  terrified  Ascaniaa»  I  was  bereft  by  destiny  of 
my  modierp  of  her  soft  embraces  and  caresses, — ^rememberest 
thou  how  many  tears  I  shed  while  still  a  child  ?  Alas!  since 
then,  a  prey  of  evil  fate,  all  sorrows  I  have  learned,  all 
misery  of  existence.  The  depths  by  Fortune  furrowed 
were  cleft  below  me,  and  the  thunder  never  silenced.  Driven 
from  vill  to  vill,  j5x)m  land  to  land,  I  sought  in  vain  a  refuge 
upon  earth:  its  unrelenting  finger  saw  I  everywhere,  and 
everywhere  its  lightnings  struck  the  bard!  Neither  in  the 
humble  ploughman' shut,  nor  under  cover  of  Alfonso's  palace, 
nor  in  the  quiet  of  the  lowliest  shelter,  nor  forest  tangle,  nor 
XDOUntains,  was  my  head  secure,  the  exile's  head,  by  shame 
and  fame  oppressed,  and  firom  the  cradle  a  victim  of  the  god- 

"Friends,  what  wrings  so  terribly  my  breast?  What 
gnawsmy  heart,  andke^ltinaflntter?  Whence  have  I 
oome?  What  awful  jonmor  have  I  made?  What  glimmers 


Digitized  by  Google  j 


Konstantin  NikoUievich  B&tyushkov  77 

there  behind  me  in  the  dark?    Ferrara  — ^ fnikt*^- 
and  the  snake  of  envy!   Whither,  whither,  mnrderera  of 
genius  ?    I  'm  in  the  haven;  't  is  Rome.    Here  are  my  fsLtn- 
ily,  my  brothers !    Here  are  their  tears  and  sweet  mrrnnni, 
and  Vergil's  crown  here  in  the  Capitol ! 

"Yes,  I  have  done  Apollo's  bidding:  his  zealous  priest 
from  earliest  youth,  I  sang,  midst  lightnings,  under  raging 
skies,  the  fame  and  majesty  of  bygone  days.  My  sotd, 
though  fettered,  never  changed;  the  rapture  of  the  sweet- 
voiced  Muses  never  died  in  me,  and  through  my  sufferings 
my  genius  grew  strong.  It  dwelt  in  the  land  of  miracles,  O 
SScm,  by  thy  walls,  on  Jocdan'a  flowery  banks;  and  it  cum- 
mimed  with  thee,  xdMUioaa  Cedron,  and  thee,  peaoefnl  re- 
treats of  MmhohI  'T  la  there  the  heroes  of  the  andent 
days  rose  from  the  dead,  in  the  majesty  and  gkn?  of  their 
grim  fl^ofy.  It  hefaeld  thee,  Gkidficy,  mlcr,  hud  of  kingv, 
mi^iefltic^  cahn,  while  aiiows  whissed;  and  thee,  yoothfol 
Ri'tiaMo^  lenrjd  like  Achillea  and  a  happy  vldor  in  love  and 
war.  It  saw  thee  flying  o'er  the  corpses  of  the  ibeman's 
host.  Eke  fire,  like  death,  like  the  deskroyiog  angd, — and 
Tartarus  vanquished  by  the  gleaming  cross! 

**  O  models  of  unheard-of  valour!  O  holy  trituaph  and 
victory  of  the  pure  faith  of  otu:  ancestors  now  long  asle^l 
Torquato  extricated  you  from  the  abyss  of  time:  he  sang, — 
and  you  will  never  be  forgotten;  he  sang:  to  him  a  wreath 
of  immortality  has  been  decreed,  wound  by  the  hands  of 
Muses  and  of  Glory.  Too  late:  I  stand  o'er  the  abyss  of 
destiny,  shall  not  applauded  reach  the  Capitol,  and  laurels 
of  fame  upon  my  feeble  head  will  not  assuage  the  singer's 
bitter  fate!" 

He  stopped.  A  sombre  light  glowed  in  his  eyes,  tiie  final 
ray  of  genius  before  its  death;  it  seemed,  the  dying  wished 
to  snatdi  one  day  of  triumph  from  the  Faxcse;  his  eyes 
sought  eagerly  the  CapitoUan  walls;  he  tried  his  best  to 
raise  himsdf  but  lay,  cfyhansTgd  finm  the  dreadful  torment 
of  his  agony,  Immovable  upon  his  bed.  Da^a  luminaiy 
was  gliding  to  the  west,  and  mefged  in  blood-ied  glow;  the 
hoar  of  death  was  near  the  sufferer's  s^oomy  brow 


* 


Digitized  by  Google 


73  The  Nineteenth  Century 


was  now  agleam  with  its  last  light.  Refreshed  by  the  even* 
lag  coolness,  he  raised  his  right  hand  to  the  hearkening 
heavens,  like  a  righteous  man,  with  hope  and  joy: 

**  See,"  he  addressed  his  sobbing  friends,  **  the  royal  lumi- 
nary flaming  in  the  west!    'T  is  he,  't  is  he  who  calls  me 

to  the  cloudless  lands  where  glows  the  eternal  light  . 

The  angel  stands  before  me  to  guide  me  on ;  he  shades  me 

with  his  azure  pinions  .    Give  me  Love's  token,  this 

mysterious  cross  .     Pray  in  hope  and  tears   all 

earthly  things  are  vanishing  —  and  glory  and  the  crown 

—  the  sublime  creations  of  the  Arts  and  Muses:  all 
is  there  eternal  as  the  I^ord,  the  Giver  of  the  crown  of 
imnuHTtal  glory  I  There  is  aU  the  great  my  spirit  fed  upon, 
and  I  did  from  my  cradle  breathe.  O  Inothen^  fiiendsl 
weepnoto*erme:  your  friend  has  readied  at  last  the  loogied- 
forgoal.  He 'H  pass  away  in  peace  and»atioqg  in  fidth,  win 

not  pefodve  his  cmd  end:  there,  there  ^.    O  blissl 

'midst  virtuous  women  and  'midst  angels  Eleanor  will  meet 
him!" 

And  with  the  name  of  love  the  godly  passed  away;  his 
friends  sobbed  speechless  o'er  him.   Daylight  softly  died 

away         the  bell's  voice  spread  the  melancholy  news 

down  to  the  streets:  "  Dead  is  our  Torqnato!  "  Rome  cried 
in  tears :  ' '  Dead  is  the  bard  who  has  deserved  a  better  fate ! '  * 

—  The  dawn  perceived  a  sombre  smoke  of  tofcbesi  and 
in  mourning  shrouded  was  the  CapitoL 

F^dor  NilcoUevich  GttnlM.  (x788>z88o.) 

Glinka  was  born  in  the  Government  of  Smolensk  and  was  educated 
in  the  First  Cadet  Corps,  which  he  left  in  1803  as  lieutenant.  He 
took  part  in  the  campaign  of  the  Russian  array  against  Napoleon  in 
the  Austrian  possessions,  serving  as  adjutant  under  Milorddovicb. 
He  described  Us  csperienee  in  his  LtUers  of  a  Rmsskm  Officer, 
wbidi  Is  a  renarkaUe  prodaetion  for  a  yooog  man  of  nineteen. 
After  his  return  he  devoted  himself  to  literature,  both  prose  and 
poetry.  Hia  poems  attracted  much  attention  on  account  of  their 
sincerity  aod  the  harmonioosness  of  their  verses.  In  1869  he  pub- 
lished a  ooUcction  of  SfirihuU  Songs. 

In  C.  T.  Wilson's  RussioM  Lytia  are  given  7X#  Apptmrmutofikt 


Digitized  bv  Goo^^le 


F6dor  NikoUievich  Glinka  79 

UnknoTvn,  The  Search  for  God,  and  Moscow.  N.  H.  D(te  hai  tnsi- 
lated  his  Mouow  (publication  tmascerUunable). 

MOSCOW 

Wondrous  dty,  ancient  dty. 

Thou  enfoldest  in  thy  walls 
Villages  and  smiling  mbiirbs, 

ChoxcheSi  palaces  and  halls. 

Thou  art  girt  by  grassy  meadows, 
Gay  with  gardens,  rich  in  flowers; 

Seven  the  hills  are  which  thou  crownest 
With  thy  temples^  with  thy  towers. 

Thou  unfoldest  like  a  parchment 

Written  by  a  giant  hand, 
And  beside  thy  little  river 

Thou  art  glorious  now  and  grand. 

Many  are  thine  andent  churches 
Towering  like  the  northern  pine; 

Where  can  eye  see  streets  so  noble, 
Mother  Moscow,  as  are  thine? 

Capture  Moscow's  mighty  Kreml? 

Who  on  earth  would  boast  the  power? 
Who  could  rob  the  golden  bonnet 

From  the  slender  Iv&n  tower  t 

Who  could  ever  swing  the  Tsar-bell, 

Or  the  Tsar-gun  overthrow  ? 
Reverence  at  the  sacred  gateway 

Who  could  ever  fail  to  show  ? 

In  thine  awfnl  hoar  of  peril. 
When  thy  haughty  neck  was  bent, 

All  thy  children,  men  of  Russia, 
Felt  with  thee  the  punishment 


Digitized  by  Google 


8o  The  Nineteenth  Centuiy 


White-walled  city,  thou  wast  chaitened 

Like  a  martyr  in  the  fire; 
And  thy  river,  boiling,  hastened 

Onward  to  escape  the  pyre. 

Once  a  captive  and  dishonoured. 

In  thine  embers  thou  didst  Uel 
Now  arisen  firom  thine  ashes 

Changftlefw,  lift  thy  head  on  high! 

Flourish  fhnmgh  the  oonntleas  ages, 

Moaoowl  many-tflivperad  town* 
Thou  art  central  heart  of  Russia, 

Ruflda's  glory,  Ruaaia's  crown  I 
— Tnmd.  by  N.  H.  Dole  (publication  not  aaoatainaUe). 

THE  SEARCH  FOR  GOD 

The  heavens  grow  dark  before  mine  eye% 
The  earth  gives  out  a  groaning  sound; 

The  stormy  blasts  in  fury  rise, 
And  all  obstructions  quick  confound; 
They  drive  apart  hills  with  their  foot. 
Huge  trees  they  pluck  up  by  the  root: 
I  call  on  God  with  loudest  tone, — 
God  is  not  in  the  tempest  known. 

As  I  behold,  the  meadows  fair 
Are  breaking  into  mound  and  vale; 
The  earth  ia'ahaking  everywhere, 
The  rocks  roll  down  the  hills  like  hail; 
Dense  ckmds  of  smoke  tiie  sight  appall. 
With  trembling  voice  on  God  I  call,— 
But  in  the  earthquake's  fearful  mnmd 
His  holy  footsteps  are  not  found. 

On  novel  wonders  StiU  I  gsze; 

The  vaults  of  heaven  with  lightning  blase^ 


Digitized  by  Google 


Prince  Petr  Andrtevich  Vy&zemski  8i 


The  flames  burst  forth  on  every  side. 
And  onwards  rush, — a  raging  tide,— 
Stirring  the  mind  with  direst  fear,— 
But  not  in  fite  does  God  appear. 

Fair  peace  succeeds:  the  perfect  calm 

My  prescient  spirit  fills  with  balm ; 

Lilce  the  young  mom  with  gUmmering  light. 

So  bums  with  haze  of  silver  bright 

The  presence  pure  of  God : 

The  soul,  responsive  to  the  strain, 

Breathes  with  unearthly  life  again ; 

Sweet  stillness  settles  on  the  scene, 

And,  thotigh  deep  distance  intervene, 

God's  voice  is  besid  abroad. 

—From  C  T.  Wilson's  Rutsitm  LyrUt, 

Prince  Petr  Anditefkii  VyizemtkL  (1790-1878.) 


PrinoeV^iMBiiklwM  oaeef  tfaevety  9sm  Utemy  bwb  in  RnMlA 
vboae  career  bagan  before  that  of  PiUbkia  and  who  were  ttill  active 

at  a  thne  when  ToUt^y  and  Dostoevski  had  established  their  reput- 
ations. His  father,  dying,  left  him  in  charge  of  Karamzfn,  to  whom 
he  was  related  by  marriage.  Through  him,  Prince  Vy&zemski  was 
early  brought  in  contact  with  the  literary  drcle,  meeting  there  on  a 
Mendl J  Ibotiog  fSsAM^  MUymlikoT,  aad  nUhUa.  Ha  took 
part  in  the  campaign  of  1812,  and  at  Boradiad  tuo  lioan  were  ahot 
under  him.  He  later  occupied  varioti'?  posts,  and  was  made  Asso- 
ciate Minister  of  Public  Instruction  and  a  Senator  in  1855.  His 
literary  works  have  lately  been  collected  in  twelve  large  volumes, 
and  yet,  inspiteof  his  great  talent  aa  a  MtlrUt,  crftic,  and  lyricist,  he 
kaaftneaiatooUivioa.  Tbectaoe  of  tbli  iafhat  he  pewevcreditt 
tte  peendo-dassic,  sentimental  attitude  of  the  school  of  Karamzfn, 
while  the  Romantic  spirit  of  Pushkin's  time  touched  him  but  lightly, 
and  the  realism  of  the  period  after  the  forties  entrenched  him  only 
more  in  his  old  habits  and  confirmed  him  in  his  hostility  to  every- 
tidng  that  dqiarted  from  the  code  of  Karanufa. 

Sir  John  Bowring  gives  in  Part  II.  of  the  Specimens  of  the  Russian 
Baets  translations  of  his  To  My  Three  Absent  Friends,  To  N.  N., 
and  Fragment ;  John  Pollen,  in  the  Rhymes  from  the  Russian,  has 
translated  his  Troika.  An  epigram  of  his  is  given  by  V.  £.  Marsden 
is  The  Am^b-SMriaa  Literary  Society,  No.  9. 


Digitized  by  Google 


82  The  Nineteenth  Centuiy 


TH£  samovAr 

'T  is  pleasant,  having  strayed  abroad,  to  find  a  familiar 
picture  of  native  customs,  homelike  bread-and-salt,  a  hos- 
pitable roof,  a  retreat,  a  sacred  retreat  of  your  country's 
Lares  for  the  soul  that  is  crusted  by  the  ice  in  the  chill  sea 
of  the  world,  where  to  a  native  question  there  is  no  native 
answer;  where  life  is  but  an  empty  exchange  of  ceremonial 
words;  where  you  are  only  a  stranger  and  only  Monsieur  N. 
*T  is  pleasant  to  warm  yourself  in  a  quiet  haven  and  with 
confidence  to  look  into  friends'  faces,  eagerly  to  listen  to  the 
discourse  in  which  there  is  something  familiar  to  the  soul 
and  a  message  fiom  bygone  days. 

A  wanderer's  days  are  like  tinto  displaced  pages:  a  teas- 
ing, malidoiis  spirit  disrupts  them,— 4here  is  no  connection: 
each  day  yon  Hve  anew,  yet  life  is  only  good  through  tradi- 
tions of  love,  oneness  of  bdiefs  and  feelings,  oooooid  of  im- 
pressions^ and  a  gontle  antiqneness  of  cnstomary  relations. 
Onr  mind  is  cosmopolitan,  but  our  heart  home-boond:  the 
mind  pleases  itadf  in  ever  treading  new  paths,  and  has  all 
its  joys  in  the  future;  but  the  heart  grows  young  with  old 
dreams,  the  heart  lives  on  old  habits  and  blooms  more  gladly 
in  the  shadow  of  the  past.  Oh,  be  blessed,  roof  of  light  and 
refuge,  where,  like  a  relative,  the  guest  of  the  moment  has 
been  received,  where  carelessly  he  could  unfold  his  heart, 
and  for  a  time  deceive  his  orphanhood!  Where  consciously 
and  sympathetically  he  partook  of  the  dear  family's  harmony 
and  happiness,  and  saw  the  young  joys  of  the  parents'  souls 
blooming  in  a  cloudless  calm  . 

But  we  are  drawn  even  by  another  mysterious  power  to 
that  familiar  retreat  where,  with  usual  kindness,  the  loving 
family  waits  for  us  at  the  table.  I  love  that  hour, — almost 
the  best  of  the  day,— a  poetic  hour  'midst  the  prose  of  rude 
days,  a  sincere  hour  of  life,  a  joyous  interval  *twixt  the  labour 
of  the  day  and  the  deep  sleep  of  the  night  All  aooounts  are 
cast,— in  the  balance  we  live:  there  are  no  cares  of  life,  nay, 
have  not  been;  has  vanished  from  your  shoulders,  lo* 
mamom  is  not  yet.  Hour  of  friendly  discourse  at  the  tea 


Digitized  by  Google 


Prince  Petr  Andrdevich  Vyazemski  83 


table  1  Hooonr  and  praise  to  the  young  hotteBsl  Right 
Orihodozly,  not  m  Gemum  £udiioii,  not  thin  like  water  or 
childish  dxhik,  but  redolent  with  Rtmia,  juicy  and  thick, 
the  fragrant  tea  flows  in  an  amber  atream. 

Veiy  well!  Bnt  I  find  one  thing  lacking:  no,  the  stamp 
of  Rossian  life  is  not  complete!  Where  is  the  native  samo- 
vie,  oat  fiunily's  hearth,  oar  family  altar,  ark  of  domestic 
joys  ?  In  it  boil,  from  it  flow,  the  traditions  of  all  our  days; 
in  it  live  the  recollections  of  Russian  antiquity ;  it  alone  has 
survived  from  the  torao  of  former  years, — the  inextinguish- 
able grandfather  has  passed  to  the  grandchildren.  It  is  the 
Russian  rococo,  formless,  awkward,  but  inwardly  good, 
though  unsightly  from  without;  it  preserves  better  the  heat, 
and  while  it  croons^  the  discourse  boils  like  its  steaming 
liquid. 

How  many  secret  chapters  of  daily  romances,  life-stirring, 
heartfelt  romances  that  are  not  in  books, — let  one  write  as 
sweetly  as  one  may, — how  many  pure  dreams  of  maidens' 
souls  and  gentle  quarrels  of  love,  and  gentle  peace  making, 
and  quiet  joys,  and  softly  riotous  joys  have  stealthily  taken 
fire  in  its  flame  and  have  invisibly  been  carried  in  its  doud 
of  steam  I  Wherever  there  are  domestic  Penates,  from  giMed 
palaces  to  hmnble  hnts,  wherever  there  is  the  brass  samoWLr, 
an  inheritanoe  of  the  orphan,  the  widow's  last  wealth,  and 
Inzmy  of  poverty,— everywhere  in  holy  and  Orthodox  Russia 
it  is  the  chief  participator  at  family  reunions.  One  cannot 
be  bom  into  the  world,  nor  enter  into  matrimony,  nor  will 
friends  say  "welcome"  or  **  good-bye,*'  but  thal^  the  end 
and  beginning  of  all  everyday  affairs,  the  boiling  samovdr, 
the  domestic  leader  of  the  choir,  raises  its  voice  and  calls 
the  family  together. 

The  poet  has  said,  and  his  verse  we  understand:  "  Our 
country's  smoke  is  sweet  and  pleasant  to  us! "  Was  not 
our  great  poet — there  can  be  no  doubt  about  it — then  in- 
spired by  the  samovdr?  Derzhavin's  shades,  following  me, 
turn  to  you  with  the  earnest  request,  to  his  honour  and  the 
honour  of  the  Orthodox  country,  to  throw  away  the  teapot 
and  introduce  the  samov4r. 


The  Nineteenth  Centuiy 


TO  MY  THRBB  ABSENT  F&IBND8 

My  brothers!  whither  scattered  now  ? 
What  fate,  what  cruel  fate  could  sever 
Hands,  souls,  fast-bound,  divided  aevo:  i 
But  ye  are  fled,  and  fled  for  ever. 

And  I  am  left  aloae  with  woel 

The  sigh  I  heave  in  silence  here, 
The  careless  zephyr  bears  away ; 
'T  is  lost  in  twilight's  darkening  ray, 
*T  is  veiled  in  night, — it  fades  in  day, — 

It  ne'er  will  reach  your  listening  ear. 

Perchance  e'en  now,  while  round  me  roll 
Dark  storms  and  misty  clouds,  e'en  now, 
Pain's  icy  sweat  upon  his  brow, 
One  calls  upon  his  friend,  and  oh ! 

Death's  wintry  curtain  wraps  his  aoul. 

Then  sleep  in  peace,  thou  spirit  blestl 

My  spirit  seems  to  cling  to  thee; 

From  sorrow  to  felicity 

Wafted,  thy  bark  has  passed  the  sea 
Of  storms,  in  joy's  calm  port  to  rest 

How  long  shall  absence'  misery  last  ? 
When,  when  shall  dawn  the  hour  of  meeting 
Shall  ne'er  again  the  blessed  greeting 
Of  social  bliss  return  ?— How  fleeting 

Its  laptnre,— 't  ia  for  ever  put! 

Cold,  cold;— I  fed  n^  hmst;  delight 

Ctm  kindle  ne'er  its  fire  again; 

My  tern  fUm  forth,  they  flow  is  vain; 

My  iniile%— no  ]l|^t  fhoee  amikB  retain; 
For  what  awaked  it  ainks  in  nig^t 


Prince  Petr  Andrtevich  Vy&zemsld  85 


Time  was,  how  bleasM  to  recall 
That  time,  when  ottr  hands  garlanded 
The  fidrest  wreaths  of  roses  red, 
And  in  youth's  spring  the  choms  led 

To  heaven,  the  source,  theendof  alL 

Time  was,  but  like  a  dream  it  fled ! 

The  hymn, — 't  is  now  a  funeral  dirge; 

The  garland, — 't  is  afiBiction's  scourge; 

The  dance, — its  memories  now  emerge 
I4ke  ghosts  that  wander  midst  the  dead. 

And  now  the  plaint  ssoends!  Appear, 
Appear,  delightful  hoars,  anewl 
Spirit  of  yonth,  so  fond,  so  tme. 
Awake!  Suns,  onoe  so  bright,  so  few, 

Shine,— let  Ulnskni's  mockery  cheer! 

But  see!  the  darkness  creeps  away, — 
The  clouds  disperse,  the  storm  is  gone,— 
Thy  smile  returns  not,  bless^  one! 
The  mountains  see  the  morning  dawn, 
To  me,  alasl  there  dawns  no  day. 

— Prom  Sir  John  Bowring's  Specimens  of  the 
Russian  Poets^  Part  II. 

DBATH  RBAPS  THB  HARVEST  OF  UPE 

Death  reaps  the  harvest  of  life,  and  every  day  and  every 
hour  asks  for  a  new  prey  of  life,  and  sternly  tears  us  asunder. 

How  many  fair  names  he  has  already  snatched  away  from 
the  living,  and  how  many  voiceless  lyres  hang  on  young 
cypresses! 

How  many  companions  are  no  more,  how  many  yotmger 
ones  have  passed,  whose  morning  dawned  when  the  sultry 
midday  burnt  us! 

But  we  have  remained,  have  survived  that  fateful  carnage; 
but  we  are  impoverished  after  the  death  of  our  near  ones, 
and  no  longer  strive  for  life  as  Ibr  a  conflict 


Digitized  by  Google 


S6  The  Nineteenth  Century 


Sadly  finishing  our  days,  we  are  waiting  for  the  belated 
relief, — slowly  dying  from  day  to  day,  until  we  shall  be  no 
more. 

Sons  of  another  generation,  we  are  a  last  year's  flower  in 
the  new:  the  impressions  of  the  living  are  foreign  to  us,  and 
they  have  no  sympathy  for  ours. 

They  care  not  for  that  which  we  love,  and  their  passions 
do  not  agitate  us!  They  were  not  there  where  we  have 
been,  and  not  for  us  is  where  they  shall  be! 

Otir  world  is  an  empty  fiuie  to  them,  <mr  past  Is  bnt  a 
myth,  and  that  which  for  ns  are  hallowed  adies»  to  them  Is 
but  mute  dost 

Yesi  We  are  like  ndnsi  and  we  stand  on  the  croasrosd 
of  the  living,  like  mortnaiy  monuments  amidst  the  hablta- 
tioosolmenl 

KondWLti  P6dorovich  Ryly6ev.  (1796-1836.) 

Ryly^ev  was  at  the  early  age  of  six  inscribed  by  his  mother  in  the 
Cadet  Corps,  in  order  to  remove  him  from  the  influence  of  his  brutal 
father.  In  1814  he  graduated  as  Ueatenaat,  and  took  part  in  the  ex- 
pedition that  entered  Farte.  Upon  hit  retnra,  he  wn  stationed  in  the 
Gorenuneots  of  Minsk  and  Vor6nezh ;  he  later  settled  in  St.  Peten- 
burp,  where  he  distiuguished  himself  for  his  official  integrity  as 
member  of  the  Criminal  Court  and  as  Manager  of  the  Russo-American 
Company.  He  began  to  write  verses  as  a  boy,  and  bis  ardent  repub- 
licanism, oonpled  with  a  not  leaa  fervent  patriotism,  led  him  to  an 
idealisation  of  ancient  Rnssian  heroea.  He  did  this  in  the  pvevailiag 
Romantic  spirit,  being  nrged  on  in  his  endeavours  by  his  mentor  and 
friend,  Pfishkin.  Of  his  historical  ballads  the  best  are  Ivdn  Susdntn 
and  Voynardi'ski  ;  they  all  created  au  outburst  of  patriotic  enthusiasm 
npon  theu:  appearance.  Of  his  other  poems  iSbit  most  perfect  afe  79M 
CUiMm  and  CMl  Valour.  Ryly^er  took  an  active  part  hi  the  plot 
of  the  Decembrists,  was  at  once  arrested,  and  later  publicly  ezecnted. 
Hi<?  poems  were  piohibited  in  Russia  until  a  comparativdy  leeent 

time. 

An  extract  from  Voynar6v5ki  was  translated  in  the  Foreiga 
Qnartcfly  Review,  vol.  ix.,  1833 ;  a  large  nnmber  of  his  poems,  con- 
taining the  whole  of  Voynardvski,  are  given  in  71u  fi>ems  of  AT. 
Helaieff,  translated,  from  the  Russian  by  T.  Hart-Davies,  London 
(new  and  enlat^ed  edition,  1887) ;  C.  T.  Wilson  has  translated  in 


I 


Digitized  by  Google 


Kondr&ti  F6dorovich  Ryly^ev  87 


Russian  Lyrics  his  Iv&n  Susdnin,  Svyatopdlk,  and  Prayer  Before 
Death.  In  Free  Russia,  vol.  xii,  No.  a,  The  Citizen  is  translated  by 
Elizabeth  Gibson. 

FROM  "VOYNAROVSKI" 

But  whose  that  wandering  form  that 's  seen 
Athwart  the  morning  fog  to  creep 
From  out  yon  hut,  and  on  the  steep 
Beneath  which  Lena's  wateis  sweep 
Fte  with  dow  fliiep  and 'wHdmd  mkn  ? 
His  axquebus  slitiig  at  his  back, 
His  short  caftan,  and  cap  of  Uaelc* 
Seem  to  denote  him  a  Cossack 
From  Dnieper's  diores.  Stem  is  his  laoe^ 
And  full  of  grief^  for  cankering  thon^t 
Ha^  f orrowed  deep  that  biowi  and  wranght 
The  stamp  of  age  on  manhood's  grace. 
See !  to  the  west  his  hands  extending, 
Wiid  lustre  breaking  from  his  eyes, 
Homeward  his  thoughts  and  wishes  sending, 
He  thus  ezdaims  with  tearless  sigh: 

"  Ye  distant  fields,  that  saw  my  birth. 

My  death  you  may  not  view ! 
Tombs  of  my  sires !   The  exile's  bones 

Will  never  rest  in  you! 
In  vain  the  flame'  of  life  yet  btims,— 

It  never  more  may  shine; 
In  vain  my  soul  the  dastard  spurns^— 

The  dastard's  lot  is  mine." 


Who  is  that  exile  ?  None  may  tell : 
Months,  years  have  passed  since  first  he  came 
To  tiiis  his  far  abode  of  shame, 
Here  shunned,  and  shunning  all,  to  dwell. 
Ne'er  hath  a  smile  been  seen  to  play 
Across  that  face  blanched  by  despair; 


Digitized  by  Google 


S8  The  Nineteenth  Centuiy 


And  tioe^  not  age,  hath  tinged  with  grey 
His  nnkonpt  beard  and  matted  hair. 
Yet,  not  a  felon  deed  hath  sent 
That  stranger  hither;  nor  hath  brant 

The  glowing  iron  his  scarred  face, 
And  charactered  a  slave's  disgrace; 
Though  ne'er  did  branded  felon  show 
Such  withered  look,  so  wild  a  brow. 
Calmness  is  there,  but 't  is  the  calm 
Of  Baykal,  ere  the  tempest  rise 
To  lash  its  waters  to  the  skies, 
Spreading  around  dismay,  alarm; 
And,  as  athwart  the  midnight  gloom 
Flickers  the  lamp  beside  the  tomb. 
So  gleam  with  ghastly  glara  Ua  cyea. 
Wandering  ^ioat  o'er  crag,  tfaxongh  ddl, 
He  mama  eadi  day,  and  none  may  dare 
To  aik  Ua  name,  hia  grief^  hia  care: 
Hia  Ikown  fotbida»  that  froim  'a  a  apeD. 

•  ••••••• 

"  lyist,  stranger,  and  with  wonder  learn 
How  Fate,  unpi tying,  wayward,  stem, 
Delights  us  mortals  to  oppress. 
Beneath  this  garb  uncouth,  this  dress 
So  coarse,  a  slave  it  scarce  befits, 
Thus  abject  here  beside  thee  sits 
Mazeppa's  kinsman,  friend,  and  heir." 

— From  Foreign  Quarterly  Review,  1832. 

ivXn  susAnin 

"  Where  lead'st  thou  our  footsteps  ?   Here  naught  can  be 
seen," 

Thus  shouted  the  loe  to  the  brave  Susanin, 

"  We  iitik  in  the  mow-heaps,  we  itlck  on  tJie  road. 

We  ne'er  ahall  arrive  at  thy  ahelteiing  abode; 

'Tia  on  purpoee  thou  atray'st  from  the  path,  bnt  in  vain. 

Prom  tiicka  like  this  Michael  no  safety  will  gain. 


Digitized  by  Google 


Kondr&ti  F^dorovich  Rylyiev  89 


"  Thongh  snow-fltoffin  may  rage,  lliodgh     wander  «fiur, 
Yet  deelk  at  the  Folce'  hands  diaU  come  00  thy  Taut 
80  lead  en,  er  tremble  I  and  ahcaten  our  pain,— 
AH  night  irfth  the  tempest  contending  amain, 
Through  anoW'Storms  and  cold  thott  hast  made  na  to  go^— 
But  what  dark  apol  ia  that  in  the  vaUey  betow  ? ' ' 

"  'T  is  the  hamlet,"  the  peasant  replied,  *'  aee,  there  stand 
The  corn-yards,  the  bridge,  and  the  pales  round  the  landl 
With  me,  on  to  the  door,  for  the  cottage  hath  been 
Long  time  ready  wanned  to  receive  guests  within, 
So  onward,  and  fear  not!  "    "  Well,  well  I  must  say 
Thou  hast  led  us,  my  Mend,  a  most  cursed  long  way. 

*'A  night  more  infernal  I  never  have  seen, 
With  snow  stuck  together  my  eyelids  have  been ; 
My  coat,  pah!  you  wring  it,  there  's  not  a  thread  dry.** 
Thus  grumbled  the  Pole,  and  went  in  with  the  cry 
Of,  "  Wine,  winel  we  are  cold,  we  are  wet  through  and 
through, 

Or  we  *U  take  what  our  broadaworda  can  wring  out  of  yon." 

And  now  on  the  board  the  rough  napkin  was  spread 
With  beer  and  with  wine-jugs,  and  each  had  his  bread 
BefiDie  him,  and  aoiq>  made  of  cabbage  waa  there 
And  Rnasian  ^eat-grad,  a  right  wdoome  fare, 
^thout  the  cold  wind  at  the  casemates  was  spuming* 
Wthin  the  dim  aplnttering  tonchea  were  burning. 

Now  midnight  had  passed,  in  tranquillity  deep 

On  the  benches  the  Poles  lay  unheeding  asleep, 

In  the  house  filled  with  smoke  no  one  stirring  waa  aeen, 

Save  as  sentinel  standing  the  grey  Susanin, 

In  the  comer  he  stood  near  the  ikon,  and  there 

For  the  young  Tsar's  protection  he  murmured  a  prayer. 

The  silence  the  tramp  of  a  horse's  hoofs  stirred. 
Then  stole  Susanin  to  the  doorway,  and  heard. 


90  The  Nineteenth  Century 


"Is  it  thou,  father  dear?  to  find  thee  I  am  here. 
Where  goest  thou  ?    Rough  is  the  journey  and  drear, 
*T  is  past  midnight,  no  lull  in  the  tempest  hath  come, 
Sure  thou  bringest  distress  to  the  hearts  of  thy  home." 

"It  was  God*8  will  thy  steps  to  this  village  to  guide, 
And  now  haike  to  the  young  Tsar,"  the  fttlier  teplted, 
'*And  tell  him,  tell  Michael,  to  flee  and  not  wait, 
For  the  mnidenms  Polea  in  then:  pride  and  their  hate 
In  secret  to  muder  young  Michael  intend. 
And  ao  doth  a  freah  woe  o*er  Moaoow  impend. 

"  Tdl  him  that  I,  loving  my  faith  and  my  land. 

Will  rescue  the  Tsar  from  the  enemy's  hand; 

Tell  him  that  hia  safety  lies  only  in  flight. 

That  e'en  now  the  assassins  are  with  me  this  night" 

"O  my  father,  what  say'st  thou  ? — a  moment  refrain,** 

Said  the  youth,  "  if  thou  die,  what  to  me  will  remain  ? 

**  Who  then  my  young  sister,  my  mother  will  guard  ?  ** 

**  The  holy  Creator  will  take  them  in  ward," 

Said  brave  Susanin,  "and  they  never  will  fall, 

For  assistance  and  shelter  He  giveth  to  all 

Who  are  orphans;  so  hasten,  't  is  time  now  to  go, 

*T  is  for  Russia,  remember,  I  lay  my  life  low." 

With  a  sob  the  youth  mounted,  and  swiftly  did  go^ 
Like  a  whistling  arrow  just  loosed  from  the  bow. 
Through  the  clouds  the  moon  ahone,  the  wild  snow-storm 
was  o'er. 

All  hushed  were  the  winds  and  tiie  tempest*a  loud  roar. 

In  the  east  the  dim  dawn  'gan  to  glimmer  afar, 

And  the  Poles  woke  fkom  slumber,  those  ibes  of  the  Tsar. 

"  Susanin,"  they  cried,  "  cease  thy  prayers  to  thy  God, 
It  is  time  for  the  start,  we  should  be  on  the  road  I  '* 
So  leaving  the  village  in  shouting  array, 
Through  the  forest  they  followed  a  winding  pathway. 


Digitized  by  Google 


Koadr«iti  F^dorovich  Ryly^ev  91 


Snsanin  led  them  on;  and  now  up  nose  the  light, 

Axid  the  fltm  through  the  btanchcs  began  to  gleam  bright. 

Soon  his  rays  were  obscured,  then  again  brightly  shone, 
Then  with  dim  light  he  glimmered,  and  vanished  anon. 
Scarce  a  rustle  was  heard  from  the  beech  or  the  oak, 
Scarce  a  sound  'neath  the  feet  from  the  firost-bound  snow 
broke, 

Scarce  a  crow  rose  in  flight  with  a  flutter  and  cry, 
And  the  woodpecker  pecked  at  the  willow-tree  dry. 

In  iflence  the  Poles  marched  on  singly  in  flle, 

StiU  hxOner  their  grey-haired  guide  led  them  the  ividle; 

Nov  high  in  the  hemm  the  mid-day  ami  atood, 

Bat  darker  and  drearer  grew  the  thick  wood. 

Tin  andden  before  them  the  pathway  was  lost, 

And  a  hedge  of  fir-branchea  thick  plaited  and  croaaed 

With  plne-botigha  right  down  to  the  ground  interUioed» 
On  the  road  like  acme  rough  wall  before  them  waa  placed; 

In  vain  did  the  scouts  bend  a  liatening  ear, 

All  was  deaert  and  dead,  not  a  sound  ooukl  they  hear. 

"  Whither  now  hast  thou  led  us  ? "  the  wearied  Poles  cried. 

*'  To  the  place  that  was  needed,"  the  peasant  replied; 

"  So  slay  me,  a  martyr,  for  here  is  my  tomb. 

But  know  that  I  save  the  young  Tsar  from  his  doom; 

Ye  thought  ye  had  found  a  base  traitor  in  me. 

But  no  Russ  is  a  traitor,  nor  ever  shall  be! 

Here  each  loves  his  country  from  youth's  early  day, 

And  his  fatherland  vilely  can  never  betray." 

"  Wretch!  *' yelled  the  fierce  Fdes  with  a  wild  foxy  torn, 
"  Thon  ahalt  die  'neath  our  aabfea."  "  Tour  anger  I  aoom, 
For  the  true  Russian  heart  with  content  and  with  tmat 
Bver  joyfully  dies  in  the  canae  which  is  just, 
Fear  of  death  or  of  doom  from  my  qiirit  is  far, 
All  untrembling  I  die  for  my  coontzy  and  Tsar." 


92  The  Nineteenth  Centuiy 


'*  Die  then!  *'  to  the  hero  the  angry  foe  screamed, 
O'er  his  grey  head  the  broadswords  keen- whistling  steamed, 
*'  Perish,  traitorous  villain,  thy  life's  end  is  near!  '* 
Snsanin  wounded  fell  without  shrinking  or  fear, 
By  his  purer  blood's  red  stream  the  pure  snow  was  laved — 
'T  was  that  life-blood  which  Michael  for  Russia  had  saved. 
— Fjrom  T.  Hart-Davies  s  The  Poems  of  K,  F.  Relauff, 

AlckifadrSmprtorkhGiib^yfedoT.  (zTQS-zSagt.) 

The  famous  author  of  the  drama  InUlligence  Comes  to  Grief  waa 
the  Mm  of  wealthy  and  cultivated  parents,  who  gave  him  a  brilliant 
cducalion.  Aft  the  ag«  of  AAaan  1m  ipoke  tevenl  languages  fluently, 
aadcntefed  fheoiiivenity,  fronwhicilL  he  gmdialed  two  yoan  later 
nith  the  degree  of  Bachelor  of  Lawa.  Bo  iaunediately  joined  the 
army,  but  did  not  take  part  in  the  foreign  campaigns  as  his  regiment 
was  kept  back  for  home  duty.  During  his  leisure  hours  he  translated 
and  remodelled  several  French  dramas,  without  displaying  any 
etpecial  takat  for  dramatic  work.  In  1818  he  was  appointed  secre- 
tary of  the  Rviiiaa  legation  in  Fenia,  and  hi  neognitioii  of  UaloiF 
portant  serrices  waa  highly  decorated  bjr  both  the  Rufrian  and  the 
Persian  governments.  During  his  wearisome  sojourn  in  Asia  he  laid 
the  fonndation  for  his  drama  InUUigence  Comes  to  Grief,  and  he 
finished  it  in  Moscow  in  1833.  He  went  with  it  to  St.  Petersburg  to 
atage  it,  but  the  censor  would  not  permit  even  ita  pnMication.  In  the 
meanwhile  the  drama  became  known  throB^ont  Rassiain  hundreds 
of  manuscript  copies,  and  it  created  a  sensation  unlike  ary  pr»» vious 
work  of  literature.  In  portraying  both  the  servility  and  corrvip;  1  n 
of  the  older  temporising  generation,  and  the  carping  criticism  aud 
wonUMie  libecaUem  of  the  younger  set,  who  ia  tiieir  cndeavonr  to 
imitate  the  West  sinned  against  the  national  character,  Griboyidov 
incurred  the  animosities  of  all  the  camps ;  but  by  unanimous  consent 
Intelligence  Comes  to  Grief  is  the  greatest  national  drama  of  Russia. 
Since  its  first  appearance  on  the  stage  in  1831,  and  its  firat  publication 
in  1833,  it  has  had  some  fifty  editions,  and  is  still  on  the  repertoire  of 
RnssiaB  theatna.  In  i8a8  Grlboy^doT  waa  aent  agahi  to  FenIa,  thJa 
time  in  the  capadty  of  minister,  but  he  was  kfflod  aoon  after  hit  ai^ 
rival  in  Teheran  by  an  infuriated  mob. 

Intelligence  Comes  to  Grief  was  translated  into  English  under  its 
Russian  title,  Gore  at  Ouma,  from  the  Russian  of  Griboiedo£f,  by  N. 
Benatdaky,  I/mdon,  Edinburgh,  1857.  In  The  Anglo-Rmriaa  UtCfw 
aty  Society,  No.  15,  is  translated  Ua  Jiavid,  hy  F.  P.  Uardianft. 


Digitized  by  Goo<?Ie 


Aleks&ndr  Sergytevicb  Griboyddov  93 


FROM    INTBUIGBNCB  CX)M£S  TO  G&ISP" 

ACT  II,  SCBNB  I.    pXmUSOV  AND  SERVANT 

Fitmumv.  Petriishka,  your  caftan  is  eteriMiSIy  pudied  up 
or  torn  at  the  elbowl  Fetch  down  the  alminac.  I/Mk 
there;  don't  read  like  a  sexton,  but  with  feeling,  with  under- 
standing, with  rests.  Hold  on !  Write  down  on  the  memo- 
randum, against  next  week:  "  I 'm  invited  to  Prask6vya 
F6dorovna  on  Tuesday  for  trout."  How  wonderful  this 
world  is  made!  Your  brain  is  in  a  whirl  when  you  philoso- 
phise about  it !  Now  you  take  care  of  yotu-self,  and  now  it 
is  a  dinner;  you  eat  three  hours,  and  it  wiU  not  be  digested 
in  three  days.  Oh,  make  a  note  for  the  same  day — no,  no! 
•*  For  Thursday  I  am  called  to  a  funeral."  O  human  race! 
It  has  slipped  my  mind  that  we  all  shall  have  to  get  into 
that  box  where  one  can  neither  stand  up  nor  sit  Here  is  an 
example  of  a  piaiaeworthy  life:  the  deftmct  was  an  honoiir- 
nhls  cdianilialain.  ha  ImM  a  kev.  andlMa  <wtioor<iH  im  <A»atw 
afc^foldsaon;  hawMzfcl^aiidniaiiiedtoaiidiwooian; 
he  married  off  his  diildien  and  gtandchilidren;  he  has  passed 
afnqr»aad^flMatioahimwillixagi«t:  "Maki^  PetiMch, 
paace  to  lits  adies! "  Write  down,  on  Tharaday,  ndiile 
jon  ase  about  it,  or  may  be,  on  Fkiday,  or  Satnzday:  "  I  am 
tobagodfiteat  thedoolor'avidow."  Tbo  diild  is  not 
yet  bom,  but,  if  my  cakolatioo  is  rig^t,  will  be. 

aoKNB  2.  fImdsov,  asRVAirr,  and  cr&vski 

Fdmusav.  Ah,  Alekatodr  Andr6ich,  oome  neaxer,  take  a 

seat! 

Chdtski.  You  are  busy  ? 

Fdmttsov  (to  the  servant ).  Go !  {Serva?tt  exit. )  Yes,  I  have 
been  entering  various  memoranda  on  business  matters,  not 
to  forget  them  by  any  chance. 

Chdtski.  You  look  disconcerted.  Tell  me,  why  ?  Is  my 
arrival  untimely?  Has,  perchance,  some  sorrow  come  to 
Sophia  Pivlovna  ?  There  is  disquiet  in  yonrftoe  and  move- 


Digitized  by  Google 


94  The  Nineteenth  Century 


Fdmusov.  What  a  riddle  you  have  proponnded,  my  fiieodl 
Not  joyfull  You  would  not  ezpeetme^  at  my  age,  to  danoe 

Chdtski.  Nobody  asks  yon  to.  I  just  asked  two  words 
about  Sophia  Pdvlovna,  fearing  that  she  might  be  ill. 

Fdmusov.  Pshaw,  the  Lord  spare  us!  Five  thousand 
times  he  rep)eats  one  and  the  same  thing:  now  it  is,  there  is 
no  one  fairer  in  the  world  than  Sophia  Pdvlovna,  now, 
Sophia  Pdvlovna  is  ill.  Tell  me,  have  you  taken  a  liking 
to  her?  You  have  raced  through  the  whole  world, — dou't 
you  want  to  get  married  ? 

Chdtski.  What  is  that  to  you  ? 

Fdmusov.  It  would  not  be  bad  to  ask  of  me :  I  am,  so  to 
say,  a  near  relative  of  hers;  at  least,  they  have  not  in  vain 
been  calling  me  her  father. 

CkdisH,  Suppose  I  should  sue  for  her  hand,  what  would 
you  say? 

Fdmtaem^  I  ahonld  say:  First,  do  not  make  a  fool  of  yoax- 
adf,  do  not,  my  friend,  neglect  your  estate;  bat  above  all, 
take  a  govenmient  position. 
Okdua.  I  should  ^adl^aerve^  but  I  hate  to  be  subservient 
FSmusov,  That 's  it!  You  aie  all  a  baughty  lotl 
how  your  fathers  have  donel  Learn  from  your  elders.  Let 
us  take,  for  example,  my  deceased  unde,  Maksim  Petr6vich : 
he  used  to  dine  not  upon  silver,  but  upon  gold;  a  hundred 
servants  were  at  his  beck ;  he  was  all  covered  with  decora- 
tions; he  travelled  all  the  time  in  a  procession,  was  all  the 
time  at  Court,  and  at  what  Court!  It  was  not  then  as  now: 
he  served  under  Empress  Catherine!  In  those  days  there 
was  some  weight  in  dignity:  bow  all  you  please  to  them, 
they  would  not  nod  their  heads.  A  dignitary  was  not  an 
ordinary  mortal:  he  drank  and  ate  quite  differently.  And 
my  uncle, — what  is  your  prince,  your  count  ?  He  had  such 
a  serious  look,  such  haughty  mien, — but  when  it  was  neces- 
sary to  be  subservient,  he  knew  how  to  limber  up  his  joints. 
Once  he  by  chance  made  a  misstep  during  audience  at 
Court:  he  fell,  and  almost  hurt  his  occiput.  The  old  man 
groaned,— his  hoarse  voice  provoked  her  Majesty's  smile. 


Digitized  by  Google 


Aleksjmdr  Scrgyievich  Griboyddov  95 


she  deigned  to  laugh.  Whaftdidhedo?  Heme,  arranged 
bis  clothes,  wanted  to  make  a  bow,  and  £ell  down  again,  but 
this  time  on  purpose.  The  laughter  was  louder  than  bdbie, 
— he  repeated  his  feat.  Well,  how  is  that  according  to  your 
ideas  ?  Afioording  to  ours,  he  was  shrewd :  he  fell  down  iu 
pain,  he  rose  quite  well.  Who  was  of  tenest  invited  to  whist  ? 
Who  heard  a  kind  word  at  Court?  Maksim  Petr6vich! 
Who  was  honoured  above  all  others  at  Court  ?  Maksim  Pe- 
tr6vich !  That 's  no  trifle !  Who  conferred  ranks,  and  gave 
pensions  ?  Maksim  Petr6vich !  Ah,  you  of  to-day  are  what  ? 

Chdtski.  Truly,  the  world  has  grown  more  stupid — you 
may  say  so  with  a  sigh !  When  we  compare  the  present  age 
with  the  one  that 's  past,  though  the  tradition  is  living,  it  is 
hard  to  believe:  he  was  most  famous  whose  neck  was  of  ten- 
est bent,  and  the  brow  took  by  assault  in  peace,  not  war; 
they  mercilessly  knocked  their  brows  against  the  floor.  He 
who  needed  it,  took  delight  in  grovelling  in  the  dust;  those 
who  stood  higher  wove  flattery  like  laoe, — it  was  a  dnoere 
age  of  sobmiarion  and  terrarl  Under  the  mask  of  zeal  for 
the  T»r — (I  am  not  talking  of  your  unde:  we  will  not 
disturb  his  ashes).  But  now,  who  would,  even  in  the  most 
ardent  servility,  undertake  to  amuse  the  people,  and  boldly 
to  sacrifloe  his  oodput  ?  Thougb  then,  many  an  equal  of 
his,  or  some  old  man  who  was  fidling  to  plecss  in  Ids  ancient 
hide,  seeing  his  capers^  probably  remarloBd:  "Oh,  if  I  could 
do  the  same ! ' '  There  are  even  now  some  servile  souls,  but 
nowadays  ridicule  terrifies  them  and  shame  holds  them  in 
check.    Kings,  with  good  reason,  are  slow  to  fitvour  them. 

Fdmusov.  My  God,  he  is  a  carbonaro! 

Chdtski.  No,  this  is  a  different  world! 

Fdmusov.  Dangerous  man ! 

Chdtski.  Everybody  breathes  more  freely,  and  nobody 
hastens  to  inscribe  himself  in  the  army  of  fools. 

Fdmusov.  How  he  talks!    And  he  talks  as  he  writes. 

Chdtski.  To  yawn  at  the  ceiling  in  the  house  of  your 
patrons,  to  make  your  appearance  and  sit  in  silence,  to 
courtesy,  dine,  fetch  a  chair,  lift  up  a  handkerchief— 

Fdmusov,  He  wants  to  preach  liberty ! 


Digitized  by  Google 


96  The  Nineteenth  Century 


Chdtskt.  Who  travels,  who  lives  iu  the  village — 
Fdmusov.  He  does  not  acknowledge  the  authorities! 
Chdtskt.  Who  serves  his  oflBce  and  not  men — 
Fdmusov.  I  should  most  severely  forbid  such  gentlemen  to 

get  within  a  gunshot  of  the  capitals! 
Chdtskt.  I  will  not  give  you  any  rest ! 
Fdmusov.  My  patience  is  all  exhausted,  I  have  had 

enough! 

Okdbki,  I  have  tuunerdfully  aoolded  your  age;  I  lem  it 
to  you  to  rqect  part  ol  it  in  fimur  of  our  times:  I  shall  not 

F4miuaf,  Idonotwiah  toknowyoitl  I  deq^  ddMOcht 

GbttnbL  I  have  had  my  say . 

Fdmtumf,  Very  wdl,  I  dose  my  eaia! 

GUftAf.  Whatlbr?  I  dudl  not  insult  them. 

Fdmmttv  (rapidfy),  Sndiaie  the  peoplethat  race  the  wodd 
and  waste  their  time.  When  they  letnrn,  what  ocder  can 
3rou  expect  of  them  ? 

Chdtski.  I  am  done. 

Fdmusov.  Please,  spare  me! 

Chdtskt.  It  is  not  my  desire  to  continue  the  dispute. 
F4muuw,  At  least  leave  my  soul  to  repentance. 

SCSNB  3.    THB  SAMB  AND  SB&VANT 

Servant.  Colonel  Skaloziib ! 

Fdmusov  (jnot  seeing  or  hearing  him).  You  *11  be  court - 
martialled  yet!   They  '11  give  you  to  drink. 
Chdtski.  You  have  a  guesL 

Fdmusov.  I  do  not  hear!  You  *U  be  court-martialled! 

Ckdiski,  Your  servant  is  reporting  to  yon. 

Fdinuspv,  I  do  not  hearl  Yon'U  be  eourt-martialled, 
oonrt-msttialled,  I  sayl 

Chdtski,  Just  turn  around,  yon  are  addressed. 

Fdmuuv  ijhmUtig  wmmi).  Oh,  lebeUion!  I  am  expect- 
ing nothing  but  Sodom! 

Sefvtmi,  Colond  Skalocdb!  Shallhebeieoeived? 

FSmmsao  iriskig).  Asses!  Shall  I  tpgtMX.  it  a  hnndied 


Digitized  by  Goo;?le 


Aleks&ndr  Sergy^evich  Griboy^dov  97 


times?  Receive  liim,  cfUl  him,  aak  him  in,  tell  him  I  am  at 
home»  that  I  am  glad.  Begone,  be  in  a  hunyl  (ExiiSkr- 
fttJi/.)  Please,  sir,  be  carefbl  in  his  piesenoe;  be  is  a  dis- 
tingnlrfird  gentleman,  of  solid  hsbits,  and  he  has  no  end  of 
deoocations;  his  rank  is  enviable,  oonaidering  his  age;  't  is 
but  a  qnestioa  of  a  abort  time  when  he  will  be  general! 

scam  5.  chI'tski,  pAmusov,  skai^ozi^b 

Fdmusov.  Sergy^y  Sergy6ich,  come  here,  near  us!  'Tis 
warmer  here,  come  here!    I  '11  open  the  register  at  once. 

Skaloziib  {in  a  heavy  bass).  Why  should  you  trouble  your- 
self?   As  an  honourable  officer  I  can't  permit  that. 

Fdmtisov.  Why  should  I  not  take  a  step  for  a  friend? 
Dear  Sergy^y  Sergy^ich,  put  down  your  hat,  take  off  your 
sword.    Here  is  a  sofa:  make  yourself  comfortable. 

SkcUozHb.  I  do  not  care  where,  so  I  am  seated. 

{^AU  three  sit  dawn,  Chdtskiat  some  disiarue.) 

fdmttiffo,  O  friend,  not  to  forget:  let  us  figure  out  our 
xelationahip— there  is  no  inheritanoe  to  be  divided  here. 
Do  yon  know— I  used  to  know,  thanks  to  what  your  cousin 
told  me— how  Kaatdsya  Kikoldevna  is  related  to  yon? 

SkaioM,  'Btg  jour  pardon,  I  do  not  know:  we  did  not 
serve  together. 

FdtmMtov,  Setgyisy  Seigy^idi,  do  you  say  that?  I  am 
ready  to  get  down  on  my  knees  before  a  relative  of  mine, 
wherever  I  may  find  him,  though  he  be  at  the  bottom  of  the 
sea.  I  aeldom  have  subordinates  who  are  not  my  relatives: 
they  are  nearly  all  my  sister's  children,  or  some  near  rela-* 
tive's;  Molchdlin  only  is  not  of  my  family,  and  for  the  reason 
that  he  knows  about  afifairs.  How  can  one  help  thinking  of 
his  family,  when  there  is  a  chance  for  promotion  or  for 
decoration  ?  Yet,  your  cousin  told  me  that  through  you  he 
has  had  many  advantages  in  his  service. 

SkalozCb.  Cousin  and  I  distinguished  ourselves  in  1 8 13  in 
the  thirtieth  of  the  Chasseurs,  and  later  in  the  forty-fifth. 

Fdtnusov.  How  fortunate  is  he  who  has  such  a  son!  He 

has,  I  believe,  a  decoration  in  the  buttonhole  ? 
VOL.  n."-7. 


98  The  Nineteenth  Century 


SkalffM.  For  Attgust  third.  We  atnek  to  a  tueodi*  He 
xeceived  his  in  the  trnttoohote^  I— «rotmd  my  nedc 

Fdmutav.  A  lovely  man!  A  fine  fellow  to  look  at!  A 
splendid  man  is  yonr  consin! 

SkabM.  He 's  diock-liill  of  new-fangled  ndes.  He  was 
to  get  a  higher  rank,  when  he  left  the  aervioe,  and  began  to 
read  boolcs  in  his  village. 

Fdmusao.  Strange  yonthf  To  iead»  and  then— look  onti 
You  have  acted  as  is  proper:  you  have  long  been  colonel, 
though  you  serve  but  shortly. 

SkalozHb,  I  am  sufficiently  fortunate  in  my  ooUeagnes. 
Vacancies  have  been  open  just  at  the  right  time:  some  older 
ones  have  been  retired,  and  others  have  been  killed  ofif. 

Fdmusov.  Yes,  if  God  wants  to  show  one  His  £Eivoar,  He 
advances  him! 

Skaloziib.  Some  are  luckier  than  I.  Not  to  go  farther, 
I  '11  mention  our  brigadier-general  in  the  fifteenth  division. 

Fdmusov.  But,  I  pray,  you  are  lacking  nothing. 

Skalozuh.  I  can't  complain, — I  have  not  been  overlooked; 
yet,  I  have  been  two  years  with  the  same  regiment. 

Fdmusov.  Oh,  you  are  after  the  rank  of  general!  Still,  in 
many  other  things  you  have  left  others  far  behind. 

SkalffM,  No,  there  are  older  ones  than  I  in  the  army:  I 
have  been  serving  since  eighty-nine.  Yes,  there  are  many 
channels  through  which  one  may  get  promotion;  I  judge  of 
them  lilce  a  real  philosopher:  in  I  care  for  is  the  tank  of 
genersl. 

Fdmitsop,  You  jndge  excellently.  God  grant  yon  heslth 
and  the  rank  of  general— and,  why  deUy  it  longer?— it 
would  be  time  to  begin  talking  of  a  Mrs.  Slnlosdh. 

SkaloM,  Get  married  ?  I  am  not  disinclined. 

Fdmusov.  WeU!  One  has  a  sister,  another  a  niece,  a 
daughter.  In  Moscow  there  is  no  lack  of  prospective  brides : 
they  breed  each  year !  My  friend,  confess,  it  would  be  hard 
to  find  another  capital  like  Moscow. 

Skaloziib.  Distances  of  enormous  proportion ! 

Fdmusov.  There  are  good  taste,  my  friend,  and  excellent 
manners,  and  for  everything  there  are  laws.   There,  for 


Digitized  by  Googl 


Aleks^ndr  Sergydevich  Griboyedov  99 


example,  it  is  an  old  custom  with  us  that  the  son  is  honoured 
accx)rding  to  his  father:  let  him  be  a  worthless  chap,  but  let 
him  have  two  thousand  peasants  to  his  name,  and  he  will 
be  an  eligible  bridegroom;  anothier  may  be  much  more  agile, 
Mi  of  an  kinds  of  pride,  let  bim  pais  for  a  ctever  ftlUm, — 
yet  be  will  not  be  a  member  of  oar  families,  nor  need  you 
wonder  at  tbis,  for  it  is  only  here  tbst  we  still  respect  noUe 
birtb.  Nor  is  this  sill  Take  oar  boopitable  bread  and  salt: 
anyone  wbo  may  wish  to  call  on  ns  is  weloome!  The  door 
is  open  for  invited  and  nninvited  guests*  eq)ecislly  if  tfa^ 
be  focdgnerB.  It  makes  no  difierenoe  to  as  wbetber  they 
be  honourable  or  dishonest  men:  dinner  is  prepared  for 
all  alike.  On  all  the  MuscoviteSk  >f  you  pileaae,  tbere  is 
a  special  stamp.  Just  look  at  our  youths,  our  sons,  and 
gnmdcbildren:  we  lecture  them,  but  look  close  at  them, 
and  you  will  find  that  at  fifleen  years  they  are  ready  to  teach 
their  teachers!  And  our  old  men  ?  When  a  notion  strikes 
them,  and  they  discuss  affairs,— each  word  they  say  is  a  sen- 
tence passed.  They  are  important  men,  and  care  not  a  fig  for 
anyone.  Should  someone  hear  their  discussions  about  the 
Government,  there  would  be  trouble !  Not  that  they  intro- 
duce innovations — never!  The  Lord  preserve  us,  no!  They 
simply  find  fault  with  this  and  that,  and  oftenest  with  no- 
thing at  all:  they  quarrel,  make  a  noise,  and  go  each  one  to 
his  home.  They  are  true  ex-chancellors  as  regards  their 
brains!  I  will  tell  you  this  much:  evidently  time  has  not 
been  propitious,  bat  no  affiur  will  be  decided  withont  them. 

And  tbe  ladies?  IM  anyone  try  and  get  the  better  of 
them!  They  ate  judges  in  all  things  and  everywhere, — 
there  are  no  judges  over  them.  When  they  rise  in  oonunon 
xiot  at  the  caoids, — ^then  God  grant  nspatienoe!  Remember, 
I  have  myself  been  married  1  Order  them  to  command  an 
armyl  Send  tbem  to  take  their  seats  in  the  Senate!  Irfna 
Vldsevna!  Lukdrsra  Aleksy^evnal  Tatsrftna  Ydievna!  Pol- 
kb^ri3ra  Andr^vna!  And  he  who  has  seen  their  daughters 
will  only  hang  his  head !  His  Majesty  the  Prnasian  King 
was  here:  he  admired  beyond  measure  the  Moscow  maidens, 
--thdr  mannerHneas,  not  their  fooesl  And  foraoothJ  Can 


100         The  Nineteenth  Century 


one  be  txrought  up  betterl  They  know  horn  to  primp  tfaem- 
seLves  In  taffeta*  vtMt,  and  dimity;  tbcy  never  aay  a  wofd 
simply,  tmt  almys  with  a  grimace.  Tfa^  aing  Pcendi 
romancea,  and  strike  the  upper  notea.  They  ding  to  the 
military, — becanae  they  are  patriots.  I  most  aay  emphat- 
ically: yon  wQl  acaiody  find  another  aodi  e  capital  aa  Moa- 
cow! 

Skalozilb.  In  my  opinion,  the  conflagratioa  haa  done  modi 
for  its  embelliahment 

Fdmusov.  You  have  no  cause  for  complaint:  since  then 
our  roads,  onr  aidewalka^  houaea»  and  all  creak  in  a  new 

fashion. 

Ckdtski.  The  houses  are  new,  but  the  prejudices  old. 
Rejoice:  neither  years,  nor  fashion,  nor  conflagrations  will 
annihilate  them. 

Fdmusov  (Jo  Chdtski).  Sir,  tie  a  knot  for  memory's  sake! 
I  asked  you  to  keep  quiet, — 't  is  but  a  small  service.  {To 
SkalozHb.)  Permit  me,  sir,  to  acquaint  you  with  Chitski,  a 
friend  of  mine,  the  son  of  the  late  Audrey  Ilfch!  He  does 
notaerve,  that  is,  he  aeas  no  advantage  in  it;  he  would  make 
a  good  offidal,  if  he  only  wished  so.  'T  is  a  pity,  a  gxeat 
pity:  he  is  a  yoong  man  with  a  head,  and  he  writes  and 
tranaiatea  beantifnUy.  One  can't  hdp  ragietring^— 

Chdiski.  Can  yon  not  regret  someooe  else  ?  Bven  your 
praises  anger  mel 

Fdmusov.  Not  I  alone,— everybody  judges  you  thus. 

Chdtski,  Who  are  the  judges?  They  being  old,  their 
hostility  against  a  free  life  cannot  be  assuaged:  they  draw 
their  judgments  from  forgotten  gazettea  of  the  days  of 
Ochdkov  and  the  conquest  of  the  Crimea.  Ever  ready  to 
chide,  they  eternally  sing  one  and  the  same  song,  and  do  not 
notice  that  the  older  they  grow,  the  worse  they  become. 
Where,  show  us,  are  the  fathers  of  the  fatherland  whom  we 
are  to  assume  as  onr  models?  Perchance  they  are  those 
who  by  robbery  have  grown  rich,  who  find  protection  against 
the  courts  in  their  friends  and  families,  and  who  erect  mag- 
nificent palaces,  where  they  indulge  in  banquets  and  lavish- 
ness,  and  where  the  foreign  clients  will  not  efface  the 


Digitized  by  Googlc 


Aleksindr  Sergydevich  Griboyidov  loi 


meanest  features  of  their  former  lives  ?  Pray,  whose  mouth 
has  in  Moscow  not  been  closed  by  dinners,  suppers,  and 
dances?  Is  it,  perhaps,  he  to  whom  yon  took  me  still  in 
my  swaddUiig  dotliea,  for  aome  Inoompreheiisible  purpose, 
to  make  obei«iBcw> — that  Neator  td  noUe  aooimdidai  who 
waa  f^frw?*!"*^**^  by  ft  crowd  of  aarvaata?  They  bcatiixed 
themaehraa  far  him,  and  in  hotiaea  of  wine  and  brawla 
more  than  once  had  saved  hia  honour  and  his  life, — and  he 
suddenly  exchanged  three  hoands  for  them.  Or  that  other 
man  irbo,  to  pleaae  hia  hacy,  brought  together  in  many 
waggooa  to  an  enforced  ballet  the  children  who  had  been 
torn  away  from  their  parents?  Himself  merged  in  con- 
templation of  Zephyrs  and  Cupids,  he  caused  all  Moscow  to 
admire  their  beauty;  but  he  did  not  with  all  that  appease 
hia  creditora:  the  Cupids  and  Z^hyrs  were  all  sold  one  by 
one. 

These  are  the  men  who  have  lived  to  have  grey  hair !  It 
is  these  that  you  wish  us  to  respect  in  the  wilderness!  These 
are  our  austere  arbiters  and  judges!  I/Ct  now  one  among  us 
young  men  be  found  who  is  an  enemy  of  servility,  who  seeks 
neither  a  place,  nor  a  promotion,  who,  thirsting  for  know- 
ledge, bends  his  mind  to  the  sciences,  or  into  whose  soul 
God  Himself  has  implanted  a  Ere  for  the  high  and  beautiful 
creative  arts,— they  at  once  cry:  murderl  fire!  and  you  at 
once  paaa  for  a  dangerous  dreamer.  The  imilbrm,  nothing 
but  the  tmifinmt  In  their  former  existence  their  bcautifnl 
gold-laoedunifotmahaddoaked  their  pttafflanimity  and  pov- 
erty of  Intdligenoe^— 80  they  wiah  us  Oodiq^eed  npoo  their 
own  path.  And  their  wives  and  daughteri  have  the  same 
paaaion  for  the  unifonna.  la  it  long  ainoe  I,  ahariog  that 
weakness  for  it,  have  renounoed  it?.  Now  I  ahall  never 
again  be  prone  to  such  chUdlahneas.  But  who  would  then 
not  have  been  carried  away  together  with  all  ?  When  some- 
one of  the  Guards  or  from  the  Court  came  here  for  a  time,  the 
women  cried ' '  Hurrah ! ' '  and  threw  their  bonnets  in  the  air. 

Fdmusov  {asidf).  He  will  get  me  into  trouble  yet !  (Aloud.) 
Sexgy^y  Sergy^ich,  I  shall  wait  for  you  in  the  study.  iExiL) 


I02         The  Nineteenth  Century 


Aleksindr  Aleks&ndrovich  BesMsher  (pseud.  BCar- 

-  PetifiiheT  was  one  of  three  broUien  wlio  took  pert  In  the  Decem- 
brist uprising.  He  had  received  a  brilliant  education  at  home,  which, 

thanks  to  the  industry  of  his  highly  cultivated  father,  was  a  museum 
in  miniature.  He  turned  his  attention  to  literature  in  1819,  through 
his  friend  Ryly^v  joined  the  December  conspiracy,  and  was  banished 
for  only  a  few  years  to  Siberia,  becatue  he  bad  voluntarily  snrrendexcd 
himself.  He  was  pomcMeJ  of  aa  nanmally  ardent  nature,  which 
led  him  to  engage  in  most  extravagant  love  a£EBiirs,  with  always  a 
duel  in  prospect,  and  his  many  novels,  with  their  transcendental 
Romanticism  and  perfervid  diction,  are  only  the  expression  of  bis 
Inaer  ezperienoea.  He  died  in  the  Oraeasus,  in  an  e  u  gag  ement  with 
the  monntaineem,  but  hia  body  was  not  seoovered.  He  waa,  in  his 
day,  the  most  popular  novelist,  whom  even  Ptishkin  greatly  admixed, 
and  several  of  his  works  have  been  translated  into  many  languages, 
among  them  also  into  Georgian.  His  Ammaldt  Bek  was  translated 
into  English  by  Thomas  B.  Shaw,  in  Blackwood's  Edinburgh  Maga- 
zine, vol.  liil.,  1843;  also  TkeTariarCIn^:  or,  A  Russian  CoUm^s 
Head  for  Dowry ^  from  the  Rmaian  of  Kadinsky,  by  O.C  Hebbe, 
LU>.,  New  York,  184&, 

FROM  "AMMALAT  BBK*' 

For  some  time  past,  the  mountaineers  had  fallen  in  con- 
siderable numbers  only  on  Christian  villages,  lor  in  the 
stanftsas  *  the  resistance  had  cost  them  very  dear.  For  the 
plundering  of  houses  they  approached  boldly  yet  cunningly 
the  Russian  frontier,  and  on  such  occasions  they  frequently 
escaped  a  battle.  The  bravest  Uxd^  desire  to  meet  with 
these  affain  that  they  may  acquire  fiune,  which  they  yaltte 
even  more  than  plunder. 

In  the  autumn  of  the  year  1810,  the  Kabaxdinians  and 
Chechentans,  encouraged  by  the  absence  of  the  commander- 
in-chief^  assembled  to  the  ntunber  of  fifteen  hundred  men  to 
make  an  attack  upon  one  of  the  villages  beyond  the  T6rek, 
to  seize  it,  carry  oflf  prisoners,  and  take  the  droves  of  horses. 
The  leader  of  the  Kabardinians  was  the  Prince  Dzhembul4t, 
Ammaldt  Bek,  who  had  arrived  with  a  letter  from  Sultan 
Akhm6t  Khan,  was  received  with  delight.  They  did  not, 
indeed,  assign  him  the  command  of  any  division;  but  this 

'  Cossack  villages. 


Digitized  by  Google 


Aleks&ndr  Aleks&ndrovich  BestAzhev  103 


troae  from  the  cfacumstiince  that  with  them  there  is  no  order 
of  battle  or  gradation  of  oommattd;  an  active  horse  and  in- 
dividual courage  secures  the  most  distinguished  plsoe  in 
action.  At  first  they  deliberate  how  best  to  begin  the  at- 
tack,— ^how  to  repel  the  enemy;  but  afterwards  they  pay  no 
attention  to  plan  or  order,  and  chance  decides  the  affair. 

Having  sent  messengers  to  summon  the  neighbouring 
Uzd^ns,  Dzhembuldt  fixed  on  a  place  of  general  assembling; 
and  immediately,  on  a  signal  agreed  on,  from  every  height 
spread  the  cry:  *'  Gardy,  gardy!  "  (alarm),  and  in  one  hour 
the  Chechenians  and  Kabardinians  were  assembling  from  all 
sides.  To  avoid  treason,  no  one  but  the  leader  knew  where 
the  night-camp  was  to  be,  from  which  they  were  to  cross  the 
river.  They  were  divided  into  small  bands,  and  were  to  go 
by  almost  invisible  paths  to  the  peaceful  village,  where  they 
were  to  conceal  themselves  till  night.  By  twilight,  all  the 
divisions  were  already  mustered. 

As  they  anhred,  they  were  xeeei^  by  their  oottutrymen 
with  frank  embnoes;  but  DzhembuUlt,  not  trusdi^  to  this^ 
guarded  the  village  with  sentineU,  and  proclaimed  to  the 
inhabitants  that  whoever  attempted  to  desert  to  the  Russians 
should  be  cut  to  pieces.  The  greater  part  of  the  Uzddns  took 
up  their  quarters  in  the  s^Udas  of  their  kun&ks  or  relations; 
but  Dzhembul&t  and  Ammaldt,  with  the  best  of  the  cavaliers, 
slept  in  the  open  air  around  a  fire,  when  they  had  refreshed 
their  jaded  horses.  DzhembuUit,  wrapped  in  his  biirka, 
was  considering,  with  folded  arms,  the  plan  of  the  expedi- 
tion ;  but  the  thoughts  of  Ammaldt  were  far  from  the  battle- 
field: they  were  flying,  eagle- winged,  to  the  mountains  of 
Avdr,  and  bitterly,  bitterly,  did  he  feel  his  separation.  The 
sound  of  an  instrument,  the  mountain  balaldyka,  accom- 
panying a  slow  air,  recalled  him  from  his  reverie;  and  a 
Kabardinian  sang  an  ancient  song. 

*'  On  Kazbek  the  clouds  are  meeting, 
Like  the  mountain  eagle-flock; 
Up  to  them,  along  the  rock, 
Dash  the  wild  Uzd^ns  retreating; 


Digitized  by  Google 


104         The  Nineteenth  Century 


Onward  faster,  faster  fieetmg. 
Routed  by  the  Rtissian  brood, 
Poameth  all  their  track  with  blood. 

**  Fast  behind  the  regiments  yelling. 

Lance  and  bayonet  raging  hot. 

And  the  seed  of  death  their  shot. 
On  the  mail  the  sabre  knelling. 
Gallop,  steed !  for  far  thy  dwelling,— 

See!  they  fall,— but  distant  still 

Is  the  forest  of  the  hill ! 

"  Rtifldan  ahot  our  hearta  ia  rending, 

PaUa  the  Moollah  on  hia  knee^ 

To  the  Lord  of  Light  bowa  he» 
To  the  Prophet  he  ia  bending; 
Like  a  diaf  t  hia  prayer  aaoendisg. 

Upward  fliea  to  Allah'a  throne— 

n-Allahl  Oh,  aave  thine  ownt* 

"  Ah,  despair!— What  crash  like  thtmderl 

Lo!  a  sign  (roui  heaven  abovel 

Lo!  the  forest  aeems  to  move, 
Crashes^  mtumnra,  bursts  asunder  I 
Lower,  nearer,  wonder!  wonder! 

Safe  once  more  the  Moslem  bold 

In  their  forest  mountain-hold  I " 

**  So  it  was  in  old  times,"  said  Dzhembuldt,  with  a  smile, 
"when  our  men  trusted  more  to  prayer,  and  God  oftener 
listened  to  them;  but  now,  my  friends,  there  is  a  better 
hope, — your  valour !  Our  omens  are  in  the  scabbards  of  our 
sabres,  and  we  must  show  that  we  are  not  ashamed  of  them. 
Hark  ye,  Ammaldt,"  he  cfmtinued,  twisting  his  moustache, 

I  will  not  conceal  from  you  that  the  affair  may  be  warm. 

I  have  just  heard  that  Colonel  K  has  collected  hia 

division;  but  where  he  i%  or  how  many  troops  he  ha% 
nobody  knows." 


Digitized  by  Google 


Aleks&ndr  Aleksjmdrovich  Bestbzhev  105 


"  The  more  Russians  there  are  the  better,"  replied  Am- 
malit,  quietly;    the  fewer  mistakes  will  be  made." 

"And  the  heavier  will  be  the  pluader." 

"  I  care  not  for  that.    I  seek  revenge  and  glory." 

'*  GUnry  is  a  good  bird,  when  she  lays  a  golden  egg;  but 
he  that  returns  with  his  tor6ks  (straps  behind  the  saddle) 
empty,  is  ashamed  to  appear  before  his  wife.  Winter  is 
near,  and  we  must  provide  our  households  at  the  expense  of 
the  Russians,  that  we  may  feast  our  friends  and  allies. 
Choose  your  station,  Ammalat  Bek.  Do  you  prefer  to  ad- 
vance in  front  to  carry  off  the  flocks,  or  will  you  remain  with 
me  in  the  rear  ?  I  and  the  Abr^ks  will  march  at  a  foot's 
pace  to  restrain  the  pursuers." 

"That  is  what  I  also  intend.  I  will  be  wheie  the  greatest 
peril  i«.  Bat  what  are  the  Abr^ca,  Dshcmliiil&tr' 

''Itlsiioleeaytoezplalii.  You  aometliiies  aee  aevend  ol 
our  boldest  cavaliers  take  an  oath,  binding  them  for  two  or 
thioe  yeais,  or  as  long  as  th^  like,  iicver  to  mingle  in  gaines 
or  gaieties^  never  to  wpm  their  lives  in  battle,  to.give  no 
quarter,  never  to  pardon  the  least  offence  in  a  brother  or  a 
friend,  to  seize  the  goods  of  others  withoat  fear  or  scrapie, — 
in  a  word,  to  be  the  Ibea  of  all  mankind,  strangers  in  their 
family,  men  whom  any  person  may  slay  if  he  can;  in  the 
iHUage  they  are  dangerous  neighbours,  and  in  meeting  them 
yon  must  keep  yoor  hand  cm  the  trigger;  but  in  war  one  can 
trust  them." 

"  For  what  motive,  or  reason,  can  the  Uzd^  make  snch 
an  engagement  ? ' ' 

"  Some  simply  to  show  their  courage,  others  from  poverty, 
a  third  class  from  some  misfortune.  See,  for  instance,  yon- 
der tall  Kabardinian ;  he  has  sworn  to  be  an  Abr^k  for  five 
years,  since  his  mistress  died  of  the  smallpox.  Since  that 
year  it  would  be  as  well  to  make  acquaintance  with  a  tiger 
as  with  him.  He  has  already  been  wounded  thiee  times  for 
blood  vengeance;  but  he  cares  not  for  that." 

'*  Strange  custom !  How  will  he  return  from  the  life  of 
an  Abrdk  to  a  peaceable  existence  ?  " 

"  What  is  there  strange  in  this?  The  past  glides  from 


io6         The  Nineteenth  Centuiy 


bim  as  water  from  the  wild-dock.  His  ndghboms  will  be 
delighted  when  he  has  finished  his  term  of  brigandage. 
And  he,  after  putting  off  Abr^kism,  as  a  seipent  sheds  his 
akin,  will  become  gentle  as  a  lamb.  Among  us,  none  but 
the  avenger  of  blood  remembers  yesterday.  But  the  night 
is  darkening.  The  mists  are  ^reading  over  T^rek.  It  is 
time  for  the  work." 

Dzhembuldt  whistled,  and  his  whistle  was  repeated  to  all 
the  outposts  of  the  camp.  In  a  moment  the  whole  band 
was  assembled.  Several  ITzdens  joined  from  the  neighbour- 
ing friendly  villages.  After  a  short  discussion  as  to  the 
passage  of  the  river,  the  band  moved  iu  silence  to  the  bank. 
Ammaldt  Bek  could  not  but  admire  the  stillness,  not  only  of 
the  riders,  but  erf  their  horses;  not  one  of  them  neighed  or 
snorted,  and  they  seemed  to  place  their  feet  on  the  ground 
with  caution. 

They  marched  Uke  a  voicelefla  dond,  and  soon  they 
readied  the  bank  of  Tdrek,  whidi,  making  a  winding  at  thte 
spot,  fimneda  promontory,  and  from  it  to  the  opposite  ahore 
eztmded  a  pebbly  dioaL  The  water  over  this  bank  was 
disllow  and  £brdable;  neverthdeaa^apaitof  thedeCadunent 
left  the  shore  higher  up,  in  order  to  swhn  past  the  CosHdn, 
and,  diverting  thefar  attention  from  the  prindpol  paaaage,  to 
cover  the  fording  party.  Those  who  had  confidence  in 
their  horses  leaped  unhesitatingly  from  the  bank,  while 
Others  tied  to  each  fore-foot  of  their  steeds  a  pair  of  small 
skins,  inflated  with  air  like  bladders:  the  current  bore  them 
on,  and  each  landed  wherever  he  found  a  oonvenient  spot 


Daybreak  appeared;  the  fog  began  to  separate,  and  dis- 
covered a  picture  at  once  magnificent  and  terrible.  The 
principal  band  of  foragers  dragged  the  prisoners  after  it, — 
some  were  at  the  stirrup,  others  behind  the  saddle,  with 
their  arms  tied  at  their  backs.  Tears,  and  groans,  and  cries 
of  despair  were  stifled  by  the  threats  or  frantic  cries  of  joy  of 
the  vietOTB.  Loaded  with  plunder,  impeded  by  the  flocks 
and  liomed  cattle,  they  advanced  dowly  towards  the  T^rek. 


Digitized  by  Google 


Aleks&ndr  Aleks&ndrovich  Bestfizhev  107 


The  princes  and  best  cavaliers,  in  mafl-ooats  and  casques 
glittering  like  water,  galloped  round  the  dense  maa8»  as 
lightning  flashes  round  a  living  doud. 

In  the  distance  wen  galloping  op  from  every  point  the 
Cossacks  of  the  Line;  th^  ambushed  behind  the  shnibs  and 
straggling  oak-trees,  and  soon  began  an  irregular  fire  with 
the  brigands  who  were  sent  against  them.  In  the  mean- 
time, the  foremost  had  driven  across  the  river  a  portion  of 
the  flocks,  when  a  doud  of  dust,  and  the  tramp  the  cav- 
alry, announced  the  approaching  storm. 

About  six  hundred  mountaineers,  commanded  by  Dzhem- 
buldt  and  Aramalat,  turned  their  horses  to  repulse  the 
attack,  and  give  time  to  the  rest  to  escape  by  the  river. 
Without  order,  but  with  wild  cries  and  shouts,  they  dashed 
forward  to  meet  the  Cossacks;  but  not  a  single  gun  was 
taken  from  its  belt,  not  a  single  sabre  glimmered  in  the  air: 
a  Circassian  waits  till  the  last  moment  before  he  seizes  his 
weapons.  And  thus,  having  galloped  to  the  distance  of 
twenty  paces,  they  levdled  their  guns,  fired  at  full  speed, 
threw  fheirfire4nnui  over  their  badn,  and  drew  their  sabres; 
but  the  CoMacks  of  the  I4ne,  having  replied  with  a  volley, 
began  to  fly,  and  the  numnftaineers,  heated  by  the  diase, 
ML  into  a  stratagem  which  they  often  employ  fhemsdves. 

The  Cmwarks  had  led  them  up  to  the  Chasseurs  of  the 
brave  forty-thhrd  regiment,  who  were  concealed  at  the  edge 
of  the  forest.  Suddenly,  as  if  the  Utile  squares  had  started 
out  of  the  earth,  the  bayonets  were  levelled,  and  the  fixe 
poured  on  them,  taking  them  in  flank.  It  was  in  vain  that 
the  mountaineers^  dismounting  from  their  horses,  essayed  to 
occupy  the  underwood  and  attack  the  Russians  from  the 
rear;  the  artillery  came  up  and  decided  the  affair.  The  ex- 
perienced Colonel  Kortsar6v,  the  dread  of  the  Chechenians, 
the  man  whose  bravery  they  feared  and  whose  honesty  and 
disinterestedness  they  respected,  directed  the  movements  of 
the  troops,  and  success  could  not  be  doubtful.  The  cannon 
dispersed  the  crowds  of  brigands,  and  their  grape  flew  after 
the  flying. 

The  defeat  was  terrible;  two  guns,  dashing  at  a  gallop  to 


io8         The  Nineteenth  Century 


the  promontory,  not  £ar  from  which  the  Circassians  were 
throwing  themselves  into  the  river,  enfiladed  the  stream; 
with  a  rushing  sound,  the  shot  flew  over  the  foaming  waves, 
and  at  each  fire  some  of  the  horses  might  be  seen  to  turn 
over  with  their  feet  in  the  air,  drowning  their  riders.  It 
was  sad  to  see  how  the  wounded  clutched  at  the  tails  and 
bridles  of  the  horses  of  their  companions,  sinking  them 
without  saving  themselves, — how  the  exhausted  struggled 
against  the  scarped  bank,  endeavouring  to  clamber  up,  fell 
back,  and  were  borne  away  and  engulfed  by  the  furious 
current.  The  corpses  of  the  slain  were  whirled  away, 
mingled  wifh  tlie  dying,  and  stieaks  of  Uood  corled  and 
writhed  like  serpents  on  the  fosm.  The  smoke  floated  sloiig 
tlie  T^rek,  iar  In  the  distance,  and  the  snowy  peaks  of  the 
Cancasns^  crowned  with  ndst,  hounded  the  fidd  of  bpttle. 

Dshemhuldt  and  Ammal&t  Bek  firaght  despentdy,— > 
twenty  times  did  they  rush  to  the  attack,  twenty  times  were 
they  repulsed;  wearied,  bnt  not  oonqoered,  with  a  hundred 
brigands  they  swam  the  river,  dismounted,  attached  their 
hofses  to  eadi  other  by  the  bridle,  and  bagan  a  warn  fire 
from  the  other  side  of  the  river,  to  cover  their  surviving 
comrades.  Intent  upon  this,  they  remarked,  too  late,  that 
the  Cossacks  were  passing  the  river  above  them;  with  a 
shout,  the  Russians  leaped  upon  the  bank,  and  sunounded 
them  in  a  moment.    Their  fate  was  inevitable. 

"Well,  Dzhembuldt,"  said  the  Bek  to  the  Kabardinian, 
*'  our  lot  is  finished.  Do  you  what  you  will :  but  for  me,  I  will 
not  render  myself  a  prisoner  alive.  'T  is  better  to  die  by  a 
ball  than  by  a  shameful  cord !  '* 

"  Do  you  think,"  answered  Dzhembuldt,  "  that  my  arms 
were  made  for  a  chain  ?  Allah  keep  me  from  such  a  blot  I 
The  Russians  may  take  my  body,  but  not  my  sooL  Never, 
never  1  Brethren,  comrades! "  he  cried  to  the  others, 
"  fortune  has  betrayed  ns,  bat  the  steel  will  not  Let  us 
sell  oor  lives  dearly  to  the  Giaour.  The  victor  is  not  he 
who  keeps  the  field,  bat  he  who  has  the  glocy;  and  the 
glory  is  his  who  prefers  death  to  slavery!'* 

"  Let  ns  die,  let  08  die,  but  let  us  die  gloriously  1 "  cried 


Digitized  by  Google 


Aleks^dr  Aleksiuidrovich  BestAzhev  109 


an,  pieidng  with  fhdr  daggeit  tlie  sides  of  their  hotaes,  that 

the  enemy  might  not  take  them,  and  then  piling  up  the  dead 
bodies  of  their  ateeds,  they  lay  down  behind  the  heap,  pte- 
paring  to  meet  the  attack  with  lead  and  steeL 

Well  aware  of  the  obstinate  resistance  they  were  about  to 

encounter,  the  Cossacks  stopped,  and  made  ready  for  the 
charge.  The  shot  from  the  opposite  bank  sometimes  fell  in 
the  midst  of  the  brave  mountaineers,  sometimes  a  grenade 
exploded,  covering  them  with  earth  and  fragments;  but  they 
showed  no  confusion,  they  started  not,  nor  blenched;  and, 
after  the  custom  of  their  countr>%  began  to  sing,  with  a 
melancholy  yet  threatening  voice,  the  death-song,  replying 
alternately  stanza  for  stanza. 

DSATH-SONG 

Chorus 

"  Fame  to  us,  death  to  yoti, 
Alla-ha,  Alla-hui " 

Semidkonu 

"  Weep,  O  ye  maidens,  on  mooatidn  and  valley, 

Lift  the  dirge  for  the  souls  of  the  brave! 
We  have  fired  oar  last  bullet,  have  made  our  last  rally, 

And  Cancasns  gives  as  a  grave. 
Here  the  soft  ^pe  no  moie  shall  invite  ns  to  sLnmber,— 

The  thunder  onr  lullaby  sings; 
Our  eyes  not  the  maiden's  dark  tresses  shall  cumber. 

Them  the  raven  shall  shade  with  his  wings! 
Porget,  O  my  children,  jrour  father's  stem  duty, — 
No  moce  shall  he  bring  ye  the  Muscovite  booty  I " 

Second  Semichorus 

•*  Weep  not,  ye  maidens!    Your  sisters  in  splendour. 
The  Houris,  they  bend  from  the  sky, 
They  fix  on  the  brave  their  sun-glance  deep  and  tender, 

And  to  Paradise  bear  him  on  high ! 
In  your  feast-cup,  my  brethren,  forget  not  our  story: 
The  death  oCtlie  Free  is  the  noblest  of  glory!  '* 


no         The  Nineteenth  Century 


First  Semichoms 

"  Roar,  wmter  torrent,  and  anUenly  daah! 
But  where  is  the  brave  one,— the  swift  Ughtiiing*fladi  ^ 
Soft  star  of  my  soal,  iny  noCfaer, 
Sleep,  the  fire  let  ashes  smother; 

Gaze  no  more,  thine  eyes  are  weaiy. 

Sit  not  by  the  threshold  stone; 
Gaze  not  through  the  night-fog  dreaiy, 

Hat  thine  evening  meal  alone, 
Seek  him  not,  O  mother,  weeping, 

By  the  cliff  and  by  the  ford ! 
On  a  bed  of  dust  he  *s  sleeping, — 

Broken  is  both  heart  and  sword! " 

Second  Semukorus 

'*  Mother,  weep  not!  with  thy  love  boming: 

This  heart  of  mine  bests  fbll  and  ftee^ 
And  to  lion-blood  is  turning 

That  soft  milk  I  drew  from  thee; 
And  our  liberty  from  danger 

Thy  brave  son  has  p^uarded  well; 
Battling  with  the  Christian  stranger, 

Called  by  Azrael,  he  fell; 
From  my  blood  fresh  odours  breathing, 

Fadeless  flowers  shall  drink  the  dew; 
To  my  children  fame  bequeathing, 

Brethren,  and  revenge  to  you! " 

Okorus 

"  Pray,  my  brethren,  ere  we  part: 

Ontch  the  steel  with  hate  and  wnthi 
Break  it  in  the  Russian's  heart, — 
0*er  coTMS  lies  the  bmve  men's  pathl 
Fame  to  us,  death  to  yon, 
ABs-ha,  AUa-huI " 


Digitized  by  Google 


Ivan  Ivcmovich  Lazhdchnikov 


1 1 1 


Strack  by  a  certain  involuntary  awe,  the  Chasseurs  and 
Cossacks  listened  in  silence  to  the  stern  sounds  of  this  song; 
but  at  last  a  loud  hurrah  resounded  from  both  sides.  The 
Circassians,  with  a  shout,  fired  their  guns  for  the  last  time, 
and  breaking  them  against  the  stones,  they  threw  them- 
selves dagger  in  hand,  upon  the  Russians.  The  Abr^ks 
in  Older  that  their  line  might  not  be  bcoken,  bound  them- 
selves to  cedi  other  with  their  girdles,  and  hurled  themselves 
into  the  mlS^  Quarter  was  neither  asked  nor  given:  sU 
fell  before  the  bayonets  of  the  Russians. 

"  Forwazdl  PoUoar  me,  AmmaUt  Beik,"  cried  Dafaembu- 
lit,  with  ftuy,  rushing  into  the  oonibat  whidi  was  to  be  his 
last:  "  Forward!  For  us  death  is  liberty  1 

But  Ammaldt  heard  not  his  call :  a  blow  firom  a  musket  on 
the  back  of  the  liead  stretched  him  on  the  earth,  already 
sown  with  corpses  and  covered  with  blood. — TransL  by 
Thomas  B.  Shaw,  in  Blackwood's  Bdinburgh  Msgazine, 
voL  liiL  (1843). 

iTio  lY&novidi  LaihMmikOTr.  (1794-18691) 

Lazh^choikov  was  the  most  famous  of  Rnasiaii  novelists  before 
O^gd.  Bis^herwuaildi  graia  and  Mlt  flitvdia&tinthecityof 
Kflidmnii,  and  he  spared  no  money  for  the  edocatioa  of  Ua  son.  At 
dzteen  yeaxa  Lazh^dinikov  wrote  his  Thoughts  in  ImitaHon  of  La 
Bfuyire,  which  was  published  in  The  Messenger  of  Europe.  His 
frther  having  lost  all  his  property,  he  accepted  a  government  posi- 
tion, bat  in  zSia  joined  the  army  and  with  it  went  through  the  whole 
FiKndi  campaign.  la  18x9  appeared  hia  Campaign  Memmm  ttf  a 
RuttUm  QH^etr^  which  are  fidl  of  yonthfnl  ardour,  patriotism,  and  a 
consciousness  of  the  European  importance  of  Russia.  Having  at- 
tracted the  attention  of  the  Court,  he  received  various  appointments, 
bnt  again  left  the  service  in  1826.  He  then  wrote  his  three  great 
novda  on  which  hia  lepotation  lesta,  aandy,  The  Last  NovUts^  The 
la  House,  and  The  Heretic  His  later  storiea  did  not  anatain  hia 
&me. 

In  English  has  appeared  The  Heretic,  translated  from  the  Russian 
of  Lajetchnikoff,  by  Thomas  B.  Shaw  (in  three  volmnes),  Edinburgh 
and  I«ondoo,  1844,  and  again,  nnder  the  title  The  HereHe  amd  ike 
MndqfMotem, «  Homamce  of  /Russia,  by  Tboa.  B.  Shaw,  Xiondon, 
1849^ 


112         The  Nineteenth  Century 


THE  HERETIC 
PROLOOUB 

It  was  the  27th  of  October,  1505.  As  if  for  the  coronation 
of  a  Tsar,  Moscow  was  decorated  and  adorned.  The  Cathe- 
dral of  the  Assumption,  the  Church  of  the  Annunciation, 
the  Stone  Palace,  the  Tower  Palace,  the  Kreml  with  its 
towers,  a  multitude  of  stone  churches  and  houses  scattered 
over  the  city — all  this,  just  come  out  of  the  hauds  of  skilful 
architects,  bore  the  stamp  of  freshness  and  newness,  as  if  it 
bad  riien  up  in  one  day  by  an  almighty  wilL  In  reality, 
all  this  liad  been  created  in  a  ibort  time  by  tbe  genius  of 
loAnn  III.  A  penon  wbo,  thirty  yearn  back»  bad  left  Mos- 
cow, poor,  insignificant,  resembling  a  large  village,  sor* 
lonnded  bamlets^  wonld  not  bave  recognised  it  bad  be 
seen  it  now;  so  soon  bsd  sll  Russia  arisen  at  tbe  single 
manly  call  of  tbis  great  genius. 

Taking  tbe  colossal  in&nt  under  bia  pcincdy  guardian- 
ship, he  had  torn  off  its  swaddling  bands^  and  not  by  years, 
but  by  bours,  he  reared  it  to  a  giant  vigour.  N6vgorod  and 
Pskov,  which  had  never  vailed  their  bonnet  to  mortal  man, 
had  yet  doffed  it  to  him,  and  had  even  brought  him  tbe 
tribute  of  liberty  and  gold:  the  yoke  of  the  Khans  had  been 
cast  off,  and  hurled  beyond  the  frontiers  of  the  Russian 
land;  Kazdn,  though  she  had  taken  cover  from  the  mighty 
hunter,  yet  had  taken  cover  like  the  she-wolf  that  has  no 
earth, — her  territories  had  melted  away,  and  were  united 
into  one  mighty  appanage;  and  the  ruler  who  created  all 
this  was  the  first  Russian  sovereign  who  realised  the  idea  of 
a  Tsar. 

Nevertheless,  on  the  27th  of  October,  1505,  the  Moscow 
which  he  had  thus  adorned  was  preparing  for  a  spectacle  not 
joyful  but  melancholy.  lodnn,  enfeebled  in  mind  and  body, 
lay  upon  bis  deatb-bed.  He  bsd  forgotten  bis  great  exploits; 
be  remembered  only  bis  sins,  and  repented  of  tbem. 

It  was  towards  the  evening-tide.  In  the  churcbes  gleamed 
tbe  lonely  lamps;  tbrougb  tbe  mica  and  bladder  pones  of  the 
windows  glimmered  tbe  fires,  kindled  in  tbebr  bouses  by  fitttb 


Digitized  by  Google 


Iv4a  Ivanovich  Lazh^chnikov  113 


or  by  necessity.  But  nowhere  was  it  popular  love  which 
had  lighted  them;  for  the  people  did  not  comprehend  the 
services  of  the  great  man,  and  loved  him  not  for  his  innova- 
tions. At  one  corner  of  the  prison,  the  Black  House,  but 
later  than  the  other  houses,  was  illumined  by  a  weak  and 
flickering  light.  On  the  bladder  which  was  the  substitute 
for  glass  in  the  window,  the  iron  grating,  with  its  spikes, 
threw  a  net-like  shadow,  which  was  only  relieved  by  a  speck, 
at  one  moment  glittering  like  a  spark,  at  another  emitting  a 
whirling  stream  of  vapour.  It  was  evident  that  the  prisoner 
had  made  this  opening  in  the  bladder,  in  order,  unpexoeived 
his  gnaxds,  to  look  forth  upon  the  light  of  heaven. 

This  was  part  of  the  prison,  and  in  it  even  now  was  pining 
a  yoatliM  captive.  He  Memed  not  mofe  than  twenty.  80 
yoongl  What  early  tranflgveaaion  oonld  have  brought  him 
here  ?  From  his  fiioe  you  would  not  believe  in  snch  trans- 
gressions; you  would  not  believe  that  Qod  ooold  have 
created  that  fidr  aspect  to  deceive.  So  handsome  and  so 
noble  that  you  would  think  never  had  one  evil  intention 
passed  over  that  tranquil  brow,  never  had  one  passion  played 
in  those  eyes,  filled  with  love  to  his  neighbour  and  calm 
melancholy.  And  yet,  by  his  tall  and  majestic  figure,  as  he 
starts  from  his  reverie,  and  shakes  his  raven  curls,  he  seems 
to  be  bom  a  lord,  and  not  a  slave.  His  hands  are  white 
and  delicate  as  a  woman's.  On  the  throat  of  his  shirt  blazes 
a  button  of  emerald;  in  the  damp  and  smoky  room,  on  a 
broad  bench  against  the  wall,  are  a  feather-bed  with  a  pillow 
of  damask,  and  with  a  silken  covering;  and  by  the  bedside 
a  coffer  of  white  bone  in  filigree  work.  Evidently  he  is  not 
a  common  prisoner.  No  common  prisoner! — no,  he  is  a 
crowned  prince! — and  pure  in  thought  and  deed  as  the 
dwellers  of  the  skies. 

All  his  crime  is  a  diadem,  which  he  did  not  seek,  and 
which  was  jdaced  on  his  head  by  the  caprice  of  his  sovereign ; 
In  no  treason^  In  no  crime  had  he  been  aooompUoe;  he  was 
guilty  by  the  guHt  of  others, —  by  the  ambition  of  two 
women,  the  Intrigues  of  the  courtiers,  the  anger  of  his  grand- 
&ther  against  the  others,  and  not  against  him.   They  had 

roL.  u.— a. 


Digitized  by  Gopgle 


114         The  Nineteenth  Century 


destined  him  a  throne,  and  they  had  dragged  him  to  a  das* 
geon.  He  understood  not  why  they  crowned  him,  and  now 
he  understands  not  why  they  deprived  him  of  liberty, — of 
the  light  of  heaven, — of  all  that  they  deny  not  even  to  the 
meanest.  For  him  his  nearest  kinsman  dared  not  even  pray 
aloud. 

This  was  the  grandson  of  Ivdn  III.,  the  only  child  of  his 
beloved  son, — Dmftri  Ivdnovich. 

At  one  time  he  sat  in  melancholy  musing,  resting  his 
elbows  on  his  knees,  and  losing  his  fingers  in  the  dark  curls 
of  bis  hair;  then  he  would  ariae^  then  lie  down.  He  was 
restless  as  though  they  had  given  him  poison.  No  one  was 
with  him.  A  solitary  taper  lighted  up  his  mlseiable  abode. 
The  stillness  of  the  room  was  disturbed  only  by  the  drops 
from  the  ceiling,  or  the  mice  nibUbg  the  crumbs  that  had 
ftllen  from  the  captive's  table.  The  little  light  now  died 
away,  now  flared  up  again;  and  in  these  flashes  it  seemed 
as  though  rows  of  gigantic  spiders  crept  along  the  wall.  In 
reality,  these  were  scribbling  in  various  languages,  scrawled 
with  charcoal  or  with  a  nail.  Hardly  was  it  possible  to  spell 
out  among  them — "  Matheas,"  "  Marfa,  burgomistress  of 

N6vgorod  the  Great,"  "Accursed  be  ,"  "  Liebe  Mutter,' 

liebe  A  and  several  words  more,  half  obliterated  by 

the  damp  which  had  trickled  along  the  wall,  or  been  scratched 
out  by  the  anger  or  the  ignorance  of  the  guards. 

The  door  of  the  dungeon  softly  opened.  Dmftri  Ivdnovich 
started  up.  "Af6niya,  is  it  thou?"  he  joyfully  enquired; 
but  seeing  that  he  had  mistaken  for  another  the  person  who 
entered,  he  exclaimed  sadly:  "Ah,  is  it  thou,  Nebogdty! 
Why  cometh  not  Af6uiya?  I  am  sad,  I  am  lonely,  I  am 
devoured  by  grief,  as  if  a  serpent  lay  at  my  heart  Didst 
thou  not  say  that  Aftniya  would  come  as  soon  as  they 
lighted  the  candles  in  the  houses?  " 

Afanisi  Nikftin  >  hath  a  mind  as  single  as  his  eye^"  said 
the  desooo  Dmftri  NebogAty,  a  kind  and  good-natmed  offi- 
cer, yet  strict  in  the  performance  of  the  diarge  given  him  by 
the  Great  Prince,  of  guarding  his  grandson.  (We  may  le- 

■See  vol.  i,  pb  III. 


Digitized  by  Google 


Iv4n  Iviinovich  Lazhdchnikov  115 


mark  that  at  this  time  lie^  In  eonaeqiMaioe  ol  tlie  iUneiB  of 
Dmitri,  the  treaaaier  and  groom  of  the  bedchamber,  fulfilled 
their  duties.  All  hononr  to  a  prince,  even  though  he  be  a 


*'  Make  thyadf  ea^,  Dmitri  Ivdnovich;  aoon,  be  auie, 
wiU  come  our  orator.  Thou  wotteat  thyself  he  groweth 
infirm^  he  seeth  not  well,  and  so  must  grope  along  the  wall; 
and  till  he  cometh,  my  dear  child,  play,  amuse  thyself  with 
thy  toys.  Sit  down  oosUy  on  thy  bed;  I  will  give  thee  thy 
coffer." 

And  Dmitri  Ivdnovich,  a  child,  though  he  was  more  than 
twenty  years  old,  to  escape  from  the  weariness  that  oppressed 
him,  instantly  accepted  the  proposition  of  his  deacon,  sat 
down  with  his  feet  on  his  bed,  took  the  ivory  box  upon  his 
knees,  and  opened  it  with  a  key  that  hung  at  his  girdle. 
By  degrees,  one  after  the  other,  he  drew  out  into  the  light  a 
number  of  precious  articles  which  had  been  imprisoned  in 
the  coffer. 

The  young  prince  held  up  to  the  fire,  now  a  chain  of  gold 
with  bears'  heads  carved  on  the  links,  or  a  girdle  of  scaly 
gold,  then  signet  rings  of  jacinth  or  emerald,  then  crucifixes, 
coUsjcSk  bnwelets,  predous  studs:  he  admired  fhem,  threw 
the  ooOars  round  his  neck,  and  adced  the  deacon  whether 
they  became  him;  took  orient  pearis  and  rubies  by  the  hand- 
ftd,  let  them  stream  like  rain  through  his  fingers,  amtised 
V'wftf'^  in  playing  with  them,  like  an  absolute  child— and 
suddenly,  hesring  a  voice  in  the  neighbouring  chamber, 
threw  them  all  bade  anyhow  into  the  coflier.  His  face 
lighted  up. 

"'T  is  Af6niya! "  he  cried,  giving  back  the  bOK  to  the 
deacon,  and  descending  from  the  bed. 

"  I<ock  it,  Dmftri  Ivdnovich!"  said  Nebog^'  finnly: 
**  without  that  I  will  not  receive  it." 

Hastily  clinked  the  key  in  the  coffer;  the  door  opened, 
and  there  entered  the  room  an  old  man  of  low  stature,  bowed 
down  by  the  burden  of  years;  the  silver  of  his  hair  was 
already  becoming  golden  with  age.  From  the  top  of  his 
head  to  the  comer  of  his  left  eye  was  deeply  gashed  a  scar, 


Digitized  by  Google 


ii6         The  Nineteenth  Century 


whidi  had  thus  let  fall  an  eternal  curtain  before  that  cgre, 
and  theiwfoce  the  other  waa  fixed  in  ita  place,  like  a  pradoaa 
alone  of  ^randroaa  water,  for  it  glittered  with  nnnaaal  bril- 
liancy, and  seemed  to  aee  for  itaelf  and  for  ita  tmlortanate 

twin  brother.  No  son  more  affectionately  meets  a  tenderly 
bdoved  father  than  Dmftri  Ivdnovich  met  the  old  man. 
Joy  aparkled  in  the  eyea  of  the  Tsar^vich,  and  apoke  in  hia 

every  g^ure. 

He  took  his  guest's  walkitic^-staff,  shook  from  his  dress 
the  powdered  snow,  embraced  him,  and  seated  him  in  the 
place  of  honour  on  his  bed.  Nevertheless,  the  guest  was  no 
more  than  Afan&si  Nikftin,  a  merchant  of  Tver,  a  trader 
without  trade,  without  money,  poor,  but  rich  in  knowledge, 
which  he  had  acquired  iu  an  adventurous  journey  to  India, 
rich  in  experience  and  fancies,  which  he  knew  how  to  adorn 
beside  with  a  sweet  and  enchanting  eloquence.  He  lived  on 
the  charity  of  his  friends,  and  yet  was  no  man's  debtor:  the 
rich  he  paid  with  his  tales,  and  to  the  poor  he  gave  them  for 
nothing.  He  was  allowed  to  viait  the  Great  Prince  l>mftri 
Ivdttovich  (whom,  however,  It  waa  fofUdden  to  call  Great 
Prince).  We  may  judge  how  delightftilly  he  filled  np  the 
dreadful  aolltode  of  the  yooth'a  Impriaonment,  and  how  dear 
he  therefore  waa  to  the  captive.  And  what  did  Dmitri  give 
him  for  hia  labour?  Modi,  very  much  to  a  good  heart,— 
his  delight,  the  only  ^leaanre  left  him  In  the  worid,— and 
thia  reward  the  Tver  man  would  not  have  exdianged  for 
gold.  Once  the  Taar^vich  had  desired  to  present  him  with 
one  of  the  predous  articles  from  his  ivory  box;  but  the 
deacon  gently  reminded  the  captive  that  all  the  artidea  in 
his  coffer  were  his,  that  he  might  play  with  them  as  much 
as  he  pleaaed,  but  that  he  waa  not  at  liberty  to  dispoae  of 
them. 

The  day  before  Afanisi  Nikftin  had  begun  a  tale  about 
the  "Almayne,"  sumamed  Heretic.  To-day,  when  he 
had  seated  himself,  he  continued  it.  His  speech  flowed  on 
like  the  song  of  a  nightingale,  which  we  listen  to  from  the 
flush  of  morning  till  the  glow  of  eve  without  shutting  our 
eyes  even  for  a  moment.   Greedily  did  the  Tsar^vich  listen 


Digitize<tby  Google 


Ivka  Iv&novich  Lazhicbnikov  117 


to  the  story-teller,  his  cheeks  burned,  and  often  tears  streamed 
from  his  eyes.  Far,  very  far,  he  was  borne  away  from  his 
dungeon,  and  only  from  time  to  time  the  rude  brawling  of 
the  guards  behind  the  partition- wall  recalled  him  to  bitter 
reality.  In  the  meantime  the  deacon  Nebogdty's  pen  was 
hurriedly  scratching  along  the  parchment:  the  sheets,  pasted, 
one  to  another  in  a  long  line,  were  fast  covered  with  strange 
hieroglyphics,  and  wound  up  into  a  huge  roll.  He  was 
writing  down  from  Afandsi  Nikitin's  mouth,  A  tale  touching 
0  €trittin  Abnayne,  swmmmti  &e  HaneUc, 

Suddenly,  in  the  midst  of  the  tale,  there  rushed  into  the 
dungeon  the  court  officer  of  the  Great  Prince.  "IvitoVas- 
flevkh  is  about  to  render  np  his  soul  to  Qod/'  said  he 
hastily; "  he  grieveth  mndi  about  thee^  and  hath  sent  tot 
thee.  Make  hastel  *' 

The  prince  was  convulsively  agitated.  Over  his  fiice, 
which  became  as  white  as  a  sheet,  pansrd  some  thought;  it 
flashed  in  his  eyes.  Oh,  this  was  a  thought  of  Pafadise! 

Freedom  a  crown  the  people  ^mercy  perhaps 

a  block  what  was  there  not  in  that  thought  ?  The  cap- 
tive—  the  child  who  had  just  been  pUying  with  jewds — 
arose  the  Great  Prince  of  all  Russia. 

Ivdn  was  still  a  sovereign,  though  on  his  dying  bed;  death 
had  not  yet  locked  for  ever  his  lips,  and  those  lips  might  yet 
determine  on  his  successor.  The  thoughts  of  another  life, 
remorse,  an  interview  with  his  grandson,  whom  he  had 
himself  of  his  own  free  will  crowned  Tsar,  and  whom  they 
had  just  brought  from  a  dungeon, — what  force  must  these 
thoughts  have  on  the  will  of  the  dying  man ! 

They  gave  the  prince  his  bonnet,  and  just  as  he  stood, 
conducted  by  the  deacon  and  other  officers,  he  hastened  to 
the  Great  Prince's  palace.  In  the  hall  he  enconnteied  the 
aobbing  of  the  kinsmen  and  servants  of  the  Taar.  "  It  is 
over! — ^My  grandsiie  is  deed! "  thought  he^  and  his  heart 
sunk  within  him,  his  steps  tottered. 

The  iqipearanoe  of  Dmitri  Ivdnovich  in  the  palace  of  the 
Great  Prince  interrupted  for  a  time  the  general  lamenta- 
tion, real  and  Idgnafl.  The  uneiq^wctedneas,  the  novelty 


Digitized  by  Google 


ii8         The  Nineteenth  Century 


of  the  object,  the  strange  fate  of  the  prince,  pity,  the  thought 
that  he,  perhaps,  would  be  the  sovereign  of  Russia  in  a  mo- 
ment, overwhelmed  the  minds  and  hearts  of  the  courtiers. 
But  even  at  this  period  there  were  among  the  long-beards 
some  wise  heads:  acute,  far-sighted  calculations,  which  we 
now  call  politics,  were  then  as  now  oracles  of  fieite,  and 
though  80iiietiiiM8»  as  happens  even  in  our  own  days,  they 
were  overthrown  b;  the  mighty  hand  of  Providence. 

These  calculations  triumphed  over  the  momentary  aston- 
ishment; the  tears  and  sobbing  began  again,  and  were 
communicated  to  the  crowd.  Only  one  voice,  amidst  the 
cxprcaaions  of  simulated  woe,  ventured  to  raise  itself  above 
them:  "  Haste,  my  lord,  our  native  prince,— thon  hast  been 
sent  for  no  short  time,— Iv&n  Vasflevich  is  yet  alive^— the 
Lord  bless  thee,  and  make  thee  our  Great  Prince!  " 

This  voice  reassured  the  youth;  but  when  he  was  about 
to  enter  the  bedchamber  where  the  dying  man  lay,  his 
strength  began  to  fail.  The  door  opened;  his  feet  seemed 
nailed  to  the  threshold.  Ivdn  had  only  a  few  minutes  left 
to  live.  It  seemed  as  if  death  awaited  only  the  arrival  of 
his  grandson,  to  give  him  his  dismissal.  Around  his  bed 
stood  his  sons,  the  primate,  his  favourite  boydra,  his  kins- 
men. 

*'  Hither, — to  me,  Dmftri, — my  dear  grandson,"  said  the 
Great  Prince,  recognising  him  through  the  mists  of  death. 

Dmitri  Ivduovich  threw  himself  towards  the  bed,  fell  upon 
his  knees,  kissed  the  cold  hand  of  his  grandsire,  and  bedewed 
it  with  tears.  The  dying  man,  as  if  by  the  power  of  galvan- 
ism, raised  himsd^  laid  one  hand  oo  his  grandson's  hesd, 
wfth  the  other  blessed  him,  then  spoke  in  a  breathless  voice: 
"  I  have  sinned  before  God  and  thee  Forgive  me  for- 
give ^The  Lord  and  I  have  crowned  thee  be  

The  &ce  of  Vasfli  loAnnovidi  was  convulsed  with  envy 

and  fear.   Yet  one  word  more  

But  death  then  stood  on  the  side  of  the  strongest,  and  that 
word  was  never  pronounced  in  this  world.  The  Great 
Prince  Iv4n  Vasilevich  yielded  up  his  last  breath,  applying 


Digitized  by  Google 


Iv4n  Iv4novich  Lazhdchnikov  119 


his  cold  lips  to  the  forehead  of  his  grandson.  His  son,  who 
had  been  earlier  designated  by  him  as  his  heir,  immediately 
entered  into  all  his  rights.  They  tore  Dmitri  from  the 
death-bed,  led  him  out  of  the  Great  Prince's  palace,  and 
conducted  him  back  to  his  dungeon.  There,  stretched  on 
his  bed,  was  reposing  Af6niya  in  the  deep  slumber  of  the 
just.  Having  bewailed  his  woes,  the  ill  fated  Dmitri  lay 
down  beside  the  old  man.  Prince  and  peasant  were  there 
equal.  The  one  dreamed  that  night  of  royal  banquets,  and 
of  a  glorious  crown,  glittering  like  fire,  upon  hit  head,  and 
of  giving  audience  to  fbfdgn  «mhewdon>  and  reviewing 
vast  annlcs;  the  otiier,  of  the  hospitable  pahn  and  the 
livnlet  in  the  deseita  of  Aiafala.  The  poor  man  awshed  the 
first,  and  how  was  he  snipiised  to  find  the  TaaiMch  by  his 
adel  Monnikdlj  he  shook  his  hoaiy  head,  and  wept,  and 
was  about  to  bless  him,  when  he  heard  the  jogrM  gallant  cry 

of  Dmitri  Ivtonrich  as  he  dreamed— "  Warrionl  on 

the  Tartars!  on  Lithuania!  " 

And  immediately  awoke  the  young  prince.  I<ong  he 
rubbed  his  eyes^  and  gased  around  him,  and  then,  falling 
on  Af6niya's  bosom,  he  melted  into  tears.  "Ah,  liather, 
father,  I  have  been  dreaming  " 

His  words  were  strangled  by  sobs. 

Soon  all  that  he  had  seen  and  heard  in  the  palace  of  the 
Great  Prince  began  to  appear  to  him  as  a  dream.  Only 
when  he  recalled  to  his  memory  that  weary  vision,  he  felt 
on  his  forehead  the  icy  seal  which  bad  been  placed  on  it  by 
the  lips  of  the  dying  Tsar. 

The  winter  came:  all  was  as  before  in  the  Black  House; 
nothing  but  the  decorations  of  the  scene  had  changed :  the 
uniform  sound  of  the  falling  drops  was  dumb,  the  bright 
speck  had  vanished  horn  the  bladder  window-pane;  instead, 
a  sihrcfy  film  of  frost  adhered  to  the  comeni  of  the  walls  and 
the  cievioes  of  the  ceiling,  and  the  bright  speck,  throngli 
whidi  the  captive  could  see  the  heavens,  with  their  sun  and 
ttt  birds,  was  veiled  with  a  thick  patch.  Bat  Af 6niya,  as 
ofdd,  viatedthednngeon.  He  had  finished  his  tale  of  the 
Almayne,  whom  they  called  the  Heretic,  and  the  scribe 


The  Nineteenth  Centuiy 


Nebog&ty»  putting  it  on  piQier  mid  for  word,  liad  placed 
the  roll  in  his  iron  chest,  —an  amttsement  for  bisdetoendaiits. 

Thus  passed  a  little  more  than  three  years. 

The  royal  prisoner  was  no  longer  in  the  dungeon,  and 
Afandsi  Nikitin  was  seen  no  more  within  it.  Assuredly 
Dmitri  Ivdnovich  had  been  set  at  liberty.  Yes,  the  Lord 
had  set  him  free  from  all  earthly  bonds.  Thus  writes  an 
annalist:  "In  the  year  1509,  on  the  fourteenth  of  February, 
departed  this  life  the  Grand  Prince  Dmitri  Ivdnovich,  in 
prison."  Gerberstein  adds:  "It  is  thought  he  was  starved 
—  with  cold  or  with  hunger  —  to  death,  or  stifled  with 
smoke."— Ftom  The  Heretic,  translated  from  the  Russian  by 
Thomas  B.  Sbaw,  Edinburgh  and  London,  1844. 

Baroo  Aiit6a  Aiit6novich  WM^.  (1798-1931.) 

D^vig  entered  the  Lyceum  at  TsiLrskoe-Sel6  on  the  aame  day  with 
Pisbkia,  wliote  friend  he  lenudaed  to  hia  dedh.  He  began  writing 
poeti7  at  aboot  the  same  time  ■■  his  move  gifted  schoofamite.  At 
first  he  confined  himself  to  more  or  lets  doee  imitations  of  Horace, 
but  under  Pushkin's  influence  he  soon  tnrned  his  attention  to  original 
poems.  Though  only  a  star  of  the  second  magnitude,  his  verses  be- 
came very  popular  and  were  let  to  mule.  Later  they  •erved  at  the 
8taiting<^poiat  ibr  the  popidar  poets,  K6lti6v,  Mekiiaov,  and  othns. 

GUX)MY  THOUGHTS 

To-day  I  feast  with  yon,  dear  finends, 

With      our  spirits  bum; 
To-morrow's  chance  may  find  me  there 

Whence  I  shall  not  return. 

Thus,  long  ago,  I  spake  to  those 

Who  were  with  merriment  wild; 
For  gloomy  thoughts  of  coming  grief 

Possessed  me  from  a  child. 

My  laughing  friends  around  my  lodka 

Bnwreathed  a  fresh  bright  crown: 
"  For  shame!  '*  they  cried;  "  youth  'a  not  a  time 

To  wear  a  moody  frown." 


Digitized  by  Google 


Baron  Antdn  Antdnovich  Ddvig  121 


War  breaking  out,  my  friends  to  it 

As  to  a  banquet  prest; 
I  with  them ;  but  me  cruel  fate 

Soon  parted  from  the  nat 

In  weuy  idleness  their  steps 

I  ibUovrad  mentslty; 
And  eft  their  relatives  I  cheered 

With  YTOcds  of  victofy. 

Time  passed :  the  thoughts  of  days  gone  by 

Sad  tears  of  sorrow  yield ; 
Then  ceased  the  war.   Where  are  my  friends  ? 

Dead  00  the  battlefield. 

Now  I  am  sorrowful  at  feasts, 

Where  others'  joy  is  greet; 
In  wine-cnps  e*en  tiie  past  recalled 

Embitters  all  my  state. 

— From  C.  T.  Wilson's  RussUm  Lyrics. 


Sang  a  little  bird,  and  sang, 

And  grew  silent ; 
Knew  the  heart  of  merriment, 

And  forgot  it; 
Why,  O  little  songster  bird, 

Grew  you  quiet  ? 
How  learned  you,  O  heart,  to  know 

Gloomy  sorrow  ? 
Ah !  the  little  bird  was  killed 

By  grim  snow-blasts; 
Perished  is  the  fellow  brave 

Through  ill  gossips! 
Had  the  bird  but  flown  away 

Tow'rds  the  bine  seal 
Had  the  youth  hot  run  away 

Toiw'fdstheftMtl 


122         The  Nineteenth  Centuty 


On  the  sea  the  billows  rott, 
And  not  suow  blasts; 

In  the  woods  are 
And  not  people  I 


Ah,  you  night,  you  little  night! 
Ah,  you  night,  yon  stormy  night  1 
Why  ham  early  evening  tide 
Bven  to  the  midnight  late 
Twinkle  not  your  litUe  fltan, 
Shineth  not  your  fnU-efbed  moon  f 
Yon  axe  veiled  with  deikling  doudal 
'T  is  with  yon,  Ithink,  O  idght, 
Bven  aa  with  me,  young  man, — 
Villain  grief  haa  called  on  na! 
When  the  dire  one  takes  abode 
Somewhere  deep  within  the  heait,— 
You  focget  the  lasaea  lair, 
Dances  and  obeisanoea  ; 
You  forget  from  evening  tide 
Even  to  the  midnight  late, 
Singing  songs,  to  take  delight 
In  the  chorus  and  the  dance. 
No,  you  sob,  you  weep  aloud,— 
And,  a  sad  and  lonely  lad, 
You  upon  your  coarse  straw  bed 
Throw  yourself  as  in  the  grave! 

Aleksftodr  SergyteWch  Pfishldii.  (1799-1837.) 

PAthkio  was  descended,  on  his  father's  side,  from  a  family  of  dis- 
tingoisbed  men,  and,  on  his  mother's  side,  from  Peter  the  Greet* ■ 
fiivonrite  n^io^  HaaidbaL  Having  ctily  lott  hif  modier,  he  ww 

brought  up  by  his  grandmother,  bnt  the  grwrtett  influence  upon  his 
first  education  had  his  nurse,  Arfna  Rodi6novna,  who  charmed  him 
with  her  rich  stock  of  populaur  stories  and  fairy  tales,  and  who,  even 
later  in  life,  inspired  him  with  national  themes.  In  181 1  Piishkin 
entend  Uie  newly  opened  Lyceomat  TliifdEoeSddb  whcie  he  did  not 
diipUy  any  especial  aptitode  fiir  itiidies;  bat  lie  toon  began  to  write 


Digitized  by  Google 


Alekscindr  Seigydevich  Pushkin  123 


poetry,  and  in  1817,  at  graduation,  read  his  own  production  which 
attracted  attention.  After  leaving  school  he  threw  himself  into 
fbe  wUrl  «f  aodelj  plearafca,  bnt  at  tlae  atme  tinie  devoted  taimidf 
to  Ids  first  great  poem,  still  in  the  Romantic  atyle  of  the  older  gener- 
ation, Rusl&n  and  Lyudmlla.  In  1820  he  incurred  the  displeasure  of 
the  Government  for  writing  some  verses  on  liberty  and  for  his  liberal 
Qtterances.  He  was  banished  to  the  south,  passing  part  of  the  time 
in  the  Cancasiis.  Here  hie  genina  was  unfolded  in  all  itsgreetneM. 
Li  the  Caacarai  he  urate  Tkt  Msoner  0/  Uke  Cauauusj  fheCrimee 
gave  him  material  for  his  Bakhchtsar&y  Fountain  ;  in  the  neighbonr* 
hood  of  Odessa  he  composed  his  Gypsies  and  laid  the  foundation  for 
£t^ini  Onyegin,  besides  writing  a  large  number  of  smaller  poems. 
In  1824  Pfiahkin  was  pennitted  to  return  to  hia  native  village,  in  the 
Government  of  Pdiov,  where  he  remained  two  yean,  after  whidi  he 
was,  by  the  intercession  of  his  friends,  allowed  to  settle  in  the  ca|iip 
tala.  In  this  last  period  of  his  activity*  he  devoted  himself  more 
especially  to  subjects  taken  from  Russian  life.  He  wrote  his  series  of 
finry  tales,  illustrated  the  acts  of  Peter  the  Great  by  a  number  of 
poems,  of  which  The  Bramat  Rider  ia  the  beat  known,  and  wrate  a 
Histoiy  ^  Hm  Ptig^Mn  RiMUm.  AMpmian  upon  hia  domestic 
life  caused  him  to  diallenge  to  a  duel  the  son  of  the  Dntdi  ambaiaa- 
dor,  by  whom  he  was  killed  in  1837,  in  his  thirty-eighth  year, 

Pushkin's  great  poetical  genius  has  not  been  surpassed  by  that  of 
any  other  Russian  poet,  and  has  only  been  equalled  by  that  of  L^- 
montov.  AH  the  later  genentiona  have  drawn  their  inapiration  fiom 
Uok  Since  the  forties  his  importance  has  been  obscnied  hf  the 
universal  domination  of  the  democratic  spirit  in  literature,  as  evi- 
denced in  the  Russian  novel.  The  celebration  of  the  centennary  an- 
niverMry  of  his  birth  has  given  rise  to  a  wide-spread  interest  in 
PAahkin,  and  hia  inflnence  ia  again  in  the  aaeendant 

PAahkin*t  proae  talea  have  often  been  translated  into  Bi^liah : 
Queen  of  Spades^  in  Chambers's  Papers,  1850,  and  Living  Age,  1850, 
also  in  Gift  of  Friendship,  1854 ;  The  Captain* s  Daughter,  translated 
by  J.  P.  Hanstein,  London,  1859;  some  tales  in  Simple  Tales,  a 
Reading  Book  for  LitUe  Fdks,  by  Ifary  Anna  Pietzker.  St.  Petezs- 
hofg,  i860;  TkePitMsMt  in  the  Allrioa,  x86i;  Rmtskm  Romemee 
(consisting  of  miscellaneous  tales),  by  Mrs.  J.  6.  Telfer  {nU  Mour- 
avieflf),  London,  1873  and  1880;  Quern  0/  Spades,  in  Lippincott's 
Magazine,  1876;  Marie,  a  Story  0/  Russian  Lo-r,  by  Marie  H.  de 
Zielinska,  Chicago,  1877  (1876) ;  The  Captain's  Daughter^  a  Tale  0/ 
ike  Time  ^  QOkeHme  It.  of  Rmria,  trandated  by'Madane  I^- 
atrSm  and  Mrs.  Percy  Baston,  London,  1883 ;  Qaeen  of  Slpades,  in 
Modem  Age,  1884;  lite  Daughter  of  the  Commandant,  a  Russian 
Romance,  Uaoalated  by  Mra.  Milne  Home,  London,  1891 ;  Tke  Q$ieem 


124         The  Nineteenth  Century* 


of  Spades  and  Other  Stories,  from  the  Ruaaian,  by  Mrs.  Sutherland 
Bdwarda  (the  first  three  stories  had  appeared  before  in  the  Strand 
IfagniBe),*  London,  1898;  T^aUt  fivm  ike  Rmtsitm,  "L^Dmtmni^ 
(in  Railway  and  General  Antomatic  Library),  London,  1893;  Th$ 
Prose  Tales  of  A,  AmskMm,  from  the  Biwain,  bj  X.  Xcoae^  I<oadoa, 
J894  and  1896. 

Of  his  poetical  works  the  following  have  been  trcmslated :  BilticU 
fioni  JUtuUm  omdLjmdmUa,  TV/Wmmt,  Tkg  Jlobden,  la  Jhudam 
LUumimn  Md  Jbeiiy,  la  Vtotdga  Bovkw,  1807 ;  eaUiito  fron  Tke 
Foumiaim  of  Bakhchisarfy  aad  JhUava  in  The  Foreign  Quarterly 

Review,  1832 ;  The  Talisman,  with  Other  Pieces  (7%^  Mertnii),  trans- 
lated by  George  Borrow,  St.  Petersburg,  1835 ;  Pushkin,  the  Russian 

Bfet  (containing  October  /p,  z&pj,  Comcosus,  To  ,  Tkt  Mob^  Tke 

Skuk  Skamt^  Tke  JKmtt  NapoUomt  Tk§  Sloim,  Tk§  Gemmi,  Aits 
for  Her,  7b  llr  Sea,  Echo,  The  Lay  of  ike  Wise  Oleg,  Memgm^ 
brance,  I  have  outlived  the  hopes  that  charmed  me,  Afotion,  To  the 
Slanderers  of  Russia,  Presentiment,  The  Madonna,  Andri  Chtnier), 
by  T.  &  Shaw,  in  The  Bdinbnrgh  Blackwood  Magazine,  1845 ;  Tk€ 
BakkikimHam  Fbmiaim,  W.  D.  Lewis,  FUlAdelphia,  1849;  ietml 
poeaM,  hj  W.  R.  MotfiU,  la  OoMtitatloBol  PM,  i860;  Om  ike 
Calumniaion  ^Russia,  by  W.  R.  Morfill,  in  Literary  Gosette,  1861 ; 
Translations  from  Russian  and  German  Poets,  by  a  Russian  Lady 
(containing  two  extracts  from  Tlie  Gypsies,  The  Poet,  The  Angel, 
The  /9th  of  October,  The  Demon,  and  several  minor  poems),  Baden- 
Boden,  1878 ;  Eugene  On^gmiite,  twnoloffd  by  lient,  OoL  Sp^ldiag, 
Loodoa,  x88i;  Tke  Biaek  Skmml,  The  Talisman,  Ode  to  the  Sea,  and 
several  extracts  (the  first  two,  amended,  in  The  Story  of  Russia,  New 
York  and  London,  1890),  by  W.  R.  Morfill,  in  Westminster  Review, 
1883 ;  The  Flower,  The  Birds,  The  Bridegroom,  The  Winterfoumey, 

Tke  Anchor,  PMava,  Song  of  Oleg  ike  Wise,  7b  ,  Tke  Angel, 

Tke  Demons,\nC*'t,Viiiam*a  Jhutim  Lynet^lMO^  Ibems 
by  Alexander  Pushkin,  translated  by  Ivan  Panin,  Boston,  18SS  ;  parts 
of  Boris  Godunov  in  Shakespeare  and  the  Russian  Drama,  by  N.  H. 
Dole,  in  Poet  Lore,  vol.  i.  (1889) ;  /  wander  dozvn  the  noisy  streets, 
Anacreontic,  To  his  Wife,  Let  me  not  lose  my  senses,  I  *ve  oveidived 
n^iringStMerikeGnatt  Tke  nvpkei^  /fey,  ify  Xbikieen,  A  Mbmrn* 
menit  7%e  Peei,  la  John  PoUca'a  Jikymesfiim  ikellussian,  London, 
1891.  In  Free  Russia  have  appeared :  by  Charlotte  Sidgwick,  in  vol. 
X.,  No.  I,  The  Poison-Tree,  ib.,  No.  3,  The  Monument ;  by  Mrs.  M. 
G.  Walker,  in  vol.  x.,  No.  4,  The  Prophet;  by  Elizabeth  Gibson,  voL 
sii..  No.  2,  A  Message,  In  The  Anglo-Russian  Literary  Society  haire 
been  pabllshed :  oome  ^eioei,  by  a  RnMloa  lady,  la  No.  xi ;  by  P.  P. 
ICarchant,  5(Sm^'  from  "Boris  Godunov,''  in  No.  13,  The  Shield  of 
deg.  In  No.  25,  TkeAtfpkei,  Tke  Three  brings,  TkeH^ojfee,  Tmik, 


Digitized  by  Google 


Aleks&ndr  Sergydevich  P6shkin  125 


in  No.  22,  To  My  Friends,  in  No.  3a ;  by  J.  Pollen,  The  TalUmaH^ 
in  No.  22  ;  by  Miss  H.  Frank,  The  Demons,  in  No.  34 ;  by  L.  A.  Mag- 
nus, Through  clam'rous  streets  my  feet  may  stray,  in  No.  33.  In  the 
Library  of  tbe  World's  Best  Literature  are  given  :  by  N.  H.  Dole,  The 
Bard^  Th§  Angela  TV  Life  of  the  Bird  (•  dUferent  venioB  of 
aSaoM  poem  to  given  below) ;  reprints  of  several  of  T.  B.  Sluiw't  and  J. 
Pollen's  poems,  and  extracts  fiom  Bwis  Gotkmam  tad  Bvgeni 
Ongftgim^  bj  Mist  L  Hapgood. 

FROM  "THfi  CAPTAIN'S  DAUGHTER" 

As  I  crossed  the  square  I  saw  several  Bashkirs  assembled 
round  the  gibbets,  engaged  in  dragging  oflf  the  boots  of  those 
who  had  been  hanged.  With  difficulty  I  repressed  my  in- 
dignation, feeling  convinced  that  if  I  gave  expression  to 
it,  it  would  have  been  perfectly  useless.  The  brigands  in- 
vaded every  part  of  the  fortress,  and  plundered  the  officers' 
houses.  On  every  side  reaoonded  tlie  ahontsof  the  dnmken 
mndneexs.  I  readied  home.  Sav^lidi  met  me  on  the 
thxeahold. 

''Thank  Godl "  he  frrlaimrd  when  he  aaw  me;  "  I  waa 
beginning  to  think  that  the  villains  had  seized  you  again. 
Ah!  my  Uttie  father,  F«ter  Andii£ich,  will  yoa  hdieve  it, 
the  lobbeia  have  plondeved  na  of  everything--doChe8,  linen, 
fnrnititte,  plate— ^iiey  hove  not  left  na  a  dngle  thing.  But 
what  doea  it  matter  ?  Thank  Godl  they  have  spared  your 
life.    But,  my  lord,  did  you  recognise  their  leader  ? 

"  No,  I  did  not  recognise  him.    Who  is  he  then  ?  " 

'  *  How,  my  little  father  1  Have  you  forgotten  that  dnmken 
scoundrel  who  swindled  you  oat  of  the  pelisse  at  the  inn  ? 
A  brand  new  hairskin  pelisse;  and  the  beast  bnzst  the  seams 
in  putting  it  on." 

I  was  astounded.  In  truth,  the  resemblance  of  Pugach6v 
to  my  guide  was  ver>'  striking.  I  felt  convinced  that  Pug- 
ach^v  and  he  were  one  and  the  same  person,  and  then  I 
understood  why  he  had  spared  my  life.  I  could  not  but  feel 
surprised  at  the  strange  connection  of  events — a  child's  pe- 
lisse, given  to  a  roving  vagrant,  had  saved  me  from  the  hang- 
man's noose,  and  a  drunkard,  who  had  passed  his  life  in 


Digitized  by  Google 


126         The  Nineteenth  Century 


^mndering  from  one  inn  to  another,  was  now 
fortresses  and  shaking  the  empire! 

"Will  you  not  eat  something?"  asked  Sav^Iich,  still 
faithful  to  his  old  habits.  "  There  is  nothing  in  the  house; 
but  I  will  go  and  search,  and  get  something  ready  for  you." 

When  I  was  left  alone,  I  began  to  reflect.  What  was  I  to 
do  ?  To  remain  in  the  fortress  now  that  it  was  in  the  hands 
of  the  villain,  or  to  join  his  band,  was  unworthy  of  an  officer. 
Duty  demandtd  that  I  ahould  go  wherever  my  services 
might  stni  he  of  use  to  my  frtiwrland  in  the  prasent  ciitieal 

positioii  of  its  affairs  But  loive  strongly  urged  me  to 

remain  near  Maria  IWbovna  and  be  her  ptotector  and  de- 
lender.  Although  I  foresaw  a  speedy  and  inevitable  diange 
in  the  oomsse  of  aflhira,  yet  I  ooold  not  help  trembling  when 
I  thought  of  the  danger  of  her  situation.  If  y  reflsctionB 
were  interrupted  by  the  arrival  of  one  of  the  Cossacks,  who 
came  to  inform  me  that  "  the  great  Tsar  required  me  to 
appear  before  him." 

"  Where  is  he  ? "  I  asked,  preparing  to  obey. 

In  the  Commandant's  house,"  replied  the  Cossack. 
After  dinner  our  father  took  a  bath,  but  at  present  he  is 
resting.  Ah !  your  Excellency,  it  is  very  evident  that  he  is 
a  distinguished  person;  at  dinner  he  deigned  to  eat  two 
roasted  sucking  pigs,  then  he  entered  the  bath,  where  the 
water  was  so  hot  that  even  Tards  Kdrochkin  could  not  bear 
it;  he  had  to  give  the  besom  to  Fomkd  Bikbdev,  and  only 
came  to  himself  through  having  cold  water  poured  over  him. 

There  is  no  denying  it;  all  his  ways  are  majestic  And 

I  was  told  that  in  the  bath  he  showed  his  Tsar's  signs  upon 
his  breast:  on  one  side  a  two-headed  eagle  as  large  as  a  fiv^ 
kopek  piece,  and  on  the  other  his  own  likeness." 

I  did  not  consider  it  neoeaaary  to  contradict  the  Oossack'a 
statement,  and  I  accompanied  him  to  the  Commandant's 
house,  trying  to  imagine  beforehand  what  kind  of  a  neep^ 
tioo  I  should  meet  with  from  Pugachdv,  and  endeavouring 
to  guess  how  it  would  end.  The  reader  will  easily  under- 
stand that  I  did  not  by  any  means  feel  easy  within  myself. 
It  was  beginning  to  get  dark  when  I  reached  the  Com- 


t « 


Digitized  by  Google 


Aleks&ndr  Seigytevich  Piishkin  127 


mandant's  house.  The  gibbet,  with  its  victtma^  loomed 
black  and  terrible  before  me.  The  body  of  the  poor  Com* 
mandant's  wife  still  lay  at  the  bottom  of  the  steps,  near 
which  two  Cossacks  stood  on  guard.  The  Cossack  who  ac- 
companied me  went  in  to  announce  me,  and,  returning 
almost  immediately,  conducted  me  into  the  room  where,  the 
evening  before,  I  had  taken  a  tender  farewell  of  Maria 
Ivdnovna.  An  unusual  spectacle  presented  itself  to  my 
gaze.  At  a  table,  covered  with  a  cloth  and  loaded  with 
bottles  and  glasses,  sat  Pugach^v  and  some  half  a  score  of 
Cossack  chiefs,  in  coloured  caps  and  shirts,  heated  with  wine, 
with  flushed  faces  and  dashing  eyes.  I  did  not  see  among 
them  Shvabnn  and  his  fellow  traitor,  the  orderly. 

"Ah I  your  Excellency!"  said  Pugach6v,  aeeing  me. 
"  Wdoome;  hooonr  to  700  and  a  place  at  onr  banqnet'* 

The  guests  moved  doser  together.  I  sat  down  silently  at 
the  end  of  the  table.  My  neighbour,  a  young  Coaaoct,  taU 
and  handaomft,  poured  out  lor  me  a  glaaa  ct  wine»  which, 
Jiowever,  I  did  not  touch.  I  began  to  obaerve  the  company 
with  curiosity.  Pugach6v  occupied  the  seat  of  honour,  his 
elbows  resting  on  the  table,  and  his  broad  fist  propped 
under  his  black  beard.  His  features,  regular  and  sufficiently 
agreeable,  had  nothing  fierce  about  them.  He  frequently 
turned  to  speak  to  a  man  of  about  fifty  years  of  age,  address- 
ing him  sometimes  as  Count,  sometimes  as  Timof^ch,  some- 
times as  uncle.  All  those  present  treated  each  other  as 
comrades,  and  did  not  show  any  particular  respect  for  their 
leader.  The  conversation  was  upon  the  revolt,  and  of  their 
future  operations.  Each  one  boasted  of  what  he  had  done, 
expressed  his  opinion,  and  fearlessly  contradicted  Pugach6v. 
And  in  this  strange  council  of  war  it  was  resolved  to  march 
upon  Orenbiirg;  a  bold  movement,  and  which  was  to  be 
very  nearly  crowned  with  success.  The  march  was  fixed 
for  the  following  day. 

"  Now,  lads,"  said  Pugach6v,  "  before  we  retire  to  rest, 
let  us  have  my  fimiurite  song.  Chmnakdv,  begin ! " 

My  neighbour  sang,  in  a  thrill  vdce,  the  following  melan- 
choly peasant's  song,  and  all  joined  in  the  chorus: 


128         The  Nineteenth  Century 


*'  Stir  not,  mother,  green  forest  of  oak, 
Disturb  me  not  in  my  meditation; 
For  to-morrow  before  the  court  I  must  go, 
Before  the  stem  judge,  before  the  Tsar  himself. 
The  great  Lord  Tsar  will  begin  to  question  me: 
*  Tell  me,  young  man,  tell  me,  thou  peasant's  son, 
With  whom  have  you  stolen,  with  whom  have  you  robbed  ? 
Did  you  have  many  companions  with  you  ? ' 
'  I  will  tell  you,  tme-beUeviag  Tftar, 
Tbe  whole  trafh  I  will  oonfeis  to  yon. 
My  companions  wm  ioor  in  number: 
My  first  companion  was  tbe  dark  nigkt. 
My  second  companion  was  a  sted  knife^ 
My  tiifid  companion  was  my  good  liome» 
My  Ibosth  companioa  was  my  tant  bow, 
My  inf  nwngf  HI  were  my  tempered  arrows.' 
Then  speaks  my  hope,  the  tme-believing  Taar: 
'  Well  done,  my  lad,  brave  peasant's  son; 
You  knew  how  to  steal,  you  knew  how  to  reply: 
Therefore,  my  lad,  I  will  make  you  a  present 
Of  a  very  high  structure  in  the  midst  of  a  field — 
Of  two  upright  posts  with  a  cross-beam  above.'  " 

It  is  impossible  to  describe  the  effect  produced  upon  me 
by  this  popular  gallows  song,  trolled  out  by  men  destined 
for  the  gallows.  Their  ferocious  countenances,  their  sonor- 
ous voices,  and  the  melancholy  expression  which  th^ 
imparted  to  the  words,  which  in  themselves  were  not  vecy 
expressive,  filled  me  with  a  sort  of  poetical  terror. 

The  guests  drank  another  glass,  then  rose  firam  the  table 
and  took  leave  of  Pagach6r. 

I  wanted  to  follow  them,  bat  Pugach^  said  to  me: 

"^tdowa;  I  want  to  speak  to  yon." 

We  remained  &ce  to  &oe. 

For  some  moments  we  both  continued  silent.  Pugach^v 
looked  at  me  fixedly,  eveiy  now  and  then  winking  his  left 
eye  with  a  curious  exprearion  of  craftiness  and  drollery. 
At  last  he  bnrst  ont  langhing,  and  with  such  unfeigned 


Digitized  by  Google 


Aleks&ndr  Sergy^evich  P6shkin  129 


merriment  tliat  I,  too^  looUag  at  liliti>  b^gaa  to  kngh, 
without  knowing  why. 

"  Well,  yonr  lordahip,"  he  said  to  mt, "  confess  now,  yon 
were  in  a  terrible  fright  wlien  my  fellows  put  the  rope  round 
yonr  neck.   I  do  not  believe  that  tlie  sky  appeared  bigger 

than  a  sheepskin  to  you  just  then  You  would  have 

been  strung  up  to  the  crossbeam  if  it  had  not  been  for  your 
servant.  T  knew  the  old  fellow  at  once.  Well,  would  your 
lordship  have  thought  that  the  man  who  conducted  yon  to 
the  inn  was  the  great  Tsar  himself  ?  '* 

Here  he  assumed  an  air  of  mystery  and  importance. 

**  You  have  been  guilty  of  a  serious  offence  against  me/* 
continued  he,  *  *  but  I  pardoned  you  on  account  of  your 
virtue,  and  because  you  rendered  me  a  service  when  I  was 
compelled  to  hide  myself  from  my  enemies.  But  you  will 
see  something  very  different  presently!  You  will  see  how  I 
will  rewmd  yoa  wken  I  enter  into  possesrion  of  my  king- 
dom! Will  you  promifle  to  serve  me  with  Ml?" 

The  naeal's  question,  and  his  insolence,  appesxed  to  me 
so  amusing  that  I  could  not  help  smiling. 

"  Why  do  you  smile?  '*  he  asked,  frowning.  "  Feifaaps 
you  do  not  believe  that  I  am  the  great  Tsar  ?  Is  that  so  ?— 
Answer  plainly  I*' 

I  became  confused.  To  scknowledge  a  vagabond  aa  em- 
peror was  quite  out  of  the  question ;  to  do  so  seemed  to  me 
unpardonable  cowaidioe.  To  tell  him  to  his  face  that  he 
was  an  imposter  was  to  expose  myself  to  certain  death,  and 
that  which  I  was  prepared  to  say  beneath  the  gibbet  before 
the  eyes  of  the  crowd,  in  the  first  outburst  of  my  indigna- 
tion, appeared  to  me  now  a  useless  boast.  I  hesitated.  In 
gloomy  silence  Pugach^v  awaited  my  reply.  At  last  (and 
even  now  I  remember  that  moment  with  self-satisfaction)  the 
sentiment  of  duty  triumphed  over  my  human  weakness.  I 
replied  to  Pugachdv: 

"  Listen,  I  will  tell  you  the  whole  truth.  Judge  yourself: 
can  I  acknowledge  you  as  emperor  ?  You,  a  sensible  mau, 
would  know  that  it  would  not  be  saying  what  I  really 
thought." 

roL.  It.— 9. 


I 


Digitized  by  Google 


I30         The  Nineteenth  Centuiy 


"  Who  am  I,  then,  in  your  opinioii  ?  " 

"  God  only  knows;  bat  whatever  yon  may  be^  yon  are 

playing  a  dangeioiisgame.*' 

Pngachdv  threw  a  rapid  glance  at  me. 

"Then  you  do  not  believe,"  said  he,  "that  I  am  the 
Emperor  Peter?  Well,  be  it  so.  But  is  not  success  the 
reward  of  the  bold  ?  Did  not  Grisbka  Otr6pev  reign  in 
former  days  ?  Think  of  me  what  you  please,  but  do  not 
leave  me.  What  does  it  matter  to  you  one  way  or  the 
other?  Whoever  is  pope  is  father.  Serve  me  faithfully 
and  truly,  and  I  will  make  you  a  field-marshal  and  a  prince. 
What  do  you  say  ?  *' 

"  No,"  I  replied  with  firmness.  "  I  am  by  birth  a  noble- 
man; I  have  taken  the  oath  of  fealty  to  the  Empress;  I  can- 
not serve  you.  If  you  really  wish  me  well,  send  me  back  to 
Orenbiirg." 

Pugach^  reflected. 

"  But  if  I  let  yoti  go^'*  said  be,  "  win  you  at  leart  pramiae 
not  to  serve  againat  me  ?  " 

"  Howcanlpfomiae  yon  tbat?"  I  replied.  "Yonyomv 
aelf  know  that  it  does  not  depend  npon  my  wilL  If  I  am 
ordered  to  march  against  you,  I  must  go— there  is  no  help 
for  it  Yoayonrself  are  nowachief;  yon  demand  obedience 
fiom  your  fbUoweni.  How  would  it  seem  if  I  refused  to 
serve  when  my  services  were  needed  ?  My  life  is  in  yoor 
hands;  if  you  set  me  free,  I  will  thank  you;  if  you  put  me 
to  death,  God  will  be  your  judge;  but  I  have  told  yon  the 
truth." 

My  frankness  struck  Pugachdv. 

"Be  it  so,"  said  he,  slapping  me  upon  the  shoulder. 
**  One  should  either  punish  completely  or  pardon  com- 
pletely. Go  then  where  you  like.  Come  to-morrow  to  say 
good-bye  to  me,  and  now  go  to  bed.  I  feel  very  drowsy 
myself." 

I  left  Pugach^v  and  went  out  into  the  street.  The  night 
was  calm  and  cold.  The  moon  and  stars  were  shining 
brightly,  lighting  up  the  square  and  the  gibbet.  In  the 
fortress  all  was  dark  and  stiU.  Only  in  the  tavern  was  a 


Aleks^dr  Sergydevich  Pushkin  131 


light  visible,  where  ccmld  be  heard  the  noise  of  the  late 
revellers.  I  glanced  at  the  pope's  house.  The  shutters  and 
doOfS  were  aSoseA,   Everything  iMemed  quiet  within. 

I  made  my  way  to  my  own  quaitan  and  found  Sav^lich 
grieving  about  my  abesDoe.  Tbe  news  a(  my  bdi^  aet  at 
liberty  filled  Idm  with  imuttefaUe  joy. 

'* Thaoka  be  to  Thee,  Ahnighty  Godl"  said  he»  qukiiis 
the  aign  of  the  cioaa.  "At  daybreak  to-mociow  we  wOl 
iBKvt  the  f ortreaa  and  go  wherever  God  will  direct  vs.  1  • 
have  prepared  aomethiDg  for  you;  eat  it,  my  little  lather, 
and  then  rest  youradf  till  the  morning,  as  if  yon  were  in  the 
bosom  of  Christ.'* 

I  followed  his  advice  and,  having  eaten  with  a  good  appe> 
tite,  I  fell  asleep  upon  the  bare  floor,  worn  out  both  in  body 
and  mind.— From  T.  Keane's  Tke  Prote  Tales  <^  AUxmukr 

FROM  "EVGENI  ONYEGIN" 
TATvAKii's  wnrBR  to  casrrfSGix 

I  write  to  you !    Is  more  required  ? 
Can  lower  depths  beyond  remain  ? 
*T  is  in  your  power  now,  if  desired, 
To  crush  me  with  a  just  disdain. 
But  if  my  lot  unfortunate 

You  in  the  least  commiserate 
You  will  not  all  abandon  me. 
At  first  I  clung  to  secrecy : 
Believe  me,  of  my  present  shame 
Yon,  never  wonld  have  heard  the  name, 

II  the  fond  hope  I  conld  have  fanned 
At  times,  if  only  oooe  a  week. 

To  see  yon  by  oar  fireside  stand, 
To  listen  to  the  words  yon  spesk. 
Address  to  you  one  single  phrase 
And  then  to  meditate  for  days 
Of  one  thing  till  again  we  met. 
'T  is  said  you  are  a  misanthrope^ 


Digitized  by  Google 


The  Nineteenfh  Century 


In  ootmtry  aolitiide  yov  flope^ 

And  vft  an  onattractive  set — 

Can  hearty  welvx>me  give  alonie. 

WI17  did  70a  visit  oar  poor  piaee? 

Forgotten  in  the  village  lone, 

I  never  should  have  seen  your  face 

And  bitter  torment  never  known. 

The  untutored  spirit's  pangs  calmed  down  | 

By  time  (who  can  anticipate  ?)  \ 

I  had  found  my  predestinate, 

Become  a  faithful  wife  and  e'en 

A  fond  and  careful  mother  been. 

Another!  to  none  other  I 

My  heart's  allegiance  can  resign, 

My  doom  has  been  pnxDoanoed  on  high, 

'T  is  Heaven's  will  and  I  am  thine. 

The  anm  cf  my  existence  gone 

But  promise  of  onr  meeting  gave, 

I  fed  thon  wast  by  God  sent  down 

My  guardian  angel  to  the  grave, 

Thon  didst  to  me  in  dreams  appear, 

Unseen  thon  wast  already  dear. 

Thine  eye  subdued  me  with  strange  glance^ 

I  heard  thy  voice's  resonance 

Long  ago.    Dream  it  cannot  be ! 

Scarce  hadst  thou  entered  thee  I  knew, 

I  flushed  up,  stupefied  I  grew, 

And  cried  within  myself:  't  is  he! 

Is  it  not  truth?  in  tones  suppressed 

With  thee  I  conversed  when  I  bore 

Comfort  and  succour  to  the  poor. 

And  when  I  prayer  to  Heaven  addressed 

To  ease  the  anguish  of  my  breast. 

Nay  I  even  as  this  instant  fled, 

Was  it  not  thou,  O  vision  bright, 

That  glimmered  through  the  radiant  night 

And  gently  hovered  o*er  my  head  ? 


Digitized  by  Google 


Aleks&ndr  Sergydevich  P6shkin 

/ 

Was  it  not  thou  who  thus  didst  stoop 
To  whisper  coahxt,  love,  and  hope? — 
Whoart  thoa?  Guardian  aogel  sent 
Or  torturer  malevolent? 
Doubt  and  uncertainty  dedde:  - 
All  this  may  be  an  empty  dream, 
Ddtnioos  of  a  mind  nstiicd. 
Providence  otherwise  may<leeil^ 
Then  be  it  so!    My  destiny 
From  henceforth  T  confide  to  theel 
Lo!  at  thy  feet  my  tears  I  pour 
And  thy  protection  I  implore. 
Imagine!    Here  alone  am  I! 
No  one  my  anguish  comprehends. 
At  times  my  reason  almost  bends, 
And  silently  I  here  must  die- 
But  I  await  thee:  scarce  alive, 
My  heart  with  but  one  look  revive; 
Or  to  disturb  my  dreams  approach 
AlasI  with  merited  reproacii. 

'Tis  finished.  HorriUe  to  read! 
With  shame  I  shudder  and  with  dmd— 
Bttt  boldly  I  myself  lesgn: 
Thine  honour  is  my  coontenrignl 
— B^ram  lient-Gol.  Spalding's  Ei^ine  On^^mms^ 
I^oodon,  i88i* 

JTROM  "THB  BAKHCHISARAy  TOUNTAIN'' 

Days  passed  away ;  Maria  slept 
Peaceful,  no  cares  disturbed  her,  now — 

From  earth  the  orphan  maid  was  swept. 
But  who  knew  when,  or  where,  or  how  ? 

If  prey  to  grief  or  pain  she  fell. 

If  slain  or  Heaven -struck,  who  can  tell  ? 

She  sleeps;  her  loss  the  chieftain  grieves. 

And  his  neglected  harem  leaves, 


The  Nineteenth  Century 


Flies  from  its  tnmqtiil  predncts  far, 
And  with  his  Tutm  takes  the  fidd, 

Fieioe  rushes  mid  the  din  of  war, 
And  brave  the  foe  that  does  not  yield. 

For  mad  despair  hath  nerved  his  arm, 
Though  in  his  heart  is  grief  concealed, 

With  passion's  hopeless  tran^orts  wwm. 
His  blade  he  swings  aloft  in  air 

And  wildly  brandishes,  then  low 
It  falls,  whilst  he  with  pallid  stare 

Gazes,  and  tears  in  tonents  flow. 

His  liaiiein  by  the  chief  deserted, 
In  foreign  lands  he  warring  roved. 

Long  nor  in  wish  nor  thought  reverted 
To  scene  once  cherished  and  bdoved. 

His  women,  to  the  eunuch's  rage 
Abandoned,  pined  and  sank  in  age. 
The  fair  Gnisinian  now  no  more 
Yielded  her  soul  to  passion's  power, 
Her  fate  was  with  Maria's  blended. 
On  the  same  night  their  sorrows  ended ; 

Seized  by  mute  guards  the  hapless  fair 
Into  a  deep  abyss  they  threw, — 

If  vast  her  crime,  through  love's  deqisir. 
Her  punishment  was  dreadful  too! 

At  length  th'  exhausted  Khan  retnmed, 

Enough  of  waste  his  sword  had  dealt. 
The  Russian  cot  no  longer  burned. 

Nor  Caucasus  his  fury  felt. 
In  token  of  Maria's  loss 

A  marble  fountain  he  upreared 
In  spot  recluse :— the  Christian's  cross 

Upon  the  monument  appeared 
(Surmounting  it  a  crescent  bright. 
Emblem  of  ignorance  and  night!). 


Aleks&ndr  Sergy6evich  Piishkin  135 


Th'  inscription  mid  the  silent  waste 
Not  yet  has  time's  rude  hand  effaced. 

Still  do  the  gurgling  waters  pour 
Their  streams  dispensing  sadness  round, 

As  mothers  weep  for  sons  no  more, 
In  never-ending  sorrows  drowned. 

In  mom  fair  maids,  (and  twilight  late,) 
Roam  where  this  monument  appears. 

And  pitying  poor  Maria's  fate 
Entitle  it  the  Fount  of  Tears! 
— Fnnn  W.  D.  I<ewis*8  Tke  ffakckesarian  FmaUaiH, 

THE  POISON-TREE 

Remote  and  dire,  in  desert-lands 
Where  naught  but  snnhtinit  sod  it  seen. 

Anchor,  the  Tree  of  Poison,  stands— 
A  sentind,  with  threatening  nieii. 

The  thirsty  steppe-land  gave  it  Urth 

In  bitterness  and  anger  dark ; 
It  sucked  foul  venom  from  the  earth, 
Its  roots  and  leaves  are  dead  and  stark. 

At  noon,  when  fiercest  sunlight  glowa^ 

The  poison  from  its  veins  escapes, 
And  trickling  down  the  stem  it  flows 

By  evening  into  globM  shapes. 

No  bird  will  seek  this  Tree  of  Deatii, 

Nor  dare  the  tiger  prowl  anigh, 
The  hungry  whirlwind's  dusty  breath 

Grows  baneful  as  it  hastens  by. 

If  e'er  a  wand'ring  doitd  distil 

Sett  tains  npon  its  blighted  top^ 
Their  harmless  nature  tarns  to  ill, 

And  dianged,  in  deadly  dews  they  drop. 


Digitized  by  Google 


136         The  Nineteenth  Century 


But  yet  a  man's  imperial  aod 

Sent  forth  a  fellow-man  afar, 
Whose  meek,  obedient  footsteps  trod, 

Right  to  the  base  of  fool  AocbAr. 

By  morning  he  returned,  and  bore 

The  fatal  resin,  with  a  bough 
Of  withered  leaves,  and  like  it  wore 

A  wasted  look — and  from  his  brow 

Cold  sweat  was  streaming,  and  he  tried 
To  stand,  but  fell  to  earth  prostrate. 

And  fheiei  poor  dsvte!  lie  aenk  and  died 
In  preaenoe  of  the  Potentate, 

Who  aopped  his  arrows  in  the  bane, 

And  sent  them  dark — a  doom  new-found  I — 
By  messenger  o'er  hill  and  plain 
To  neighbours  in  the  countries  round. 
•Tvansl.  by  Charlotte  Sidgwick,  in  Free  Roana,  January, 
1899  (voL  z.,  No.  i). 

TH£  BIRD 

Naught  of  labour,  naught  of  sorrow. 

On  God's  little  bird  doth  rest. 
And  it  questions  not  the  morrow. 

Builds  itself  no  lasting  nest. 

On  the  bough  it  sleeps  and  swings 

Till  the  ruddy  sun  appears, 
Then  it  shakes  its  wrings  and  sings, 

When  the  voice  of  God  it  hears. 

After  Spring's  delightful  weather. 
When  the  burning  Summer  *s  fled. 

And  the  Autumn  brings  together 
For  men's  sorrow,  for  men's  dread, 


Aleks&ndr  Sergy^evich  Pushkin  137 


Mists  and  storms  in  gloomy  legions; 

Then  the  bird  across  the  main 
Flies  to  far-ofif,  southern  xcgionSi 

Till  the  Spring  returns  again, 
•Tiand.  by  N.  H.  Dole  (publicatioii  nnssoertainable). 

THE  PROPHET 

By  spiritual  thirst  opprest, 
I  hied  me  to  the  desert  dim, 
When  lo !  upon  my  path  appeared 
The  holy  six- winged  seraphim. 
My  brow  his  fingers  lightly  pressed. 
Soothing  my  eyelids  into  rest: 
Open  my  inward  vision  flies, 
As  ope  a  startled  eaglet's  eyes. 
He  touched  my  ears,  and  they  were  filled 
With  sounds  that  all  my  being  thrilled. 
I  lelt  a  trembling  fill  the  skies, 
I  liesfd  the  sweep  of  angels'  wings, 
Bensslh  the  sea  saw  creeping  things. 
And  in  tlie  velleyB  vines  arise. 
Over  my  lips  a  white  he  hnng, 
And  tote  from  me  my  sinful  tongue^ 
The  babbling  tongue  of  vanity. 
The  sting  of  serpent's  subtlety 
Within  my  lips,  as  chilled  I  stood. 
He  placed,  with  right  hand  red  with  blood. 
Then  with  a  swovd  my  bosom  cut, 
And  forth  my  quivering  heart  be  drew; 
A  glowing  coal  of  fire  he  put 
Within  my  breast  laid  bare  to  view. 
As  corpse-like  on  the  waste  I  lay, 
Thus  unto  me  God's  voice  did  say — 
"  Prophet,  arise!    Confess  My  Name: 
Fulfil  my  will;  submit  to  Me! 
Arise!   Go  forth  o'er  land  and  sea, 
And  with  high  words  men's  hearts  inflame! " 
—From  J.  Pollen's  Rhymes  from  the  Russian, 


Digitized  by  Google 


1 33        The  Nineteenth  Centuiy 


THB  TALISMAN 

Where  fierce  the  surge  with  awful  bellow 

Doth  ever  lash  the  rocky  wall, 
And  where  the  moon  most  brightly  mellow 

Doth  beam  when  mists  of  evening  fall ; 
Where  midst  his  harem's  countless  blisses 

The  Moslem  spends  his  vital  span, 
A  sorceress  there  with  gentle  kisses 

Presented  me  a  Talisman. 

And  add:  ''Unta  thy  latMt  minafee 

Preserve,  ptieaem;  my  Talinun; 
A  secret  power  it  bolds  within  it,— 

'T  was  love,  true  love  the  gift  did  plaiL 

From  pest  on  land  or  death  on  ocesa 

When  hurricanes  its  surface  fan, 
O  object  of  my  fond  devotion! 

Thou  scap'st  not  by  my  Talisman. 

The  gem  in  eastern  mine  which  slumbers, 

Or  ruddy  gold  't  will  not  bestow; 
'T  will  not  subdue  the  turbanned  numbers 

Before  the  Prophet's  shrine  which  bow; 
Nor  high  through  air  on  friendly  pinions 

Can  bear  thee  aiHft  to  home  or  dan, 
From  moomful  dimes  or  strange  dominion^ 

Fkom  Sonth  to  North,— nqr  Talisman. 

"  But  oh !  when  crafty  e3re8  thy  reason 

With  sorceries  sudden  aedc  to  move^ 
And  when  in  night's  mysterious  season 

Lips  ding  to  thine, — but  not  in  love, — 
From  proving  then,  dear  youth,  a  booty 

To  those  who  falsely  would  trepan. 
From  new  heart  wounds,  and  lapse  from  duty, 

Protect  thee  shall  my  Talisman." 
— From  The  Talismati,  and  Other  PUccs,  by  George  Borrow, 
St.  Petersburg,  1835. 


Aieksindr  Sei^tevich  P&shkin  139 


THB  I«AY  OF  THB  WI8B  01^ 

Wise  016g  to  the  war  he  hath  bound  him  again, 

The  Khosdrs  have  awakened  his  ire; 
For  rapine  and  raid,  hamlet,  city,  and  plain 

Are  devoted  to  falchion  and  fire. 
In  mail  of  Byzance,  girt  with  many  a  good  spear, 
The  Pxinoe  pricks  along  on  his  f  aithiol  destiere. 

FlNnn  the  darksome  fir-forest,  to  meet  that  amy, 

Forth  paces  a  grey-haired  magician : 
To  none  but  Per6n  did  that  sorcerer  pray, 

Fulfilling  the  prophet's  dread  mission: 
His  life  he  had  wasted  in  penance  and  pain : — 
And  beside  that  enchanter  01^  drew  his  rein. 

*'Now  vede  me,  enchanter,  beloved  of  Ferfin, 

The  good  and  the  ill  that 's  before  me: 
Shall  I  soon  give  my  neighboor-ibes  triumph,  and  soon 

Shall  the  earth  of  the  gim  be  piled  o'er  me  ? 
Unfold  all  the  truth;  fear  me  not;  and  for  meed, 
Chooae  among  thcniy—I  give  thee  my  best  battle-steed.' ' 

"  O  enchanters,  they  care  not  for  prince  or  for  peer. 

And  gifts  are  but  needlessly  given; 
The  wise  tongue  ne'er  stumbleth  for  falsehood  or  foar, 

'T  is  the  friend  of  the  councils  of  Heaven! 
The  years  of  the  future  are  clouded  and  dark, 
Yet  on  thy  fidr  forehead  thy  fate  I  can  mark: 

now  firmly  the  words  of  my  tongue; 

For  the  cbief  finds  a  rapture  in  glory : 
On  the  gate  of  Byzantinm  tfay  Vttckler  is  hung, 

Tliy  name  shall  be  deathleaa  in  story; 
Wild  waves  and  broad  kingdoms  tfay  soeptie  obey, 
And  the  foe  sees  with  envy  so  bonndleas  a  sway: 


HO         The  Nineteenth  Century 


"And  the  blue  sea,  uplifting  its  treacheroua  wave, 

In  its  wrath, — in  the  hurricane- hour, — 
And  the  knife  of  the  coward,  the  sword  of  the  brave, 

To  slay  thee  shall  never  have  power: 
Within  thy  strong  harness  no  wound  shalt  thou  know, 
For  a  guardian  unseen  shall  defend  thee  below. 

"  Thy  steed  fern  not  labour,  nor  danger,  nor  pain, 

His  locd's  lightest  accent  he  heareth. 
Now  still,  though  the  arrows  ML  round  him  like  rain, 

Now  o^er  the  redfidd  he  careereth; 
He  tea  not  the  winter,  he  fiears  not  to  bleed,— 
Yet  thy  death-wound  shaU  come  from  thy  good  battle-steed ! 

016g  smiled  a  moment,  but  yet  on  his  brow, 
And  lip,  thought  and  sorrow  were  blended: 

In  silence  he  bent  on  his  saddle,  and  slow 
The  Prince  from  his  courser  descended; 

And  as  though  from  a  friend  he  were  parting  with  pain, 

He  strokes  his  broad  neck  and  his  dark  flowing  mane. 

**  Farewell  then,  my  comrade,  fleet,  fidthfiil,  and  bold  I 

We  must  paxt,^sach  is  Destiny's  power: 
Now  rest  thee,— I  swear,  in  thy  sthmp  of  gdd 

No  foot  shall  e'er  rest,  from  this  hoar. 
Farewell  1  we 've  been  cnmrades  ior  many  a  long  jrear,— 
My  squiresi  now  I  pray  ye^  come  take  my  destveie. 

' '  The  softest  of  carpets  his  horse-cloth  shall  be: 

And  lead  him  away  to  the  meadow ; 
On  the  choicest  of  com  he  shall  feed  daintilie, 

He  shall  drink  of  the  well  in  the  shadow.'* 
Then  straightway  departed  the  squires  with  the  steed, 
And  to  valiant  016g  a  fresh  courser  they  lead. 

d^T  and  his  conindcs  are  fieasting,  I  trow; 

The  mead-cups  are  menily  ciashing: 
Their  lodks  are  as  white  aa  the  dawn*]i|^iled  snow 

On  the  peak  of  the  mountain-top  flashing: 


Aleks&ndr  Seigyievich  Piishkiii  141 


They  talk  of  old  timtB,  of  flitt  digrs  of  their  pride. 
And  the  fights  wheie  together  they  etnt^  aide  aide. 

*'  But  where,"  qaoth  01^,  "  Is  my  good  hattle-hone  ? 

My  mettlesome  chaiger,— how  fares  he  ? 
Is  be  plsyfiil  as  ever,  as  fleet  in  the  course; 

His  sge  and  his  freedom  how  bears  he  ?  " 
They  ansiver  and  say:  on  the  hill  by  the  stream 
He  has  long  slept  the  sLnmber  that  knows  not  a  dream. 

0\6g  then  grew  thooghtfol,  and  bent  down  his  brow: 

O  man,  what  can  magic  avail  thee! 
A  false  lying  dotard,  Enchanter,  art  thou: 
Our  rage  and  contempt  shall  assail  thee. 
My  horse  might  have  borne  me  till  now,  but  for  theei " 
Then  the  bones  of  his  charger  01^  went  to  see. 

01^  he  rode  forth  with  his  spearmen  beside; 

At  his  bridle  Prince  Igor  he  hurried: 
And  they  see  on  a  hillock  by  Dnieper's  swift  tide 

Where  the  steed's  noble  bones  lie  unburied: 
They  are  washed  by  the  rain,  the  dust  o'er  them  is  cast, 
And  above  them  the  feather-grass  waves  in  the  blast 

Then  the  Prince  set  his  foot  on  the  courser's  white  skull. 
Saying:  "  Sleep,  my  old  friend,  in  thy  glory! 

Thy  lord  hath  outlived  thee,  his  days  are  nigh  full: 
At  his  funeral  feast,  red  and  gory, 

*T  is  not  thou  'neath  the  axe  that  shall  redden  the  sod, 

That  my  dust  may  be  pleasured  to  quafif  thy  brave  blood. 

*'And  am  I  to  find  my  destruction  in  this? 

My  death  in  a  skeleton  seeking?" 
From  the  skull  of  the  courser  a  snake,  with  a  hiss, 

Crept  forth  as  the  hero  was  speaking : 
Round  his  legs,  like  a  ribbon,  it  twined  its  black  ring; 
And  tiie  Prince  shrinked  aUmd  as  he  fidt  the  ten  sting. 


143         The  Nineteenth  Century 


The  mead-cups  are  foaming,  they  cirde  around,— 
At  Ol^s  mighty  Death-Feast  thcgr  'le  fingiiig; 
Prince  Igor  and  Olga  they  ait  on  tho  moand; 

The  war-men  the  death-song  are  singing: 
And  they  talk  of  old  times,  of  the  days  of  their  pride, 
And  the  fights  where  together  they  struck  side  by  side. 
—From  T.  B.  Shaw's  Pushkin,  tfu  Russian  FoUt  in 
Blackwood's  Magazine,  1845. 

TO  THE  SLANDERERS  OF  RUSSIA 

Why  me  ye,  bahbten^  ao— ye  loidt  of  popular  wonder? 
Why  ■och  anatHrmae  'gainst  Russia  do  yon  thunder  ? 
What  moves  your  idle  lage  ?  la 't  Poland'a  fallen  pride  ? 
'T  ia  but  Slavonic  kin  among  themselves  contending, 
Aa  ancient  household  atrilie,  oft  judged  but  still  unending, 
A  qtieation  which,  be  sure,  ye  hever  can  decide. 

For  ages  past  still  have  contended 

These  races,  though  so  near  allied: 

And  oft  'neath  Victory's  storm  has  bended 

Now  Poland's,  and  now  Russia's  side. 

Which  shall  stand  fast  in  such  commotion. 

The  haughty  Pole,  or  faithful  Russ  ? 
And  shall  Slavonic  streams  meet  in  a  Russian  ocean-— 

Or  that  dry  up  ?   This  is  point  for  us. 

Peace,  peace!  your  ejres  are  all  unable 
To  read  our  history's  bloody  table; 
Stiange  in  yoor  sight  and  dark  moat  be 

Our  firings  of  household  enmity! 
To  you  the  Kreml  and  Proa's  tower 
Are  voiceless  all, — you  mark  the  iate 
And  daring  of  the  battle-hour, — 
And  understand  us  not,  but  hate  

What  stirs  ye  ?    Is  it  that  this  nation 
On  Moscow's  flaming  wall,  blood-slaked  and  ruin-quenched, 
Spumed  back  the  insolent  dictation 
Of  Him  before  whose  nod  ye  blendwd? 


Digitized  by  Google 


Aleks4ndr  Sergyievich  P&shkin  143 


Is  it  that  into  dust  we  shattered 
The  Dagon  that  weighed  down  the  earth  so  weoxily  7 
And  onr  best  blood  so  freely  scattered 
To  boy  for  Europe  peace  and  liberty  ? 

Ye  're  bold  of  tongue — but  hard,  would  ye  in  deed  but  try  it. 
Or  is  the  hero,  now  reclined  in  laurelled  quiet. 
Too  weak  to  fix  once  more  Izmail's  red  bayonet  ? 
Or  hath  the  Russian  Tsar  ever  in  vain  commanded  ? 

Or  must  we  meet  all  Europe  banded  ? 

Have  we  fofgot  to  conquer  yet  ? 
Or  rather,  ahall  they  not,  from  Perm  to  Taniia'  fimntains, 
Pffom  the  hot  OoJchian  steppes  to  Finland's  Icy  iiioiintalti% 

Ftcm  the  grey  Kmnl's  half-shattered  wall. 

To  fu  Kathay,  in  dotage  bniied, — 

A  stedy  rampart  dose  and  serried, 

Kise,  Rnsaia's  waniore^  one  and  all? 

Then  send  your  nmnbm  without  number, 

Your  maddened  sons,  your  goaded  slaves, 

In  Russia's  plains  there 's  room  to  slumber, 

And  well  they  *11  know  their  brethren's  graves! 
—From  T.  B.  Shaw's  Pushkin,  the  Russian  Poet,  In 
Blackwood's  Magazine^  1845. 

FROM  "BORIS  GODUNOV" 

I 

Night:  A  cell  in  the  Chddov  mo7iastery 

FATHER  pfMEN,  GRIGORI  (sleeping). 

Pinun  {writing  before  a  lamp).  Once  more,  one  final  anec- 
dote, and  then 
My  manuscript  will  be  complete,  the  task 
On  me,  a  sinner,  laid  by  God,  fulfilled. 
'T  is  not  for  naught  that  during  all  these  years 
The  Lord  hath  made  me  witness  many  things, 
And  taught  me  aU  the  art  of  writing  boolm. 
When  In  the  fatitre  some  Indnstrions  monk 
Shall  find  my  hard-accomplished,  nameless  work. 


144         The  Nineteenth  Centuiy 


He  will,  like  me,  illume  his  little  lamp, 
And,  brushing  off  the  dust  of  centuries. 
Will  copy  down  my  truthful  chronicle. 
Then  will  the  children  of  believers  true 
Read  all  the  story  of  their  native  land, 
Recall  the  labours  of  their  mighty  Tsars, 
Performed  for  them,  for  glory  and  for  right, 
And  humbly  offer  prayers  that  God  will  blot 
The  crimes,  though  dark,  of  him  who  wrought  for  them. 
Thus,  bent  for  many  years  I  live  anew. 
The  past  before  me  rose  its  hurrying  flood. 
Is 't  long  ago  that  like  the  angry  sea 
Time's  fiitefiil  surges  tnoke  in  giest  events? 
And  now  it  tests  in  motionless  repose! 
Not  many  men  my  memory  preserves, 
Not  niiay  words  are  in  my  mind  engrossed, 
And  all  the  rest  for  ever  now  are  gone. 
But  day  is  nigli,  my  little  lamp  bunts  dim, 
Onemore,ooefinalstory  of  thepast!  (JVnies,) 
Gr^M  (wakes).  Tbat  dream  again?  How  strange  t  That 
cursM  dream! 
Thrice  have  I  dreamed  it!   But  the  aged  man 
Still  sits  before  his  little  lamp  and  writes. 
He  hath  not  closed  his  eyes  the  livelong  night 
In  slumber:  how  I  love  his  peaceful  mien. 
As,  deeply  buried  in  the  past,  his  soul 
Broods  o'er  the  secret  of  his  manuscript. 
How  gladly  would  I  scan  his  precious  line. 
What  writeth  he :  the  Tatars'  bloody  reign, — 
The  cruel  deeds  of  John  the  Terrible? 
The  stormy  council  of  old  N6vgorod  ? 
The  glories  of  the  fatherland  ?    In  vain! 
Nor  in  his  glance  nor  in  his  lofty  brow 
Can  one  discern  the  secrets  of  his  mind : 
His  mien  is  calm  and  ML  of  majesty, 
As  wdl  becomes  an  aged  priest  who  looks 
With  dondlesB  eye  on  good  and  evil  men 
Impartially,  detecting  right  and  wrong 


Digitized  by  Google 


Aleksindr  Songytevich  Pfishkin  145 


Or  hatred  or  compmrion  knowing:  not. 
Pimm.  Art  thou  awake  ? 

Gr^6ri.  Thy  UaMiiig,  hoiumred  sire. 

Ptmen.  The  Lord  His  bkanng  grmt  thee,  oh,  my  aoo, 

To-day,  hereafter,  and  for  evermore! 

Grigdri,  Long  has  thy  pen  been  busy,  nor  hat  aleqi 
Once  brought  thee  sweet  oblivion  this  night; 
But  some  strange,  diaboh'c  vision  hath  disturbed 
My  rest:  my  enemy  hath  tormented  me. 
I  dreamed  that  up  the  winding  narrow  stairs 
I  mounted  to  the  windy  tower  alone; 
Before  me  from  the  top  all  Moscow  lay 
Diminished  like  an  ant-hill.    Far  below 
The  people  swarmed  and  babbled  in  the  square 
And  jeered  at  me  with  senseless  ridicule. 
Shame  mastered  me  and  terror  overwhelmed. 
And,  fidling  headlong  on  my  fiboe,  I  wakod. 
'T  la  thrice  that  I  have  dreamed  the  aplfiame  dream, 
la't  notamarvd? 

Pimem.  'T  ia  thy  youthful  Uood 

Hakes  apoft  of  thee:  1^  prayer  and  atrenuooa  fiut 
Thy  dreama  wHl  he  with  peaoeftil  vlaiona  filled. 
'T  is  e'en  not  otherwise  with  me  when  I» 
Dazed  with  involuntary  drowsiness, 
E'er  fail  my  soul  with  earnest  prayer  to  guard— 
My  aged  dreams  are  then  disturbed  with  sin: 
While  scenes  of  banqueting  torment  me  oft. 
Now  warlike  camps  or  surging  battles  rude, 
Now  senseless  dissipations  of  wild  youth. 

Grigdfi.  How  gaily  must  have  passed  thy  youthful  daysl 
Thou  wast  in  battle  'neath  Kazdn's  high  walls; 
Hast  shared  the  wars  in  Lithuania's  plains; 
Hast  seen  the  wanton  court  of  John  the  Great. 
How  fortunate !    But  I  from  earliest  years 
Have  been  immured  in  cells  a  needy  monk ! 
Why  should  not  I  have  had  delight  in  war 
And  feasted  at  the  table  of  the  Tsar  ? 
Then,  when  I  reached  like  thee  the  term  of  life. 


14^         The  Nineteenth  Centuiy 


I  might  have  tuned  me  gladly  bom.  the  vnM 
And  all  its  vaaitiei,  and  ahtit  myadf 
Within  the  calm  fetbement  of  a  odi 
To  meditate  npon  my  holy  vows. 

Lament  not,  brother,  that  thou  haat  ao  aOQii 
The  world  abandoned,  that  a  loving  God 
Hath  little  ol  temptation  sent  to  thee. 
Take  thou  my  word,  a  fascination  atroog 
Is  exercised  upon  us  from  afar, 
By  glory,  luxury,  and  woman's  wiles. 
Long  have  I  lived  and  much  have  I  enjoyed  ; 
But  only  true  enjoyment  have  I  known 
Since  to  the  cloister  God  hath  led  my  steps. 
Recall  the  mightiest  Tsars  that  have  ever  lived. 
Who  stands  above  them  ?    God  alone !    And  who 
Would  venture  to  oppose  them  ?   None!   What  then? 
On  them  so  sorely  weighs  the  golden  crown 
They  would  exchange  it  gladly  for  the  cowl. 
B*en  John  the  Taar  aought  oomfint  and  idief 
Within  the  aemUanoe  of  monastic  role. 
His  conrt,  where  swanned  his  haughty  &voin!tei^ 
The  novid  aq)ect  of  a  doister  took; 
His  hody-goaid,  in  sackcloth  and  in  atde^ 
Appealed  like  dodle  monks,  the  while  the  Tear, 
Himself,  the  cmd  Tmr,  an  abbot  mild. 
Myself  have  aeen,  here  in  this  very  cell— 
("T  was  then  the  abode  of  that  most  just  of  meOp 
Kirfll,  who  suffered  much,  and  even  then 
I  also  had  been  led  by  God  to  see 
The  folly  of  the  world) — myself  have  seen, 
Here  in  this  ver^^  cell,  the  mighty  Tsar, 
Grown  weary  of  his  mad  designs  and  wrath. 
Repenting,  sit  amongst  us,  meek  and  mild. 
We  stood  before  him  silent,  motionless, 
And  quietly  he  would  converse  with  us, 
Would  hold  the  abbot  and  the  brotherhood: 
"  Ye  fathers,  soon  the  wished-for  hour  will  come, 
When  I  '11  appear  with  hunger  to  be  saved; 

I 


Digitized  by  Google 


Aleksjindr  Sergy^evich  Pushkin  147 


Hum  Nikodfm,  thou  S^rgi,  thou  Kkfll, 

And  an  of  ye,  accept  my  lieaxtfielt  tow! 

I  *tL  oome  to  you  a  atntier  In  despair; 

I  '11  take  upon  myadf  the  monk's  haiah  garb, 

I  '11  fall,  O  hdy  &ther,  at  thy  leet  I " 

Thus  spcike  the  mighty  nder  of  the  realm; 

And  gentle  woids  flowed  firom  hia  crad  lips, 

And  tears  bedewed  his  cheeks;  and  we  in  tears 

Would  pray  onr  Lord  his  ainf id,  suffering  aool 

To  fill  with  everlasting  love  and  peace. 

Bat  his  son  Fe6dor  ?   Upon  the  throne 

Vowed  to  perpetual  silence,  like  a  monk; 

He  sighed  to  lead  a  life  of  easy  peace. 

He  straightway  changed  the  royal  palace-halls 

To  cloistered  cells,  the  heavy  cares  of  state 

Did  not  at  all  disturb  his  saintly  sotil. 

God  mercifully  gave  the  Tsar  his  peace; 

And  while  he  lived,  our  Russia,  undisturbed 

In  taintless  glory,  owned  his  gentle  sway. 

Bnt  when  he  died,  a  miracle  was  wrought, 

Unheard  of:  at  his  couch  appeared  a  man 

With  face  of  flame,  seen  by  the  Tsar  alone. 

Pc6dor  talked  ^fh  him,  and  called  him  "  Siie^"— 

"  Great  Patriazdi."  All  aronnd  vvere  filled  with  fear 

To  see  the  heavenly  apparition  theie^ 

Because  the  holy  father  was  not  then 

Within  the  chamber  where  the  Tsar  was  laid. 

When  he  ^ypeared  sweet  fragrance  filled  the  halls, 

And  like  the  sun  his  holy  visage  shone. 

—From  Shakespeare  and  ike  Russian  Drama,  by 
N.  H.  Dole,  in  Poet-lore,  vol.  i.,  No.  11. 

DEMONS 

Clouds  are  shifting,  clouds  are  flying, 
Scarce  the  hidden  moon's  pale  light 

On  the  drifting  snow  is  lying, — 
Wild  the  heavens^  wild  the  night 


The  Nineteenth  Century 


Swiftly  o'er  the  stormswept  lowland — 

Jingle,  jingle  bells  amain ! 
Swiftly  still,  though  heavy-hearted. 

Drive  I  o'er  the  frozen  main. 

*<  Ho  iiim!  driver,  onwud! "  *'  Ptitar, 
Good  my  kxd,  we  may  not  go^ 

For  the  stormwind  blinds  me,  nuitar. 
And  the  road  is  choked  with  now." 

Useless  all!  the  track  is  hidden; 
We  are  lost  to  help  and  home; 

From  afar  the  demon  spies  us — 
Closer  circling  aee  him  Qome  I 

Hal  beside  us  lie 's  careering, 
Hifliing,  apitting,— now,  I  ween. 

Round  the  steeds  so  madly  veering 
On  the  brink  of  yon  ravine. 

There — if  near  or  far  I  know  not— 
He  was  whirling  in  my  sight. 

There  again  he  pined  and  dwindled. 
Vanished  into  empty  night! 

CkNtds  are  shifting,  donda  are  flying, 

Scarce  the  hidden  moon's  pale  lig^ 
On  tiie  drifting  anow  is  lying,— 

Wild  the  heavens,  wild  tke  night 
Coorago  &ils  to  atnig^  longer. 

Suddenly  tiie  ddgh  bdhi  cease— 
Panae  the  team— Declare  thou  yonder — 

Wolf  or  tree-stem— ia  it  peace? 

Hark,  the  wind  is  wailing  sadly, 

I/>udly  snort  the  startled  team. 
There,  see  there  he  gambols  madly, 

Tkrough  the  murk  his  eyeballs  gleam. 
Once  again  the  team  has  started— 

Jingle,  jingle  bells  amain! 
Lo,  the  spirit-hosts  assemble 

O'er  the  faintly  gleaming  plaint 


Evg^ni  Abrimovich  Baratynski  H9 


Fonn  ihey  liave  not,  have  no  number, 

lightly  whirling  nnmd,  they  aeem 
like  the  dead  leaves  of  November 

In  the  moon's  tmoertaln  besm. 
Axe  they  endless?  whither  fly  they  ? 

Why  this  wailful  chanting,  say  I 
Mourn  they  now  their  dead  ?  In  marriage 

Give  they,  dae,  some  witch  away? 


Clouds  are  shifting,  clouds  are  flying, 

Scarce  the  hidden  moon's  pale  light 
On  the  drifting  snow  is  lying, — 

Wild  the  heavens,  wild  the  night. 
Still  they  come  and  still  they  vanish 

In  the  darkness  o'er  the  plain, 
Still  their  moaning  and  imploring 

Rends  my  very  heart  in  twain ! 
— Transl.  by  Miss  H.  Frank,  in  The  Anglo- 
Russian  Literary  Society,  No.  34. 

ETgM  Ateftmovich  Baffttfnild.  (1800-1844*)  ^ 

Baratyoski  was  the  most  talented  of  all  the  contemporary  poets  ot 
FAdfthk  Hecameof  adiitingiiiahedlaiiiily  in  the  Govennent  of 
Tambdr.  At  fifteen  yeari  he  enteied  the  Gorpa  of  Paiges,  M  was  aoon 
expelled  for  some  misdemeanour.  This  compelled  his  enlistiiig  as  a 
common  soldier  in  St.  Petersburg,  where  he  came  at  once  in  contact 
with  the  leading  poets  of  the  day,  and  he  began  himself  writing  verses. 
The  following  six  years  he  passed  in  Finland,  the  austere  nature  of 
^riildi  modi  ImpreMed  hie  nhid  and  gave  him  ample  mafteriil  Ibr  Ms 
Bidancholy  Muse.  After  rising  to  the  rank  of  a  commissioned  officer, 
he  retired  and  settled  in  Moscow.  In  1843  went  abroad,  and  the 
next  year  be  suddenly  died  in  Naples.  His  best  production,  TAe 
Gipsy  Girl,  was  at  one  time  preferred  to  Pilshkin's  poems,  but  he  is 
noiw  diiefly  remembered  m  tiie  earliest  and  moat  briUiaat  of  Rnmlaa 

In  C.  T.  Wilson's  /Russian  Lyrics,  London,  1887,  is  given  JuiiiA  Re- 
warded; the  same,  under  the  title  The  Madonna,  translated  hy  F.  P. 
liarchast,  in  The  Anglo-Russiau  Literaxy  Society,  No.  a8. 


Digitized  by  Google 


I50         The  Nineteenth  Century 


FINI^AND 

Into  your  clefts  you  have  received  the  poet,  granite  rocks 
of  Finland,  eternal  granites,  guardian  heroes  of  the  land  of 
the  glacial  crown.  With  the  lyre  he  is  among  you.  His 
greeting  is  a  greeting  to  the  masses  of  the  rock,  coutempor- 
raneous  with  the  world.  I«i]&e  them  may  he  for  ever  be  un- 
changeable ! 

How  wondrously  everything  about  me  charms  my  eye: 
there  with  its  immeasurable  waters  the  sea  is  welded  with 
the  heavens;  here  the  dreamy  pine-forest  has  descended  with 
heavy  tread  from  the  mountain  rock,  and  mirrors  itself  in 
tlie  flmootli  waters!  *T  is  late:  day  is  out,  but  the  vault  of 
heaven  is  bright;  night  comes  without  darkness  upon  the 
FlnsiBfa  diffii^  and  only  fiir  its  own  adornment  it  leads  out 
upon  the  horizon  a  usdess  choir  of  diamond  atacs.  This  is 
the  countiy  of  Odin's  children,— the  distant  nations  of  the 
stonnl  This  Is  the  crsdle  of  their  restless  days^  consecrated 
to  funons  warilngs! 

Silent  is  the  sounding  shield,  not  heard  the  voioe  of  the 
skald;  the  flaming  oak  is  extiuguished;  the  stormy  wind 
has  scattered  the  solemn  calls,  the  sons  know  not  the  ex- 
ploits of  their  fathers,  and  prone  in  the  dust  lie  the  prostrate 
forms  of  their  gods, — and  all  around  me  is  deep  silence.  O 
ye  who  carried  war  from  shore  to  shore,  where  are  ye,  heroes 
of  the  north  ?  Your  vestige  has  disapp>eared  from  your 
native  land.  Do  ye  press  your  grieving  eyes  against  the 
cliffs  and  swim,  a  misty  host,  up  in  the  clouds  ?  Do  ye  ? 
Give  me  answer,  listen  to  my  voice  calling  to  you  in  the 
silence  of  the  night.  Mighty  sons  of  these  threatening, 
eternal  clififs !  How  were  ye  severed  from  your  rocky  father- 
land? Why  are  ye  sad?  Why  have  I  read  upon  your 
mdancholy  faces  tiie  smile  6£  chiding?  And  ye  have  hid 
sronrselvesintheabodeof  shadesl  And  time  has  not  spared 
your  names!  What  are  oar  exploits,  what  the  gloiy  of  onr 
days^  wliat  is  oar  windy  tribe?  Oh,  everything  will  in  its 
torn  disappear  in  the  abyss  of  yearsl  For  aU  there  Is  one 
law, — the  law  of  annihilation.  In  all  I  hear  the  mysterioas 
greeting  of  soaght>f or  forgetfblnesa. 


Digitized  by  Google 


Evgdni  Abr&movich  Baratynski  151 


But  I, — for  life's  sake  loving  life  in  ingloriousneas, — shall 
I  with  careless  soul  tremble  before  destiny  ?  Though  not 
eternal  in  time,  I  am  eterual  for  myself:  does  not  the  storm 
of  time  speak  to  imagination  alone  ?  The  moment  belongs 
to  me,  as  I  belong  to  the  moment.  What  care  I  for  past  or 
future  races?  Not  for  them  do  I  strum  the  soft- voiced 
strings:  though  not  listened  to,  I  am  suflBciently  rewarded 
with  sounds  for  sounds,  and  with  dreams  for  dreams. 

SPRING 

Spring,  O  spring!  How  pure  the  air,  how  clear  the  vault 
cf  lieaven !  With  its  bright  azure  it  blinds  my  eyes. 

Spring,  O  spring !  How,  upon  the  pinions  of  the  wind, 
csressing  the  snnbesnis,  the  donds  flit  upon  highl 

The  rivnlets  babble,  the  rivukts  sparkle;  roaring  the  rim 
carries  00  its  triumphant  badt  the  uplifted  ioe. 

The  trees  are  still  bare,  but  in  the  grove  the  old  leaves, 
as  before,  mstle  tinder  foot  and  emit  fragrance. 

Rising  to  the  veiy  sun  and  invisible  in  the  dear  height, 
the  lark  sings  the  song  of  wdoome  to  the  spring. 

What  has  happened  to  my  soul  ?  With  the  brook  it  is  a 
brook,  and  with  the  bud  a  bird:  with  one  it  babbles^  with 
the  other  flies  into  heaven. 

Why  do  sun  and  spring  give  it  such  joy  ?  Does  it,  as  a 
daughter  of  the  elements,  make  merry  at  their  banquet  ? 

Well,  happy  is  be  who  there  drinks  oblivion  from  thought, 
who  there  is  carried  far  away  from  itl 

TRUTH 

Yearning  since  childhood  for  happiness,  I  have  ever  been 
poor  in  happiness!  Or  shall  I  never  attain  it  in  the  wilder- 
ness of  existence  ? 

My  young  dreams  have  flitted  from  the  heart,— I  do  not 
recognise  the  world:  I  am  deprived  of  my  former  aim  of 
hopes,  but  have  no  new  aim. 

ScnadesB  are  yon  and  all  your  irishesl "  ^oike  to  me  a 
secret  voice,  and  I  cast  off  for  ever  the  best  creatioasof  my 
dreams. 


Digitized  by  Google 


15^         The  Nineteenth  Century 


But  wherefore  has  the  disappointment  of  the  soul  not  been 
complete  ?  Why  lives  within  me  the  blind  pity  of  my  youth- 
ful dreams  ? 

Thus  I  once  murmured,  meditating  about  my  heavy  lot: 
suddenly  I  saw — it  was  no  dream — Truth  before  me. 

"  My  light  will  show  the  path  to  happiness! "  said  she. 
"  Let  me  bat  wish, — and  I  will  teach  you,  impassioned  one, 
joyful  dispasaiooatenefls: 

**  Though  through  me  you  may  loae  the  heat  of  your  heart; 
though,  teaming  to  know  people,  you,  perchance^  frightened, 
may  cease  to  love  your  iieighbooni  and  your  friends. 

"  I  shaU  destroy  all  thedlianns  of  ezistenoe,  hot  shall  pat 
your  mind  aright;  I  shall  pour  an  austere  odd  over  your 
soul,  but  shall  give  it  calm."  ' 

I  trembled,  as  I  listened  to  her  words,  and  grievously  I 
replied  to  her:  "  O  unearthly  guest,  sad  is  your  visitation  I 

' '  Your  light  is  the  funereal  light  of  all  earthly  joys !  Your 
peace,  alas!  is  the  melancholy  peace  of  the  grave,  and  it  is 
terrible  to  the  living ! 

*'  No,  I  am  not  yours:  in  your  severe  science  I  shall  not 
find  happiness  I  Leave  me:  I  will  somehow  manage  to  wan- 
der upon  my  path. 

**  Good-bye!  or  no:  when  my  luminary  in  the  starry 
height  will  begin  to  grow  dim,  and  when  the  time  will 
come  to  forget  all  that  to  my  heart  is  dear, — 

"Appear  then!  Open  then  my  eyes,  enlighten  my  mind, 
that,  despising  life,  I  may  without  muimnring  deacoid  into 
the  abode  of  night!" 

Nikol4y  MIkh&ylovich  Yu^koir.  (1803-1844) 

Ytepfkw  was  bora  in  Simbirsk,  when  he  remained  to  Us  twdfth 
year.  In  iSoo  he  entered  the  Sdiool  of  ICince  at  St.  Petenbofg,  bat 

before  graduating  went  to  the  nsivenity  at  Dorpat,  from  which  he 
also  failed  to  get  a  diploma.  He  passed  his  student  days  in  riotous 
bouts  that  completely  undermined  bis  health.  His  anacreontic  poems 
early  attracted  the  attention  of  Zhuk6vski  and  Pibhkin,  and  the  latter 
becmne  a  warm  firiend  of  his.  He  then  settted  in  Moeoow,  where  he 
■erred  in  one  of  the  governmental  ofiSces,  and  wrote  a  series  of  poems, 
amimg  which  To  ike  Foet,  The  ConfiagrtMom^  and  A  :^niig  IiMgki 


Digitized  by  Google 


NikoUy  Mikhiylovich  Yazjrkov  153 


are  his  best.  Ill  health  soon  drove  him  abroad,  and  there  he  com- 
poaed  bis  famous  To  the  Rhine ;  his  other  poems  of  the  same  period 
have  a  religioaa  and  patriotic  tinge.  Yai^ov's  poetry  has  been  the 
•obleGt  flf  mndi  coMlKwewiy ;  aonie  deny  the  intriuic  valne  of  hit 
production^  thongh  all  nnite  in  extolling  Uw  esqnitite  arailcihiCM 
and  harmony  of  his  verse. 

N.  H.  Dole  has  translated  his  The  Sailor  (publication  unascertain- 
ahle).  In  C.  T.  Wilson's  Russian  Lyrics^  London,  1887,  are  given 
Tk§  BturOiftmkt^  Bvmk^t  Brayar, 


THB  8AIU>R 

Cruel  is  our  lonely  ocean, 

Roaring  always  day  and  night; 
Buried  'oeath  its  wild  ootmiiotion 

Many  a  wreck  lies,  fax  from  sight. 

Courage,  comrades!   I,  confiding, 
To  the  free  winds  g^ve  my  barque; 

Forth  it  hastens,  swiftly  riding 
O'er  the  billows  gtim  and  dark. 

Thick  the  doada  fly  o'er  the  heaven, 
Fierce  the  gale  growa^— blade  the  waves; 

Hither,  thither  we  are  driven. 
While  the  waking  whlriwind  raves. 

Courage,  comrades!    Peals  the  thunder, 

High  the  watery  heaps  arise, 
Yawning  gulfs  now  draw  us  nnder, 

Noiw  we  're  Bfted  to  the  skies. 

Yet  behold,  our  ship  is  nearing 
Through  the  stonii  the  wished-for  land; 

See,  the  vaults  of  heaven  are  clearing, 
See,  the  port  is  near  at  hand. 

Thither  bat  brave  hearts  and  ready 

Will  the  billows  speed  along  I 
Courage,  r^rades !  straight  and  steady 

Flies  out  essel,  stanch  and  strong. 
— Transl.  by  N.  H.  Dok  (pablicatioa  not  ascertainable). 


154         The  Nineteenth  Century 


THE  STORM 

Lo !  behind  the  distant  mountains  is  concealed  the  beauti- 
ful day;  under  the  protection  of  the  woods  above  the  waters 
the  tremulous  shade  grows  ever  longer  in  wavelike  rows. 
In  the  river  gleams  the  evening  star, — hills,  vales,  and  shores 
are  deserted :  long  processions  of  carts,  having  left  the  fields, 
drive  into  the  village.  Now  and  then  a  watchdog  barks,  or 
the  breeze  makes  the  leaves  rustle  in  the  darkling  oak-forest, 
or  a  bh:d  flies  timidly  by,  or  a  heavy,  creaking  waggon,  drawn 
by  a  tund  hone,  and  oounting  off  each  plank  with  its  wheds, 
crosses  the  lightly  poised  bridge.  And  suddenly  a  broken, 
dull  Tattling  is  home  over  the  river,  already  silent  and 
dreamy,— and  all  is  quiet  again. 

But  in  the  distance,  at  the  edge  of  the  heavens*  large, 
cloudy  waves  have  on  all  sides  veiled  the  full  moon :  now 
they  part,  now  they  come  together  again;  now  the  silent 
clouds  threateningly  merge  into  one  mass  that,  lightning- 
bearing  and  black,  steals  from  the  east  upon  the  azure  vault. 
Already  is  the  speechlessness  of  the  woods  disturbed  by  the 
encroachment  of  the  wind;  no  longer  is  the  nightly  flowing 
of  the  river  peaceful  and  dark.  In  broad  ripples  flash  upon 
it  the  far-stretched  groves  of  shadows, — just  as  a  sail,  trem- 
bling in  the  air  and  almost  furled  by  the  sailor,  when  suddenly 
a  storm  arises,  and  rolling  the  noisy  floods,  seizes  the  pinion 
of  his  barque  and  strelclies  it  above  the  whiriing  waten. 

Daricness  has  drowned  the  heavens;  lain  ponn  down; 
the  storm  agitates  and  stirs  the  waters  and  the  woods.— it 
lightens^  tfannden^  and  raves.  Wondrons  moments!  When 
flcom  end  to  end,  through  the  stormy  donds  a  furrow  of 
toothed  lightning  gleams  in  purple  fire,— then  everything 
is  seen:  thediain  of  the  distant  mountains  and  the  varie- 
gated pictures  of  the  windings  of  the  Sor6t,  the  lakes,  the 
villages,  the  banks,  and  the  vales.  Suddenly  the  darkness 
grows  more  grim  and  murky,  the  thunder  claps  are  louder; 
noisier,  thicker,  faster  are  the  torrents  of  the  rain.  But  to- 
morrow the  luminary  of  the  day  will.  luxurious  alence, 
appear  in  the  light-blue  heaven,  am  will  re-estabUsh  a 
golden  morning  in  the  storm-washed  country. 


t 


Digitized  by  Google 


Mikhail  Y^revich  Ldrmontov  155 


TO  THE  POBT 

When  isapinlioa  has  grown  one  with  you,  and  yonr 
breast  heaves  mightily  with  it,  and  yon  perodve  yom  con- 
secration and  know  your  God-blest  path,  when  all,  by  which 
the  heavenly  gift  is  patent  upon  earth,  is  ready  for  your 
deeds, — ^the  light  and  heat  ol  mighty  thought  and  the  fire- 
breathing  word, — then  go  into  the  world,  that  it  may  hear 
the  prophet  I  But  in  the  world  be  holy  and  majestic,  hiss 
not  the  sugared  lips  of  vice,  b^  not,  take  no  reward, — 
whether  the  morning  star  invite  you  with  its  glow,  or  terrible 
be  the  tyranny  of  fate:  be  innocent  as  the  dove,  and  bold 
and  brave  as  the  eagle ! 

And  harmonious  and  soothing  sounds  will  rise  from  your 
thundering  strings;  in  these  sounds  the  slave  will  forget  his 
torments,  and  King  Saul  will  listen  to  them,  and  you  will 
bloom  in  life  of  high  solemnity,  and  for  ever  bright  will  be 
your  open  brow  and  piercing,  flaming  eye ! 

But  if  you  are  filled  with  the  earthly  desire  of  praise  and 
pleasure, — gather  not  rich  gifts  upon  the  altar  of  your  God: 
He  will  ungraciously  look  upon  you,  will  not  accept  yonr 
cniming  offerings;  smoke  and  tiivnder  will  disperse  them, 
—and  the  priest  wUl  recede,  trembling  with  fear  and  shame. 

Mikhail  Ytirevich  Ltonootor.  (X8Z4-Z84X.) 

L^TtnoQtov  was  bom  in  the  house  of  his  grandmother,  who  brought 
him  upafttrthees^dMrnof  bb  modier.  Up  to  his  tenUi  year  he 
WM  cdocated  at  home,  in  die  Gomitiy,  atndyitig  •event  modem  lea- 

guages  and  Greek.  In  1826  he  was  tiken  to  Moscow  and  placed  in 
the  Boarding  School  for  Young  Noblemen,  which  was  connected  with 
the  university.  He  here  distinguished  himself  as  a  student,  but  was 
much  ridiculed  by  his  mates  on  account  of  his  awkward  manner  and 
mattiaethe  exterior.  This  led  him  to  withdraw  fiom  their  company 
as  much  as  possible,  and  to  frequent  solitary  spots.  He  reed  •  greet 
deal,  but  his  favourite  author  was  Byron,  whose  life  he  set  up  as  an 
example  for  himself  to  follow.  Having  been  expelled  from  the  uni- 
versity for  some  scandalous  pranks,  he  entered  in  1832  the  School  of 
the  Onerd  Cedelt  et  St  Petersburg,  where  he  ■ooo  geined  the  tepnt* 
stion  of  a  clever  poet  of  immodeit  vence.  After  gndnedon  he 
pined  hie  life  in  e  whiri  of  lociety  pletsttree  at  St.  Petenhotg  and  ek 


15^         The  Nineteenth  Century 


Ts&rskoe  Sel6.  Pushkin's  death,  in  1837,  roused  L^rraontov  from  his 
inactivity.  The  poem,  On  the  Death  0/ the  Poet^  which  he  then  wrote, 
and  trfiieli  was  aptead  over  Rmala  In  a  huge  nnmlwr  of  ttanaacript 
copies,  caoied  a  aenaation  in  Ugher  aociety,  and  he  waa  bantohcd  for 

it  to  the  Caucasus,  but  was  soon  returned  to  the  army.  L6montov 
was  at  that  time  little  known  to  the  public  at  large,  though  his  poem 
**  Borodin6 "  had  just  appeared,  as  he  kept  himself  aloof  from  the 
fiterazy  coteries.  He  first  attracted  universal  attention  bj  his  Ballad 
^ih€  Tuat  ItfAn  Viuttemekt  after  which  followed  a  long  aetiea  of  hia 
fomoaa  poems,  and  the  prose  novd.  The  Hero  of  our  Time.  In  1840 
he  was  agaiu  banished  to  the  Caucasus  for  having  fought  a  duel,  bat 
the  next  year  he  was  killed  in  another  duel  with  a  fellow-officer. 

L6rmoDtov  had  displayed  unusual  talent  before  the  age  of  twenty, 
and  before  Ua  twenty-eighth  yeAr  he  had  achieved  a  fepntatioa  that 
la  hardly  second  to  P6alikln'a.  Hia  fervid  fanaginalion  led  him  to  add 
to  his  fashionable  Byronlan  mood  a  charm  entirely  his  own :  his 
melancholy  and  pessimism,  which  find  their  most  beautiful  expression 
in  his  long  poem,  The  Demon,  do  not  leave  the  reader  disheartened 
and  disappointed,  bnt  rather  invite  to  peniivie  nedltatioa,  HIi  podsj 
gives  the  fanpresaion  of  having  no  rdation  to  active  life ;  It  aeena  as 
though  the  questions  of  the  day  did  not  exist  for  him.  This  is  petQjr 
due  to  the  fact  that  he  stood  aside  from  the  literary  circles,  but  more 
especially  because  he  wrote  at  a  time  when  the  application  of  art  to 
life  had  not  yet  become  the  watchword  of  Russian  poets.  He  there* 
fote  charaeterisea  the  transition  period  ftom  PAdikIn  to  OdgoL  He 
was  entirely  under  the  influence  of  Byron,  wlthoot,  however,  Inhefit* 
ing  his  political  and  humanitarian  ideals. 

There  are  several  translations  of  his  prose  tale  :  Sketches  of  Russian 
Life  in  the  Caucasus,  by  a  Russe  (a  literary  forgerj),  London,  1853 ; 
j1  Hero  of  Our.  TImmss,  now  first  txandated  into  English,  London* 
1854 ;  The  H^m  9mr  Dt^t  feom  the  Russian,  by  T.  Pnladcy  (in 
The  Parlour  Library),  London,  [1854] ;  A  Hero  of  Our  Time,  from 
the  Russian,  by  R.  I.  Lipmann,  London,  [1886];  Russian  Reader: 
Lermontoffs  Modem  Hero,  with  English  translation  and  biograph- 
ical sketch,  by  Ivan  Nestor-Schnormann,  Cambridge  Unlvcnity  Snas, 
1899.  r4MM«w^artof^«y94;^^r  7{iM^)  was  alao  given  In  Kal^ 
and  General  Automatic  Library,  London,  [1892].  The  Demon  has 
been  translated  twice:  TJie  Demon,  translated  from  the  Russian,  by 
A.  Condie  Stephen,  London,  1875,  2nd  ed.,  1881,  3rd  ed.,  1886;  The 
Demon  of  Lermontoff,  translated  from  the  Russian,  by  Franda  Stoir, 
London,  1894.  The  haa  appeared  nnder  the  name,  The  O'r- 

OMjiM  Bcgft  transUted  throngh  the  German,  by  &  8.  Gonant,  Boaton, 
1875- 

The  following  separate  poems  have  been  translated  into  English : 


Digitized  by  Google 


Mikhail  YCirevich  L^rmpntov  157 


The  Gifts  of  Terek,  by  T.  B.  Shaw,  in  Edinburgh  Blackwood  Maga- 
zine, vol.  liv. ;  Rememhereit  thou  the  day,  by  W.  R.  A.lger,  in  The 
PUtry  of  the  Orimt,  Borton,  1865  ;  Gifts  of  tkg  Ttnk,  ThtCupof 
i4fe^  Co&Mdk  Omdlmtg,  Tke  BFwmer,  by  A.  B.  SUfey,  la  Blicik- 
wood's  Magazine,  yol.  cxxxvi. ;  God's  Present  in  Nature^  Clouds, 
The  Cup  of  Life,  The  Bark,  The  Dispute,  Circassian  Sonj^,  Cossack 
Cradlesong,  The  Prisoner^  The  Deserter,  Tke  Dream,  Stanzas,  Tke 
Nm^s  Sang,  Prayer,  Tke  Brmuhfifom  PtUOine,  by  C  T.  'maa^  ia 
RmssUm  Lyrics^  London,  1887;  The  Angelt  Tke  Voynet  Bfegfer^ 
Thanksgiving,  On  Death  of  PUshkin,  Dnatn,  Clouds,  How  Weary, 
Alone  I  pass  along  the  lonely  road,  Men  and  Waves,  The  Queen  of 

the  Sea,  The  Prophet,  When  my  native  land.  To  ,  The  Dagger, 

Not for  Tkee,  DispuU,  "  Why  t "  Moscow,  is  J.  Pollen's  Rhymes  from 
ike  Jlussiamt  London,  1891 ;  in  Ffco  Rnitin  liave  appeared :  fay  O.  R. 
Tomson,  The  P)et,  in  vol.  i.,  No.  6;  by  Mary  Grace  Walker,  Tlhe 
Death  of  Pushkin,  in  vol.  x.,  Nos.  6  and  7,  My  Neighbour,  in  vol. 
xL,  No.  I,  My  Country,  ib.,  No.  4 ;  by  Mrs.  Ch.  Sidgwick,  At  a  Bail, 
ib.,  No.  2 ;  in-  The  Anglo-Russian  Literary  Society  have  been  pnb- 
liilied:  fay  P.  P.  Mafdumt,  Tke  Angel,  Tke  Prayer,  In  No.  xx,  Tke 
BranA/nm  Pxlestine,  and  Gratitude,  in  No.  16,  Cossack  Cradlesong^ 
in  No.  25,  Ballad  of  the  Tsar  Ivan  Vasilevich,  in  No.  26 ;  by  Miss 
G.  Shepherd,  Oh,  he  was  bom  for  happiness,  for  hope,  in  No.  13 ;  by 
A.  C.  Coolidge,  Alone  I  wander  out  along  the  road  and  The  Angela 
in  No.  14  (giirenbefiwe  in  Harvard  MontUy  Magazine,  1895);  byMta. 
Heafh,  TkeSaU,  in  Na  19;  by  J.  PoUen,  Tke  Gifts  of  the  Terek,  in 
No.  20  ;  by  Anna  Lanra  K.  Bezant,  On  life's  road  I  wander,  lone  and 
dreaming,  in  No.  21;  in  the  Library  of  the  World's  Best  Literature  is 
given  The  Cloud,  by  N.  H.  Dole,  and  are  reprinted  The  Prisoner  and 
TheCmp  of  Life,  by  Staley,  and  Tke  Angel,  by  Pdten. 

PROM  «  A  HERO  OP  OUR  TIMBS'» 

KAKSfiC  MAKdflfVCH 

Leaving  Maksdn  Maksfmych,  I  rode  at  a  rapid  gait 
through  the  T6rek  and  Dary&l  canons,  breakfasted  in  Raz- 
b6k,  drank  tea  at  I4ni»  and  hastened  away  for  sapper  to 

Vladikavkdz. 

I  stopped  at  the  inn  where  all  passengers  stop  1  was 

told  that  I  should  have  to  pass  three  days  longer  here,  since 
the  chance-team  had  not  yet  returned  from  Ekaterinogrdd 
and,  consequently,  could  not  start  on  its  return  journey. 


isB         The  Nineteenth  Century 


Tlie  fifit  day  I  passed  londy.  Baily  In  tlie  moniiiig  of 
the  nest  day  a  vehlde  dxove  into  the  yaxd.  "Ah,  Makrfm 
Makifinych! "  We  met  like  old  friends.  I  offered  him  my 
room;  he  aooqited  it  widioot  oeremony,  even  clapped  me  on 
my  dioolder  and  curved  his  month  in  the  manner  of  a  aodle. 
Wbat  a  queer  fellow ! 

Maksim  Makaimych  was  well  versed  in  the  culinary  art: 
he  could  broil  a  pheasant  remarkably  well,  superbly  seasoned 
it  with  cucumber  sauce,  and  I  must  confess  that  without  him 
I  should  have  been  obliged  to  live  on  dry  food.  A  bottle  of 
Kakhetine  wine  helped  us  to  forget  the  modest  number  of 
our  dishes,  of  which  there  was  but  one,  and  lighting  our 
pipes  we  seated  ourselves, — I  at  the  window,  be  at  the  stove, 
for  it  was  a  damp  and  cold  day.    We  were  silent. 

We  sat  for  a  long  time.  A  few  vehicles  with  dirty  Armen- 
iana  drove  into  the  yaid  of  the  inn,  and  bdiind  them  an 
empty  carriage. 

*'  Thank  the  Lofd!  *'  said  ICaksIm  Ifakshnych,  approadi- 

ing  the  window.  "  What  a  fine  carriage! "  he  added  

"Whocanithe?  Let  ns  go  and  find  oat" 

We  went  into  the  oofridor.  A  lack^  waa  dragging,  with 
the  help  of  the  driver,  aome  portmanteaus  into  a  room. 

"  Listen,  friend,"  the  staff-captain  asked  him,  "  to  whom 

does  this  magnificent  carriage  hdong?  ^Eh?  Afinecar* 

riage!" 

The  lackey  did  not  turn  around,  but  muttered  something 
as  he  opened  the  portmanteau.  Maksfm  Maksimych  grew 
angry.  He  touched  the  rude  fellow  on  the  shoulder  and 
said  to  him:  "  I 'm  talking  to  you,  my  dear  fellow." 

**  To  whom  the  carriage  belongs  ?   To  my  master  ?  ** 

*•  And  who  is  your  master  ?  '* 

"  Pech6rin." 

'*  Yoa  don't  say?  Pech6rin?  Oh,  good  God!  Did  n't 
he  serve  in  the  Cancasns?  "  exclaimed  Itfakshn  Maksfmych, 
palling  me  by  the  sleeve.  Joy  glistened  in  his  tytB. 

"  I  tUnk  he  did,  tmt  I  have  not  been  long  with  Um." 

"Wdl,  that 'sit!  Grig6ri  Aleksdndrovidi  ?  That's  his 
name?  Yonr  master  and  I  have  been  friends^*'  he  added^ 


Digitized  by  Google 


Mikhail  Y6revich  L^rmontov  159' 


giving  tbe  lackey  a  friendly  alap  on  tlie  dumlder  that 
made  him  stagger. 

"  Sxcoae  me,  Or,  yon  are  in  my  way,'*  he  aaid,  knitting 
hisbnm. 

'*  How  funny  yon  are,  friend  I  You  must  know  that  your 
master  and  I  have  been  bosom  friends  and  have  lived  to- 
gether.  But  what  has  become  of  him  ? ' ' 

The  servant  announced  that  Pechdrin  would  remain  for 
supper  and  the  night  at  Colonel  N.'s. 

"Won't  he  come  here  in  the  evening?"  said  Maksim 
Maksfmych.  "  Or,  are  n't  you  going  down  to  see  him  for 
something  or  other?  If  you  are,  tell  him  that  Maksfm 
Maksfmych  is  here, — he  knows, — I  'U  give  you  eight  griven- 
niks'  for  v6dka."  • 

The  lackey  made  a  scornful  grimace  when  he  heard  of 
such  a  modest  promise,  but  he  assured  Maksim  Maksfmych 
that  he  would  carry  ont  his  order. 

"  He  'U  oome  right  away! "  Maksim  Maksimydi  said  to 
me^  with  a  isdiant  look.  I  *U  wait  finr  him  outside  the 
gate.  Oh,  what  a  pity  I  don't  know  Cotond  N." 

Maksim  BCakslmych  sat  down  on  a  bench  in  front  of  the 
gate,  and  I  went  to  my  room. 

An  hour  later  an  invalid  brought  a  boiling  aamov^  and  a 
ts^ot  ' '  Maksim  Maksfmych,  don't  you  want  any  tea  ?  " 
I  cried  to  him  through  the  window. 

"Thank  you,  I  don't  feel  like  it." 

"  Do  take  a  glass!  hook,  it  is  alzeady  late  and  cold." 

*•  No,  thank  you." 

"Well,  as  you  please!"  I  began  to  drink  tea  myself; 
some  ten  minutes  later  the  old  fellow  came  into  the 
room. 

"You  are  right:  it  will  be  better  to  take  some  tea.  I 
have  been  waiting,  but  his  man  went  to  him  long  ago;  evi- 
dently aomethlng  has  detained  him." 

He  httniedly  sipped  a  cnp^  declined  a  aeoond,  and  went 
again  ontaide  the  gate,  aomewat  distorbed.  It  was  dear 

*  A  gif veaidk  is  equal  to  ten  kop^s,  or  about  live  oenti. 
"Native  brandy. 


i6o         The  Nineteenth  Century 


that  Pech6rin's  negligence  annoyed  the  old  fellow,  especially 
since  he  had  only  lately  been  telling  me  of  his  friendship, 
and  since  he  was  so  sure  an  hour  ago  that  Pech6rin  would 
hurry  to  see  him,  the  moment  he  heard  his  name. 

It  was  late  and  dark  when  I  again  opened  the  window  and 
began  to  call  Maksim  Maksfmych,  saying  that  it  was  time  to 
•  go  to  bed.    He  muttered  something  through  his  teeth.  I 
repeated  the  invitation,  but  he  did  not  answer. 

I  lay  down  on  the  divan  and  covered  myself  with  my 
cloak.  I  left  a  candle  on  the  oven-bench  and  fdl  asleqt.  I 
dioald  liave  alept  quietly  if  yUkdm  ICakslmych  liad  not 
entered  wy  late  into  tiie  Toom  and  awakened  me.  He 
thvew  down  his  pipe  on  the  table,  began  to  pace  over  the 
room  and  to  poke  tbe  fire;  finally  he  lay  down,  but  be 
coogbed,  §fit,  and  towed  for  a  long  time. 

"  Are  bugs  biting  yon?  "  I  asked  him. 

"  Yes,  bags,*'  be  answered,  dnwing  a  deep  sigh. 

I  awoke  very  early  the  next  morning,  but  Maksfm  Mak- 
sfmych  had  anticipated  me.  I  found  him  in  front  €d  the 
gate,  seated  on  the  bench. 

*'  I  must  go  down  to  the  Commandant,"  heaaid, "  ao please 
send  for  me  if  Pech6rin  should  come." 

I  promised  I  would.  He  ran  away  as  if  his  limbs  had 
reg^ained  their  youthful  vigour  and  flexibility. 

Less  than  ten  minutes  had  passed  when  at  the  end  of  the 
square  appeared  the  man  we  were  waiting  for.  He  was 
walking  with  Colonel  N.,  who  bnmght  him  to  the  inn,  bade 
him  good  bye,  and  retonied  to  tbelbrt  I  immediately  aent 
the  invalid  for  Ifakdm  Makafanydi. 

The  bones  were  aheady  hitched.  The  bdla  now  and  then, 
tinkled  over  the  yoke,  and  the  lackey  had  already  twice  ap- 
proached Fedi6cin  with  the  report  that  aU  waa  ready,  bat 
Makifm  Maksfmych  had  not  yet  made  his  appeaience. 
Fortunately  Pechdrin  wia  bnried  in  meditation  and  waa 
looking  at  the  blue  crags  of  the  Caucasus,  and  did  not  aeem 
to  be  in  a  hurry  to  leave.   I  went  up  to  him. 

"  If  you  will  wait  a  little,"  I  said,  "  you  will  have  the 
pleasure  of  meeting  an  old  friend  of  yours." 


Digiiized  by  Google 


Mikhail  YArevich  Ldrmontov  i6i 


"  Oh,  that 's  so! "  he  answered  npidly.  '*  I  was  lold  ao 
yesterday;  but  wtam  is  he ?  " 

I  torned  to  the  square  and  saw  Maksim  Maksfmych  run- 
ning  at  full  speed.  A  few  minutes  later  he  was  near  us;  he 
could  hardly  breathe;  perspiration  ran  down  his  face;  wet 
tufts  of  grey  hair  stood  out  from  under  his  cap  and  stuck 
to  his  brow;  his  knees  were  trembling.  He  wanted  to 
throw  himself  on  Pech6rin's  ueck,  but  the  latter  quite  coldly, 
though  with  a  pleasant  smile,  stretched  out  his  hand  to  him. 
The  staff-captain  was  stupefied  for  a  moment,  but  then 
eagerly  grasped  his  head  with  both  of  his:  he  could  not 

"Howgladlam^dear  MaksfmliCakfllmydil  Wdl,hoir 
are  you  gettiaff  along?"  Pech6rin  aaked« 

"And  thou?  and  yon?"  the  old  man  motteied  with  teais 
in  his  eyes.  "  How  many  yean— how  many  days— but 
where  aie  yon  going  to  ?  " 

"  I  am  going  to  Persia,  and  still  farther," 

'*  Right  away?  Do  stay  here  a  while,  my  friendl  Are 
we  really  going  to  separate  at  onoe  ?  We  have  not  seen 
each  other  for  so  long." 

"  I  must,  Maksfm  Maksfmych,"  was  his  answer. 

*'0  Lord!  Where  are  you  hurrying  so?  I  should  like 
to  tell  you  so  much,  and  ask  you  so  much!  Well,  have  you 
retired  ?   What  have  you  been  doing  ?  " 

'*  Having  ennui!  "  Pech6rin  answered,  smiling. 

"  Do  you  remember  our  life  in  the  fort  ?  'T  was  a  fine 
country  for  hunting!  You  were  a  passionate  hunter!  And 
Bdla?" 

Pech6rin  grew  dightly  pale  and  ttirned  away. 

"  Yes»  I  remember! "  he  said,  yawning  forcedly* 

Maksim  Maksfmych  b^an  to  entreat  him  to  stay  an  hour 
or  two  with  him. 

"  We  shall  have  a  fine  dinner,"  he  said.  "  I  have  two 
pheasants,  and  the  Kakhetine  wine  is  excellent,  of  oourse 
not  what  it  is  in  Georgia,  yet  of  the  best  sort.  We  shall 
talk.  Yon  will  teU  me  olyonr  life  in  St.  Petersburg.  WdU, 
what  do  you  say  ?  " 

VOL.  n.— «i. 


i62         The  Nineteenth  Centuiy 


"  Really,  I  have  nothing  to  tell,  dear  Maksim  Maksi'mych. 
Now  good-bye,  I  must  go,  I  am  in  a  hurry.  Thank  yott 
for  remembering  me,"  he  added,  taking  his  hand. 

The  old  man  knit  his  eyebrows.  He  was  sad  and  angiy, 
though  he  tried  to  hide  it. 

"  Forget?  No,  I  have  forgotten  nothing.  Well,  God  be 
with  youl   I  hoped  to  meet  you  differently. " 

"  Well,  wen  I "  said  Pech6rin,  embracing  him  in  a  friendly 
manner.  "Am  I  not  the  aame?  Wliat  *8  to  be  done? 
Bach  one  has  his  road  laid  oat  God  knows  if  we  shall 
ever  meet  again!  ** 

He  was  already  in  the  carriage  when  he  said  this,  and  the 
driver  was  arranging  the  reins. 

"Wait,  wait!"  Maksim  Maksimych  suddenly  shouted, 
catching  hold  of  the  door  of  the  carriage:  "  I  almost  forgot. 
I  have  your  papers,  Grig6ri  Aleksdndrovich,  and  I  have 
been  dragging  them  along  with  me.  I  had  hoped  to  find 
you  in  Georgia,  but  by  the  will  of  God  we  have  met  here. 
What  shall  I  do  with  them  ?  " 

"Whatever  you  please  1"  answered  Pechdrin.  "Good- 
bye!" 

"So  you  are  making  for  Persia?  When  will  yon  be 
back  ?  "  Maksim  Maksi'mych  cried  after  him. 

The  vehicle  was  far  off,  but  Pech6rin  made  a  sign  with 
his  hand  which  could  be  interpreted  as  follows:  "Hardly! 
And  there  is  no  reaaoii  why  I  should!  *' 

The  tinkling  of  the  bell  and  the  rattling  of  the  wheda  on 
the  flinty  road  had  long  died  away,  but  the  poor  old  man 
was  still  standing  in  the  same  piece,  buried  an  meditation. 

"  Yes,"  he  said  at  last,  trjring  to  assume  an  indifferent 
look,  though  from  time  to  time  a  tear  of  indignation  glit- 
tered on  his  eyelashes.  "We  have  been  friends,  but  what 
does  friendship  nowadays  mean?  What  interest  can  he 
have  in  me  ?  I  am  not  rich,  have  no  title,  and  am  not  a 
match  for  him  as  to  age.  What  a  swell  he  has  become 
since  he  has  been  in  St.  Petersbtu'g.  What  a  carriage! 
How  much  luggage!  And  what  a  proud  lackey!" 
These  words  were  pronounced  with  an  ironical  smile. 


Diyiiizea  by  LaOOgle 


Mikhail  YArevich  L^rmontov  163 


**  Tdl  me,"  lie  oontiiiiied,  tandng  towards  me:  "  Wliat  do 
yon  Uunk  about  it  ?  What  demon  carries  him  now  to  Per- 
da?  It  '8  ridknlous,  upon  my  word,  ridicnloiisl  I  alwa3r8 
knew  that  he  was  a  flighty  man  upon  whom  one  could  not 
rely.  But,  really,  it 's  a  pity  he  should  end  so  badly, — it 
can't  be  otherwiael  I  always  said  it  does  no  good  to  foiget 
old  friends!" 

Here  he  turned  away  to  conceal  his  agitation,  and  began 
to  pace  up  and  down  the  yard,  near  his  vehicle,  as  if  to 
examine  the  wheels,  while  his  eyes  kept  filling  with  tears. 

"Maksim  Maksimych,"  I  said,  walking  over  to  him, 
"  what  kind  of  papers  are  those  that  Pech6rin  has  left 
with  you  ?  ** 

"  God  knows!  Some  mcmolfB." 

"  What  will  you  do  with  them  ?  " 

"Whalt  I  *11  have  them  made  into  cartridges." 

"  Too  liad  better  give  them  to  me," 

He  looked  at  me  in  wonderment,  mntteied  ^^—tf^wg 
throngh  his  teeth,  and  began  to  rummage  throogh  Us  port- 
manteau. Then  he  took  out  a  notebook,  threw  it  oontempt- 
uoody  on  the  floor,  then  another,  a  third,  a  tenth,  and 
they  had  all  the  same  £^e:  there  was  something  c^iM<tt|i  in 
his  anger;  I  was  amused,  and  I  pitied  him. 

*'  Here  they  are,"  said  he.  "  I  congratulate  yon  with 
your  find." 

"And  I  may  do  with  them  what  I  wish  ? " 

"As  far  as  I  am  concerned,  you  may  print  them  in  news- 
papers. What  do  I  care  ?  What  am  I  to  him  ?  Neither  a 
friend,  nor  a  relative.  It  is  true,  we  have  lived  a  long  time 
together  under  the  same  roof.  But  there  are  many  others 
with  whom  I  have  lived! " 

I  grabbed  the  books  and  carried  them  quickly  away,  fear- 
ing that  the  captain  might  regret  his  action.  Th^  an- 
nounced to  us  soon  after  that  the  carriage  would  start  in  an 
hour.  I  gave  orders  to  pack.  The  captain  entered  the 
room  as  I  was  putting  on  my  cap.  He  was  evidently  not 
getting  ready  to  tiavd;  he  had  a  kind  of  a  iomd,  oold 
look. 


i64         The  Nineteenth  Century 


*' Are  n't  yoa  going,  MakiCm  Makadnjch  ?  " 

"  No,  sir." 

*'  I  have  not  yet  seen  the  Commandant,  and  I  hive  to 

hand  over  to  him  some  Crown  gooda." 
**  But  you  have  been  with  him  ?  " 

"  Yes,  I  have,  that  's  so,"  he  said,  hesitatingly,  "  but  he 
was  not  at  home,  and  I  did  not  wait  for  his  return." 

I  understood  him — the  poor  old  man  had,  probably  for  the 
first  time  in  his  life,  neglected  his  official  duties  for  private 
reasons,  as  they  say  in  chancery  language,  and  how  he  was 
nvnucdedlbr  itl 

"Very  florry,  Mikjrfm  Maksfmych,  that  we  are  to  part 
befiwe  our  time." 

"  We  iitiooath  old  men  can't  keq>  np  with  yon!  You 
are  a  wocldly,  proud  young  aet  Aa  long  aa  yon  are  under 
Ciicaaaian  tralleta,  you  are  passable,  tmt  when  yon  meet  one 
of  oar  kind  later,  you  are  aahamed  to  stretch  out  your  hand 
to  him. 

'*  I  have  not  deserved  these  reprosdies>  Maksim  Mak- 
sfmych." 

"  I  shotdd  not  have  mentioned  it,  if  I  had  not  been  egged 
on.  Aa  for  you,  I  wish  you  good  luck  and  a  happy  jour- 
ney." 

We  parted  quite  dr>'ly.  Good  Maksfm  Maksfmych  be- 
came a  stubborn,  quarrelsome  staff -captain !  Why  ?  Be- 
cause Pech6rin,  in  his  absent-mindedness  or  for  some  other 
reason,  stretched  out  his  hand  to  him,  when  he  was  ready 
to  &U  around  his  neck.  It  is  sad  to  see  a  young  man  lose 
all  his  best  hopes  and  dreams,  when  the  looe-ooloaKd  glass 
is  taken  away  from  him  through  whldi  be  had  been  looking 
at  human  acts  and  feelings^  though  Uiere  is  hope  tlmt  he 
will  exchange  his  old  iUuaioos  for  new  ooea^  not  less  transi- 
tory, bttt  also  not  less  sweet  But  what  is  to  take  their 
place  in  a  man  of  Maksfm  Maksfmych's  years  ?  The 
heart  involuntarily  becomes  hardened,  and  the  soul  cloeeo 
up. 

I  travelled  by  myself. 


Digitized  by  Google 


Mikhail  YArevich  Ldrmontov 


FROM  "THE  DBMON" 
z 

A  flombre  fiend,  a  spirit  iKmiahcd, 

Was  fl3^iig  o'er  this  world  of  fliii; 

While  thoughts  of  better  days,  now  vanUhed, 

Upon  hia  brein  were  crowding  in — 

Those  days,  when  in  the  home  of  light 

Midst  cherubim  he  too  was  bright. 

The  time  was  when  the  comet  fleeting. 

Its  soft  caressing  smile  of  greeting 

To  interchange  with  him  was  proud; 

When,  through  the  never-ending  dood, 

He  followed  curiously  the  trace 

Of  where  the  caravans  had  moved 

Of  stars,  whose  paths  were  lost  in  space,— 

When  he  believed  and  when  he  loved. 

A  happy  first-born  of  creation, 

He  knew  no  thought  of  fear  or  doubt: 

Badstenoe  then  was  his,  without 

The  wdght  of  ages  of  damnation  

And  much  and  much,— bat  no,  not  aD, 
Had  he  the  strength  that  dated  xecaU. 

¥ 

u 

Through  earthly  deserts  long  he  flped, 

Without  a  refuge  or  an  aim. 

The  ages  after  ages  fled ; 

Like  minute  after  minute,  came 

Recurring  ceaselessly  the  same. 

In  this  mean  world  o'er  which  he  leaded 

No  ill  he  sowed,  relief  afforded; 

Por  nowhste  he  resistance  met 

That  stood  against  the  snares  he  set 

Sin  did  but  weariness  beget 


The  Nineteenth  Century 


m 

Now,  o*er  the  Cwicastis,  on  higli. 

Was  Eden's  outcast  flying  by. 

Kazbek,  beneath,  with  diamond  light 

Of  everlasting  snow  shines  blinding; 

And  deep  below,  a  streak  of  night, 

Like  some  dark  cleft,  the  snake's  delight, 

In  endless  curves  the  Dar>'dl  's  winding 

And  T6rek  like  a  lion  springing, 

With  bristling  mane,  in  fur>'  roars: 

The  beast  of  prey,  the  bird,  high  winding 

Its  flight  in  azure  where  it  soars. 

Have  heard  the  cry  his  waves  give  forth. 

And  little  golden  doads  there  are 

Fram  aontfaeni  lands,— ay,  from  afar, 

To  fbOow  on  the  journey  nocffa. 

The  difis  in  serried  masses  seem. 

Replete  with  some  ntysleiioas  dream. 

To  bend  their  heads  above  the  stream. 

And  watch  his  waters  as  they  gleam 

Perched  on  the  rocfc,  the  castle  tower, 

That  stands  on  Caucasus  to  watt, 

A  giant  guardian  at  the  gate. 

Seems  sternly  through  the  mist  to  glower. 

And  wild  and  wonderful  about 

Was  all  God's  world;  but  that  proud  sprite 

With  but  a  glance  of  scorn  looked  out 

On  all  his  God  had  wrought  in  might; 

His  lofty  brow  did  naught  express 

Except  the  void  of  nothingness. 

XV 

Before  him  now  another  scene 

Had  living  beauties  to  display, 

Where  Georgian  vallejrs  robed  in  green. 

Stretched  outward  like  a  carpet,  lay. 


Mikhail  YArevich  L^rmontov  167 


One  of  earth's  happy  fertile  nooks 

Where  column-like  the  ruins  stand; 

O'er  stones  of  every  hue,  the  brooks 

Run  downward  babbling  through  the  land. 

The  nightingales  among  the  roses 

Sing  tuneful  love  in  accents  fond 

To  graceful  mates  that  ne'er  respond; 

The  plane-tree's  spreading  shade  diacloacs 

The  spot  where  ivy  thick  reposes; 

Here  gorges  where  from  burning  day 

The  timid  deer  lie  hid  away ; 

And  light,  and  life,  and  leaves  that  rustle, 

AtidTofoes*  hnndred-acmiidiiig  bttstle. 

And  plants  whose  thonaand  breaths  compete, 

And  fieioe  volaptnoiiB  noonday  heat; 

And  nights  whoae  atomatie  dew 

DistOa  a  fredineaa  ever  new; 

And  ataxs  tliat  axe  as  bright  as  ejea^ 

Aa  glances  of  the  Geofgian  maid. 

But  natme  in  all  charm  anayed 

To  no  new  throb  of  life  gave  rise 

Within  that  outlaw's  sterile  breastt 

Save  for  a  hostile,  cold  unrest; 

And  that  which  here  he  contemplated. 

He  looked  with  scorn  upon  and  hated. 

— ^TransL  by  A.  C.  Coolidge  (unpublished). 

DISPUTB 

Once,  before  a  tribal  meeting 

Of  the  mountain  throng, 
Kaab^-hiU  with  Shat-the-mountaln 

Wrangled  lond  and  long. 
"  Have  a  caxe,  Kazb6k,  my  brother," 

Shat,  the  gxcy-haired,  spoke; 
"  Not  for  nanght  hath  hnman  conning 

Bent  thee  to  the  yoke. 


i68 


The  Nineteenth  Centuiy 


Man  will  build  his  smoky  cabins 

On  thy  hillside  steep; 
Up  thy  valley's  deep  recesses 

Ringing  axe  will  creep; 
Iron  pick  will  tear  a  pathway 

To  tby  stony  heart, 
Delving  yellow  gold  and  copper 

For  the  human  mart. 
Caravans,  e*en  now,  are  wending 

O'er  thy  sUtely  heights, 
Where  the  mists  and  kingly  eagles 

Wheeled  alone  their  flights. 
Men  are  crafty;  what  though  trying 

Proved  the  first  ascent! — 
Many-peopled,  mark,  and  mighty 

Is  the  Orient" 

*'  Nay,  I  do  not  dread  the  Orient," 

Kazbek,  answering,  jeers; 
"  There  mankind  has  spent  in  slumber 

Just  nine  hundred  years. 
Look,  where  'neath  the  shade  of  plane-trees 

Sleepy  Georgians  gape, 
Spilling  o'er  their  broidered  dothing 

Poem  fd  lusdoas  grape  I 
See,  'mid  wieilhs  of  pipe-mike,  lying 

On  his  flofwered  divan, 
By  the  sparkling  pcariy  Ibnntsin 

DoMth  Teheran  I 
hoi  around  Jerusalem's  dty, 

Burned  by  God's  command 
Motionless,  in  voiceless  stillneSB, 

Deathlike,  lies  the  land. 

"  Farther  off,  to  shade  a  stranger. 

Yellow  Nilus  laves, 
Glowing  in  the  glare  of  noonday. 

Steps  of  royal  graves. 


Digiiized  by  Google 


Mikhail  Y6revich  L£rmontov 


Bedouins  forget  tbdr  sorties 

For  brocaded  tents, 
While  they  count  the  stars  and  sing  of 

Ancestral  events. 
All  that  there  the  vision  greeteth 

Sleeps  in  prized  repose ; 
No!  the  East  will  ne'er  subdue  me! 

Feeble  are  such  foes!  ** 
"  Do  not  boast  thyself  so  early," 

Ansv.ered  ancient  Shat; 
"  In  the  North,  look!  'mid  the  vapours, 

Sometbing risesi  What?" 

Secretly  the  mighty  Kasbdk 

At  this  wamiiig  shook, 
And,  in  tronble,  towards  the  nor'ward 

Cast  a  hurried  hiok. 
As  he  looks  in  perturbation. 

Filled  with  anxious  care, 
He  beholds  a  strange  commotion, 

Hears  a  tumult  there. 
I/)!  from  Ural  to  the  Danube, 

To  the  mighty  stream, 
Tossing,  sparkling  in  the  sunlight. 

Moving  regiments  gleam; 
Glancing  wave  the  white-plumed  hebuets 

Like  the  prairie  grass, 
While,  'mid  clouds  of  dust  careering, 

Flashing  Uhlans  pass. 
Crowded  dose  in  serried  phahmx 

War  battalions  come; 
In  the  van  they  bear  the  standards, 

Thunders  load  the  drum; 
Streaming  forth  like  molten  copper 

Batteries,  rambling,  boond; 
SnM^Ung  jast  before  tiie  battle 

Torches  flare  around; 
Skilled  in  tculs  of  stormy  warftie, 


i;o         The  Nineteenth  Centtuy 


Heading  the  advance, 
See!  a  grey -haired  general  guides  them. 

Threat' ning  in  his  glance. 
Onwards  move  the  mighty  r^^imeats 

With  a  torrent's  roar; 
Terrible,  like  gathering  stori2i-cloud8» 

Bast,  dne  east,  they  poor. 

Tlien,  oppressed  with  dire  ford)odiiig% 

Filled  with  gloomy  diesms, 
Stiove  Kszb^  to  oount  the  foemen. 

Failed  to  count  their  streams. 
Glancing  on  his  tribal  mountains^ 

Sadly  gloomed  the  hill; 
Drew  across  his  brows  the  mtsfeeap, 

And  for  aye  was  still. 

—Prom  J.  Pollen's  Rkymes/rifm  tke  Rmsum, 


Alone  I  wander  out  along  the  road; 

The  stony  way  glesms  through  the  mist  afiur; 
The  night  is  cslm;  the  waste  lists  to  its  God; 

And  star  Is  speaking  unto  star. 

In  heaven  wondrousness  and  grandetu*  reign; 

The  earth  sleeps  in  a  glow  of  soft  blue  sky. 
Then  why  do  I  feel  such  distress,  such  pain  ? 

What  have  I  to  await?  or  what  regret  have  I  ? 

Alread}'  I  await  no  more  from  life; 

And  nothing  in  the  past  do  I  regret. 
I  seek  for  freedom,  and  an  end  to  strife; 

I  only  wish  to  sleep  and  to  forget 

But  not  as  in  the  tomVs  too  chilly  rest, 
My  slumber  through  the  sges  I  ooooelve 

With  all  Life's  vigour  throbbing  in  my  breast—  i 

That  with  my  breathing  it  should  gently  heave,—  I 

I 

I 


Digitized  by  Google 


Mikhail  Yikrevich  L^montov  171 


Tliat  all  the  day  and  night,  to  soothe  my  ear, 
A  tender  voice  to  me  of  love  ahoidd  tfng; 

And  I  must  have,  in  green  for  ever  near, 
A  dark  oek  bending  o'er  me,  murmuring. 

— Transl.  by  A.  C.  Coolidge,  in  The  Harvard 
Monthly,  1895,  in  The  Anglo-Roasian 
literary  Society,  Na  14. 

THE  SAIL 

A  solitary  sail  is  gleaming, 

While,  through  the  haze  of  th'  azure,  she. 
In  chase  of  chance's  fortune  seeming, 

Far  from  a  cherished  home  may  be. 

The  waves  leap  up, — the  wind  is  blowing, 
The  mast  is  bending  low  and  creaks,— 

Alas  I  from  happiness  not  going, 
It  is  not  happiness  she  seeks. 

Beneath  her  prow  bine  floods  are  swelling, 

Above  her  glides  the  sunlit  fleece, 
Bnt  still  she  pxays  for  storms,  rebelling— 

As  if  in  storms  there  can  be  peace. 

— TrsnsL  by  Mrs.  Heath,  in  The  Anglo-Russian 
I4terBiy  Society,  No.  19. 

THE  PRAYBR 

In  life's  hard,  trying  moments, 

With  sorrow  in  my  breast, 
I  breathe  a  prayer  most  wonderful. 

Which  ever  brings  me  rest. 

Thete  Is  a  power  of  blessedness 

In  those  sweet  words  enshrined, 
Thought  csnnot  grasp  theur  sscred  charm 

That  cslms  the  anxious  mind. 


17^         The  Nineteenth  Century 


Doubt  stays  no  more,  the  soul  is  £pee^ 

Her  burden  rolls  away, 
Her  faith  renewed,  tears  bring  relief. 
When  this  sweet  prayer  I  pray. 

— ^Tiansl.  by  F.  P.  Marchant,  in  The  Anglo- 
Ruasian  Lriterary  Society,  No.  ii. 

THK  BRANCH  OF  PA1.ESTINE 

Branch  of  Palestine,  the  story 

Of  thy  birth  and  beauty,  say 
Of  what  hill  and  vale  the  glory 

Were  thy  Imct  mad  biMMmt  gay  ? 

Thee^  by  Jofdan's  limpid  focmtaiiu^ 

Did  the  Bastem  sttnbeam  bleas? 
Thet,  on  LcibaiuNi's  gnat  mountaiiii^ 

Did  the  flight-wind's  love  caiw  ? 

Salem'a  sons,  with  sorrow  floiitten, 
As  they  twined  thy  leaves  with  caie— 

Sang  they  songs,  in  old  times  written  ? 
Breathed  th^  then  a  gentle  prayer? 

Is  thy  parent-palm  yet  living 

Where  the  summer  suu  beats  down, 
Still  to  deaert-traveUers  giving 

Shade  beneath  her  bfoad*]eaftd  crown  ? 

Or,  thy  fided  palm-tree  sighing, 

Withered  at  thy  parting,  grieves^ 
While  the  thirsty  dust  is  lying 

Thickly  on  hex  yellow  kaves  ? 

Whose  the  reverent  hand  that  bore  thee 

From  thy  country  to  this  place  ? 
Wept  he  often,  bending  o'er  thee  ? 

Have  those  hot  tears  left  their  trace  ? 


biyiiized  by  Google 


Mikhail  Yiirevich  Ltonontov  173 


Was  lie  of  God*s  boat  the  floirer, 
Shone  his  cheek  with  fftpttive  bright, 

Worthy  heaven,  like  thee,  each  hour 
In  bis  God's  and  oomrades'  sight  ? 

Branch  from  Salem,  guard  tinnlffpiag 

Of  the  golden  ikon  fair, 
Watch  before  the  holiest  keeping, 

Thou  art  weighed  with  silent  care! 

Beauteous  twilight,  lamp-beams  o'er  thee; 

Full  of  peace  and  comfort,  shine; 
Ark  and  cross  repose  before  thee, 
Symbols  of  a  love  divine ! 

— ^Transl.  by  F.  P.  Marchant,  in  The  Anglo- 
Russian  Literary  Society,  No.  i6. 


Remember* St  thou  the  day  when  we — 

Late  was  the  hour — were  forced  to  part  ? 
The  night-gun  boomed  athwart  the  sea; 

In  painful  silence  beat  each  heart; 
The  lovely  day  found  cloudy  close; 

A  heavy  mist  the  landscape  palled; 
And  seemed  it,  when  that  shot  arose, 

An  echo  from  the  ocean  called. 

Alone  I  wander  by  the  flood ; 

And  when  a  gun  booms  in  its  might, 
I  Hiink  in  pain  bow  we  once  stood 

Togietber  on  that  parting  night 
And  as  the  moomfnl  edioes  toll. 

Muffled,  along  the  fluid  wsUSk 
From  out  the  caverns  of  my  soul 

Death  answeringly  calls  and  calls. 

— FiwnW.  R.  Alger's  The  Poetry  rf 
the  Orient,  1865. 


174         The  Nineteenth  Century 


AT  A  BALL 

How  oft,  surrounded  by  the  motley  crowd. 
Mid  whirling  dance,  and  din  of  music  loud, 

I  sink  my  senses  in  a  dream,— 
When  phnaed  eonvention,  poUsbed  fiction,  fly 
And  aU  the  men  and  women  pass  me  by, — 

Like  masks  their  faces  seem. 

When  my  cold  hands  are  met  with  colder  still. 
And  callous  city  beauties  touch  me  chill, 

Bold  but  effete,  with  hollow  cheer, 
Then,  to  appearance  wrapped  in  light  and  glar^ 
I  cherish  iu  my  heart  a  fancy  fair,— 

Echoes  a  bygone  year. 

Poisaking  all  aioond,  in  heart  and  mind 
I  fly— a  free,  fnt  bird^to  things  behind. 

And  see  myself  a  chUd  once  more, 
In  places  old  and  dear.  The  house  overhead,— 
The  garden  path  I  see,— the  ruined  shed,-* 

The  pood  well-weeded  o'er: 

And  see  across  the  pond  the  village  lie, 
From  clustered  roof  the  smoke  is  rising  high. 

The  mists  from  meadows  far  away! 
I  enter  a  dark  alley:  evening  red 
Blinks  through  the  shrubs,  and  underneath  my  tread 

The  dead  leaves  rustling  stray. 

Then  a  strange  longing  holds  me,— yearning  sore 
For  love,— my  fsncy's  love  and  nothing  more:— 

She  was  a  dream  and  yet  my  love! 
Her  aky-blne  eyes  could  flash  with  silver  flame^ 
Her  rosy  smile  with  kindling  sweetness  came. 

Like  sunrise  through  the  grove. 

Thus,  potent  master  of  my  fairyland. 
Alone  I  pass  my  hours,  and  understand 


Diyiiized  by  Google 


Mikhail  Ytirevich  L^nnontov  175 


The  spell  of  those  sweet  days  to  save, 
Unharmed,  unstained  by  passion  or  by  doubt, 
I4ke  some  fair  flowery  islet,  lying  oat 

Where  leaps  the  wild  sea  wave. 

Bot  suddenly  a  jar  teoews  my  senae,^ 
The  happy,  happy  dieam  Is  frighted  henoe^ 

That  gentle,  uninvited  guest. 
And  wild  I  long  my  steel-cold  lines  to  fling 
Upon  the  startled  crowd,  to  smite  and  sting, 
With  anger  from  my  breast. 

— Tranal.  by  Mrs.  Charlotte  Sidgwick,  In  Fkee 
Russia,  voL  xi.,  Na  2. 

DRBAM 

•Neath  midday  heat,  in  Dagestdna's  Vale, 
With  leaden  ball  in  breast  I  lifeless  lay; 

From  a  deep  wound  smoke  rose  upon  the  gale, 
And  drop  by  drop  my  life-blood  ebbed  away. 

Alone  I  lay  upon  the  sandy  slopes; 

The  craggy  cliffs  around  me  crowded  steep; 
The  sonlight  burned  upon  their  yellow  tops. 
And  burned  on  me  who  slept  no  mortal  sleep. 

A  dream  I  dreamed,  and  saw  in  qiarkling  bowers 
An  evening  feast  in  my  home,— to  away, — 

Where  young  and  lovely  women,  crowned  with  floweiii 
Conversed  of  me  in  aooents  light  and  gay. 

But,  in  their  happy  talk  not  joining,  one 
Sat  far  apart,  and  plunged  in  thought  she  seemed; 

And  oh!  the  mystery  knows  God  alone, — 
This  was  the  dream  her  young  soul  sadly  dreamed. 

She  saw  in  vision  Dagestdna's  Vale, 
Where  on  the  slope  a  well-known  body  lay; 

From  the  black  wound  smoke  rose  upon  the  gale. 
And  in  cold  streams  the  life-blood  ebbed  away. 
—From  John  Pollen's  Rhymes  from  the  Russiem. 


176         The  Nineteenth  Century 


Alekif^  Vaiilerich  Kolts6T.  (1808-2843.) 

Koltfldr  WW  fhe  wm  of  a  boigher  of  V<Nr6oedi  wbo  dealt  in  Ute 

and  tallow.  He  received  very  little  training  in  his  coarse  and  ignor* 
ant  family,  and  at  ten  years  of  age  went  to  a  scbool  just  long  enough 
to  learn  to  read  and  write.  After  that  his  father  put  him  to  work 
at  his  bofinetSi  bat  the  boy  found  enongh  time  to  read  aome  Russian 
fairy  talea  and  a  few  novels.  Dmitriev*!  poems,  which  USH  into  his 
hands,  gave  him  a  taste  for  poetry,  and  a  "  Russian  Prosody,"  given 
him  by  a  local  book -dealer,  for  the  first  time  taught  him  the  harmony 
of  verse  and  its  technical  structure.  He  at  once  began  to  compose 
poems  in  imitation  of  such  as  he  could  procure,  while  a  seminarist 
ivlioae  acqnaintanoe  be  adttvated  corrected  and  guided  bla  fiiat 
attempts.  In  1831  Kolts^  went  to  Moaoow  whera  he  was  introdnoed 
to  the  critic  Byelinski,  who  at  once  recognised  the  unusual  talent  of 
the  untutored  bard.  After  a  second  visit,  in  1836,  the  two  became 
staunch  friends,  and  under  Bjellnski's  influence  Kolts6v  produced 
the  beat  of  bia  poena.  He  toon  xetnrned  to  the  aoidid  aanrnmdingi 
of  his  native  place,  and  died  shcMTtly  after  of  consumption.  The  strik- 
ing picturesqueness  of  his  verse,  whidl  is  based  on  the  inimitable,  un- 
translatable diction  of  the  peasant,  has  given  rise  to  two  diametrically 
opposed  views :  according  to  the  one,  he  is  the  popular  bard  par  ex- 
ceUeuce:  according  to  the  other,  he  has  only  made  artistic  ose  of  the 
peaaant'a  language  for  pradndiona  that  are  eminently  refined  and, 
therefote,  removed  from  the  nndentanding  of  the  maases. 

In  English  translation  have  appeared  :  Season  of  Love,  A  Prayer, 
Ttvo  Lives,  First  Lore,  in  A  Russian  Poet,  by  W.  R.  S.  Ralston,  in 
Fortnightly  Review,  vol.  vi.,  1866;  The  Abundant  Harvest,  The 
MoweTt  The  Jhuani  Mmsing,  in  RusHam  Idylls,  by  W.  R.  8.  Ral- 
ston, in  Gontemporary  Review,  vol.  zxiii.,  1874 ;  The  FU»ighman*s 
Song,  The  PeasanVs  Misgivings,  The  Orphan,  Love's  InxntaHon,  in 
C.  T,  Wilson's  Russian  Lyrics,  1887;  The  Forest,  Betrayed  by  a 
Bride,  by  J.  H.  Harrison,  in  The  Anglo-Rossian  Literary  Society, 
No.  16,  and  i4  WkUer  Wooing,  The  Momer,  by  MM,  Roea  New* 
march,      No.  ja 

FIRST  U>VK 

Her  whom  I  loved  in  early  yeais 

So  weU,  ao  tenderly,— wbo  filled 
Wifh  a  fiist  pafliion's  hopes  and  fears 

A  heart  which  time  has  not  yet  stilled,— 
Canlfoigether?  Day  by  day  I  strive 
Her  wdl-loved  image  from  my  mind  to  drive; 


Digitized  by  Google 


Aleksy^y  Vasilevich  Kolts6v  177 


To  find  oevr  dfcania  my  old  dreams  to  efface, 
And  let  another  love  my  early  love  replace. 
But  all  in  vain.   I  atrive  and  atrive^  and  yet 

Whate'er  I  do  I  never  can  forget. 
When  in  the  silent  hours  of  night  I  sleep, 

She  comes  in  dreams;  once  more  I  see  her  stand 
Beside  my  couch ;  once  more  her  accents  steep 

My  suffering  soul  in  bliss;  once  more  her  hand 
In  mine  so  gently,  mournfully,  she  lays, 
While  her  dark  eyes  on  mine  in  sadness  gaze. 
Speed,  kindly  Time,  my  thoughts  from  her  to  sever, 
Or  set  me  free  with  her  to  live  for  ever. 

— Transl.  by  W.  R.  S.  Ralston,  in  Fortnightly 
Review,  1866  (vol.  vi.). 

THB  ABUNDANT  HARVBST 
I 

With  a  toty  flame  the  dawn  buma  on  high,  but  the  fog  atiU 

broods  over  the  face  of  the  earth ; 
Till  the  day  has  caught  the  fire  of  the  sun,  and  coUed  up  the 

mists  higher  than  the  tops  of  the  hills, 
And  has  pressed  them  into  a  black  dottd.    The  black  dond 

has  begun  to  knit  its  brows, — 
Has  begun  to  knit  its  brows,  as  if  reflecting,  as  though 

musing  upon  the  place  of  its  birth, 
As  though  remembering  how  the  wild  winds  will  drive  it 

before  them  across  the  face  of  the  wide  world. 
Then  it  arms  itself  with  the  hurricane  and  the  thunderbolt, 

with  the  lightning's  flash  an^  the  bow  of  the  cloud. 
It  Ins  taken  np  arma,  and  flown  abroad,  and  tftndk  its 

atiohe,  and  poured  itself  forth 
In  a  totient  of  teais»  in  a  flood  of  rain,  ofrer  the  oopioos 

bosom  of  the  earUi. 

n 

Now  firom  heaven's  heights  the  dear  sun  looks  down.  The 

earth  a  pitenteons  draught  has  dmnk. 
On  their  com-fldds  and  gardens,  and  meadows  green,  the 

rustic  folk  cannot  gaze  enough. 


17S  The  Nineteenth  Century 


For  tfae  grace  of  God  these  rustic  folk  have  waited  long  with 

tzemUiiig  and  piayer. 
Together  with  the  sptrng  there  have  oome  to  life  the  secret 

thoughts  of  their  quiet  minds. 
Thought  the  first:  To  pour  into  sacks  the  grain  in  the  fajn% 

and  to  set  their  carts  in  order. 
Thought  the  second:   Forth  from  the  village  by  night  to 

drive  their  line  of  carts. 
Thought  the  third  When  of  this  they  thought,  to  God 

the  Lord  arose  the  prayers. 
With  early  dawn  have  they  gone  afield.    There  in  handfnls 

heaped  each  scatters  the  grain,  furrows  the  soil  with  the 

ploughshare's  blade,  or  rips  it  across  with  the  harrow's 

tooth. 

m 

I  will  go  and  gaze  with  gladdened  eye  at  what  God  has  sent 

to  men  for  their  toil. 
Above  my  waist  the  large-grained  rye  rises^  then  dmsmily 

bends  well  nigh  to  the  ground. 
On  every  side  the  corn,  guest  sent  by  God,  greets  with  a 

smile  the  joyful  day. 
Over  it  the  breeze  floats  lustrously,  streaming  this  way  and 

that  a  wave  of  gold. 
Now  in  whole  families  the  peasants  commence  their  harvest, 

cutting  close  to  the  roots  the  stalks  of  the  lofty  rye. 
Into  close-packed  mows  are  the  sheaves  collected;  from  the 

lines  of  carts  sounds  music  all  the  night  long. 
On  wmy  side'do  the  stacks  erect  thdr  heads  in  the  ham* 

yarda,— taking  up  much  room,  like  noUes  of  yore  in 

their  robes  of  state. 

IV 

The  dear  sun  sees  that  the  harvest  is  done;  so  colder  gleam 

his  last  autumnal  rays. 
But  with  warm  light  glows  the  peasant's  taper — burning 
before  the  pictured  form  of  the  Mother  of  God. 
— TftansL  by  W.  R.  S.  Ralston,  in  Tht  Contemponiy 
Review,  1874  (vol.  zziii.). 


Digitized  by  Google 


Aleksyey  Vasilevich  KoIts6v 


THE  FORBST 

IN  MBMORY  OF  PtSSHKIN 

What  does  the  silent  wood 
Dream  of  so  pensively  ? 
What  is  the  sorrow  that 
Rides  in  its  mystery  ? 

Why  dost  thoti,  Knightly  One, 
Under  its  charm's  spell, 
Head  tiiidef ended 
Hold  'gainst  the  wind-«troikc^— 

Standing  there  shamedly 
I<etting  the  slonn-doads 
As  they  pass  momently 
Burst  on  thee  savagely  ? 

Thy  helmet  of  green  leaves 
Bound  fastly  together 
Is  whirled  from  thee  far  off 
And  scattered  to  dust; 

Thy  boughs,  as  a  mantle  falla» 

Lie  all  around  thee; 
Thou  standest  ashamedly, 
Forced  to  submit  thee. 

Where  hath  vanished  now 
Speech  that  was  mighty, 
Strength  that  was  prouder  than 
AH  a  king's  bravery  ? 

A  night  there  hath  been  for  thee^ 
A  cahn  night  within  which 
Then  heardest  the  nightingale's 
Ddttgeof  song— 


The  Nineteenth  Century 


A  day  there  haih  been  for  thee 
Tritimphant»  fiogetteM— 
A  friend  and  an  enemy 
Sought  thy  oool  freahnefls; 

*T  was  late  in  the  evening, 
And  loud  blew  the  storm-blast 
Of  him  that  was  speaking 
Unto  thy  detractor. 

His  wrath  drove  the  doods  off 
That  round  thee  had  gathered. 
His  Tmt  dnng  anmnd  thee 
Like  vrind-gttsts,  bat  warmer. 

Thou  said'st  to  the  other, 
With  voice  that  changed  loudly, 
"Go,  fall  back  beyond  me! 
Go.  leave  me  in  peace! " 

That  voice  of  his  dizzied, 
As  tone  on  tone  sounded; 
Thy  very  depths  trembled, 
Their  atontcat  tmnks  reethig. 

Then,  startled  from  silence, 
To  life  thoa  awakeat; 
A  whistling  of  tempest 
Re-echoed  thronghotit  thee; 

'T  is  the  cry  of  the  wood-sprite, 
A  witch's  note  shrilling, 
Until  the  loud  rumble 
Is  borne  away  seaward. 

Where  now  all  thy  glory 
Of  verdure  and  leaf? 
Thou  'St  put  on  daik  dothing 
Of  rain-mist  and  grief; 


Digitized  by  Google 


Aleksy^y  VasUevich  Kolts6v  i8i 


wild  art  thou  and  ailent, 
But,  when  the  wind  qai^eni^ 
Thy  plaint  sadly  peala  oitt 
For  him  lost  ttntimaly. 

And  so,  thou  dark  forest, 
Life-long  hast  thou  harassed 
The  Knightly,  the  Noble^ 
To  combat  for  thee. 

Against  thee  prevailed  not 
Those  stronger  than  thou  art; 
1^8  avtamii  in  him,  though. 
Seemed  cmdly  short. 

The  woods  know  in  dreamlsnd 

That  forces  of  evil 
Their  malice  did  spend  on 
Who  least  had  deserved  it; 

From  ofif  Knightly  shoulders 
A  head  had  been  struck — 
Not  by  a  hero's  hand. 
But  by  a  recreant. 

— Transl.  by  I.  H.  Harrison,  in  The  Anglo- 
Russian  I4terary  Society,  Na  16. 

BETRAYED  BY  A  BRIDE 

Warm  the  snmmer  sun  in  heaven, 
Bnt  lior  me  no  heat  is  given ! 
Tftousk  is  the  very  heart's  blood. 
Through  the  bride  that  played  me  false. 

Griefs  Made  paU  hath  fallen  o'er  me^ 
On  my  sonow-bowed^dovm  head; 
Mortal  anguish  tears  my  sonl,  and 
From  this  body  would  it  break. 


i8i         The  Nineteenth  Century 

Neighbours  asked  have  I  to  help  me; 
No  maa  gave  me  aught  but  laughter; 
Then,  to  the  grave  of  either  parent — 
Neither  heard  the  voice  X  called  with. 

I^ght  then  changed  forme  to  darknefl8» 
Setwrim  on  the  ground  I  lay. 
Dull  the  night,  tmtil  a  tempest 
Roused  me  from  the  tombstone  oold. 

Raged  the  storm — a  horse  I  saddled, 
Bent  on  riding — God  knows  where — 
Life  is  heartless  toil  to  laugh  at, 
Man's  fate  evil  alone  to  share. 

— Trausl.  by  I.  H.  Harrison,  in  The  Anglo- 
Russian  Literary  Society,  No.  i6. 

THE  MOWGR 

I  can't  understand  it, 

I  can't  make  it  out — 

Yet  why  I  can't  see 

How  it  all  came  about  ? 

In  an  unlucky  day, 

In  an  ill  hour,  alack, 

I  came  into  this  world 

With  no  sddtt  to  my  back! 

Yet  my  grand-dad's  broad  shoolden 

Afe  mine,  as  yon  see; 

And  my  mother's  deep  chest; 

In  my  chedcs  flowing  ine 

Bums  the  Uood  of  my  atn, 

Like  milk  set  afire 

By  dawn's  crimson  light; 

And  my  locks  lie  in  clusters 

As  black  as  the  night. 

Yet,  whatever  I  do — 

Oh,  it  never  goes  right! 


Diyiiized  by  Google 


Aleksydy  Vasllevich  Kolts6v 


In  an  unlucky  day, 
In  an  ill  hour,  alack, 
I  came  into  this  world 
With  no  shirt  to  my  backl 

There 's  darling  Grunyiisha, 
The  Stdrosta's  daughter^ 
Well,  all  through  the  spring 
Did  I  patiently  Gourt  her; 
But      tlw  ^  churl, 
Was  finely  put  oati 
To  whom  has  lie  planned 
That  he  'U  many  the  girl  ? 
Oh,  I  can't  tmdeistand 
How  it  all  came  about. 
Does  he  think,  the  old  Bm, 
I  was  after  his  money  ? 
I^et  him  stick  to  hia  bcMS 
If  he  give  me  my  honey— 
'T  is  for  her  that  I  pine. 
Oh,  her  face  is  bright 
And  as  rosj'  as  sunrise, 
Her  rounded  cheeks  mellow, 
And  the  flash  of  her  eyes 
Might  drive  a  young  fellow 
Clean  out  of  his  wits. 

Ah,  't  was  only  last  night 
That  ahe  wept  ao  for  me, 
But  ber  tean  were  in  vain. 
For  her  dad  aaid  downright 
That  it  never  ooold  be. 
Shall  I  never  again 
Prom  my  sorrow  be  free? 
Come,  I  'II  buy  a  new  scytlifi^ 
And  I  *11  sharpen  it  well, 
Aye,  its  edge  I  will  whet, 
Gre  I  bid  a  farewell 


The  Nineteenth  Centuiy 


To  my  own  native  place. 
Nay,  Grunya,  don't  fret. 
Don't  worn',  dear  maid, 
Though  keen  is  the  blade, 
I  '11  not  cut  myself  down; 
Good-bye,  little  town. 
You,  hard  parent,  good-byel 
To  a  land  &r  away 
WSl  the  young  moiwer  hie. 
Down  the  Don's  bank  I  '11  atiay 
Till  I  reach  the  qnaydde* 
Where  the  aobtirha  stand  gay 
And  the  Steppe  stretches  wide. 
There,  wherever  I  glance. 
The  tall  plume^grass  is  blown. 

0  Steppe,  thou,  my  own. 
How  thy  fertile  expanse 
Lies  green  on  each  hand. 
So  free  and  so  vast, 

Till  it  reaches  at  last 

To  the  Black  Sea's  far  strand  I 

1  have  come  as  thy  guest, 
But  I  come  not  alone, 

I  have  brought  thee  a  friend, 
One,  my  closest  and  best 
See,  my  sharp  scythe  is  here^ 
As  myself  he  is  dear. 
Ob,  from  end  to  fiir  end, 
What  a  j<qr  it  will  be 
To  wander  with  him 
O'er  the  Steppers  giasqr  seal 

Swish,  work  away  shoulders; 
Swing  arms  to  and  fro, 
While  cool  on  my  face 
The  light  southern  winds  blow, 
Refreshing  and  rippling 
The  Steppe's  endless  space. 


Nikoi&y  Vasilevich  G6gol  185 


Now,  scythe,  hum  a  song, 
Flash  in  circles  thy  blade ; 
How  the  long  grass-ranks  fall 
As  the  steel  moves  along  1 

0  ye  poor  blossoms  all, 
Your  heads  are  low-laid ! 
Ye  must  dry  up  and  fade 

In  the  straight  swathes  of  grass 
As  my  young  heart,  alas, 
Withers  tspfor  a  maid,— 
And  I  lanqniah  for  Gribiyal 

1  H  rake  up  the  hay 

Till  80  high  my  stack  atands 

That  the  wife  of  the  Coaaack 

Most  pay  with  both  hands. 

I  shall  sew  op  my  pockett 

My  tveasure  to  guard, 

Then,  home  I  'U  betake  me^ 

To  the  Stdrosta  say : 

"  Though  tears  could  not  make  thee 

Give  Griinya  away, 

Thou  art  not  so  hard 

But  my  good  pieces  may." 

— ^Transl.  by  Mrs.  Rosa  Newmarch,  in  The 
Anglo-Russian  JUiterary  Society,  No.  30. 

Nikol4y  VasUevich  G6gol  (— Yan6vski).  (1809-1852.) 

G<^1  was  bom  in  the  Government  of  Polt&va,  in  Little-Russia,  and 
was  educated  at  home  up  to  his  twelfth  year.  His  father  was  a  landed 
proprietor  of  more  than  ordinary  culture,  who  had  a  private  theatre 
at  Ut  cstativ  <h>  whidi  imt  played  IMc-RnnUui  eoniedies,  boom  hii 
own.  His  gnndfiither  bad  held  an  important  post  with  tito  Zqwvfig 
Cossacks,  and  being  an  excellent  story-teller,  had  imbued  his  grand- 
son with  the  spirit  of  the  recent  Cossack  past.  At  the  Gymnasium, 
G6gol  evinced  little  interest  in  his  studies,  but  devoted  himself  with 
enthnsissm  to  drawing  and  to  the  theatie  which  be  himself  crested 
tot  Us  icIiOolMniift.  He  even  then  conipossd  wonut  eonedics  and 
edited  a  aumoscript  periodiosl.  After  graduation  he  went  to  St 
Petenbttig  in  aetxch    aamt  ooeapetioii,  but  found  himself  nnfit  ibr 


1 86         The  Nineteenth  Century 


any  work.  He  also  tried  literatare,  and  in  1829  appeared  bis  romantic 
tale  /fiMf  KMI^tuim,  It  m  to  teftxely  criticiaed  that  G6gol 
iMWght  up  the  whole  editioo  and  ooaunitted  it  to  the  flatDea.  He 

bnsied  himself  with  the  hiatofy  of  Little-Russia,  and  shortly  aAer  he 
wrote  his  beautiful  Evenings  on  the  Farm  near  the  Dikdnka,  in  which 
the  idealisation  of  the  past  and  of  his  native  country  is  already  tem- 
pered by  realism.  These  Evenings  at  once  made  him  known,  and 
ho  became  intiinate  with  Zhakdvald  and  PAahkiii.  He  dfeamed  of 
devoting  himself  to  history,  but  prolonged  labour  was  distasteful  to 
him,  and  he  did  not  go  beyond  collectinj^r  niaterial  for  his  Little- 
Russian  epic,  Tards  Bilba.  lie  really  obtained  a  professorship  at 
the  university,  but  his  professional  career  was  a  failure.  Instead,  he 
btonght  out  a  aeries  of  admirable  atoriea,  anch  aa  OU^ukiaud 
Landed  Proprietors,  The  Nose,  The  Fhaeton,  The  Mantte,  and  hia 
comedies,  of  which  the  Revizbr  has  remained  a  classic  in  the  Russian 
repertoire.  He  was  now  completely  launched  into  naturalism,  and 
waa  at  once  recognized  by  the  critic  Byellnski  (see  p.  305),  as  forming* 
aaewaduMlIn  litctatnte,  A  few  Tcaia  later  he  gave  to  the  wodd 
the  first  part  of  the  Dead  Souls,  in  which  he  reached  the  highest 
point  of  his  artistic  development.  The  plot  of  the  atory  is  simple: 
an  unscrupulous  ex-official  travels  alx)ut  the  country  to  buy  up 
peasants^  that  in  reality  are  dead  but  l}efore  the  Gk>vemment  are  still 
accounted  alive  until  the  following  census  and  are  subject  to  taxes ; 
by  nominally  tranaferring  them  to  hia  own  estate,  he  ia  able  to  mort- 
gage them  at  the  rate  of  three  hundred  roubles  for  each  "soul." 
This  plot  served  G6gol  as  a  thread  on  which  to  string  his  different 
types  of  people.  In  1836  G6gol  went  abroad,  and  slowly  succumbed 
to  a  species  of  melancholia,  which  showed  itself  in  an  increased 
tendency  to  myatidsm.  Tlda  led  him  to  bom  the  greater  part  of 
what  waa  to  form  tile  aeooad  book  of  tbit  lUad  SimiSt  and  to  pcactice 
self-chastisement. 

In  English  translation  have  appeared:  The  Portrait,  in  Black- 
wood's Edinburgh  Magazine  and  in  Living  Age,  1847  \  Home  Life  in 
Jlussia,  by  a  Rnaaian  Noble  (a  Uteraiy  forgery),  a  vola.,  London, 
1854 ;  Cossack  Tales,  translated  bj  G.  Tolstoy,  London,  [1860] ;  SL 
yohn's  Eve  and  Other  Stories,  translated  by  Miss  I.  F.  Hapgood, 
New  York,  [1886],  and  London,  1887  ;  Taras  Bulba,  by  I,  F.  Hapgood, 
New  York,  [1886],  (Lovell's  Library,  No.  1016),  and  London,  1887; 
TtkUekikoff's  Journey;  or^  Dead  Souls,  by  L  F.  Hapgood,  New  York, 
[1886],  and  London,  1887 ;  alao  DaaA  Souis,  1887  and  1888,  and  Tans 
Bulba,  1887  and  1888,  published  by  Vizetelly;  A  May  Evening, 
in  Cosmopolitan,  vol.  iii.;  The  Cloak,  in  Short  Stories,  1891, 
and  (with  The  Ibrirait  and  Old-fashioned  Farmers)  in  Wayward 
Dasia,  by  Gr£viUe,  Chicago,  1891 ;  Inspector  GeMa$ni,  or^  Revizdr, 


uiyiii^uu  Ly  Google 


Nikoliiy  Vasilevich  G6gol  187 


translated  by  A.  A.  Sykes,  London,  1892,  1893 ;  The  Inspector^  a 
comedy,  translated  by  T.  Hart  Davies,  London,  1892 ;  On  Christmas 
Evtt  translated  bj  F.  Volkhovsky,  in  Free  Russia,  vol.  x.,  No.  12; 
Marring  and  A  Madmuufis  Diawy,  in  the  Humour  of  Russia^  by  B. 
L.  Voynich,  London  and  New  York,  1895;  extracts  from  The 
Inspector,  and  from  Mirgor&d,  translated  by  I.  F.  Hapgoodi  axegivctt 
iu  tbe  Libraxy  of  the  World'a  Best  Literature. 

THB'  DNIBPER 

Wonderfiil  is  the  Dnieper  in  quiet  weather  when  aoftly  and 
smoothly  he  hurries  his  foil  waters  by  fonets  and  hilk.  He 
neither  mslki^  nor  thnnden.  Yotilook  at  hhn,  and  you  do 
not  know  whether  his  majestic  hieadth  is  in  motion,  or  not, 
and  it  looks  as  if  he  were  all  cast  of  glass  and  as  if  his 
Une,  fflinored  path,  measnieless  in  breadth  and  endless  in 
length,  meandeved  and  wound  over  the  wide  green  world. 
The  hot  sun  then  joyfully  looks  down  from  his  height  and 
plunges  his  beams  in  the  coolness  of  the  glassy  waters,  and 
the  woods  of  the  shore  are  brightly  reflected  therein.  Green- 
locked  ones!  They  crowd  together  with  the  field  flowers  to 
the  brink,  and  bending  over  look  into  the  water,  and  do  not 
get  tired  looking  at  their  bright  image,  and  smile  to  it,  and 
greet  it,  shaking  their  branches.  They  dare  not  look  into 
the  middle  of  the  Dnieper;  none  but  the  sun  and  the  blue 
sky  look  upon  it;  rarely  a  bird  flies  to  the  middle  of  the 
Dnieper.  Proud  one!  There  is  uot  a  river  in  the  world 
like  him. 

Wonderful,  too,  is  the  Dnieper  in  a  warm  summer  night, 
when  all  is  asleep,— man,  and  beast,  and  bird,— and  God 
alone  majesticaUy  surveys  heaven  and  earth  and  majesticslly 
waves  His  garment.  Prom  the  garment  fall  stars;  stars  bum 
and  gleam  over  the  world,  and  all  together  are  reflected  in  the 
Dnieper.  The  Dnieper  holds  them  all  in  his  morky  lap;  not 
one  of  them  will  escape  him,  tmless  it  be  dimmed  in  heaven. 
The  black  forest,  weighted  down  by  aleeinng  ravens,  and  an- 
ciently disrupted  mountains  hang  down  over  him  and  attempt 
to  cover  him  with  their  long  shadows.  In  vain  I  There  is 
nothing  in  the  world  that  cotdd  cover  the  Dnieper.  Ever 
blue,  he  treads  his  gentle  floods  in  the  night  as  in  the  day, 


i88         The  Nineteenth  Century 


and  may  be  seen  as  far  as  the  human  eye  can  see.  Proceed- 
ing in  his  voluptuous  course  and  hugging  the  shore  in  the 
coolness  of  the  night,  he  leaves  behind  him  a  silvery  streak 
which  flashes  like  the  blade  of  a  Damascus  sabre,  but  the 
Uue  one  again  falls  asleep.  Even  then  the  Dnieper  is  won- 
derfol,  and  there  is  no  river  like  him  in  the  whole  world! 

But  when  the  grey  donds  past  like  monntains  over  the 
sky,  the  black  focest  shakes  to  its  roots,  the  oaks  crack,  and 
the  lightnings,  piercing  through  the  doods,  at  once  illnmine 
the  whole  world, — ^then  the  Dnieper  is  terrible  I  The  mounds 
of  water  thunder  as  they  beat  against  the  mountains,  and 
with  a  splash  and  groan  they  rush  back,  and  weep,  and  lose 
themselves  in  the  distance.  Thus  grieves  an  old  Cossack 
mother  as  she  leads  her  son  to  the  army:  in  his  best  spirits 
and  boldly  he  rides  forth  on  his  black  charger,  his  arms 
akimbo,  his  cap  poised  jauntily;  but  she  sobs  and  runs  after 
him,  seizes  him  by  his  stirrup,  catches  his  bridle,  and  wrings 
her  hands,  and  is  dissolved  in  bitter  tears. 

THE  REVIZ6r 

ACT  I.    (room  in  the  Burgomaster' s  house).    SCENE  i.  THE 

BURGOMASTER,  CURATOR  OK  CHARITABLE  INSTITU- 
TIONS, INSPECTOR  OF  SCHOOLS,  JUDGE,  CAPTAIN  OF 
POUCE,  DOCTOR,  TWO  SERGEANTS  OF  POUCE 

Bwgcmoikr.  Gentlemen,  I  have  called  you  together  to 
give  yon  a  very  disagreeable  piece  of  news:  a  Itevix6r  Is 
coming. 

Judge.  What,  a  Reviz6r  ? 
Curmtor,  What,  a  Reviz6r  ? 

Burgomaster,  A  Reviz6r  from  St.  Petersbuig,  inoQgnito, 
and  with  secret  instructions,  if  you  please. 

Judge.  I  declare! 

Curator.  Things  have  been  too  easy  with  us,  so  there  it  is. 

Inspector.  Good  gracious!    With  secret  instructions! 

Burgomaster.  I  really  had  a  presentiment  of  it:  last  night 
I  did  nothing  but  dream  of  two  extraordinary  rats.  I  tell 
you,  I  never  saw  the  like  of  them;  they  were  black  and  of 


Digitized  by  Google 


Nikolay  Vasilevich  G6gol  189 


tmosual  size.  They  came,  nosed  arowid,  and  went  away. 
I  'U  zead  to  you  the  letter  I  received  from  Andrdy  Iv^novich 
Chmykhov  whom  you,  Artdmi  FiHppovich  (Curator),  know. 
This  is  what  he  writes:  "Dear  friend,  and  benefactor" 

{mutters  in  a  whisper  as  he  runs  down  the  lines)  '*  and  to 

let  you  know."  Ah,  here  it  is:  "among  other  things  I 
hasten  to  inform  you  that  an  official  is  here  with  instruc- 
tions to  inspect  the  whole  Government,  and  especially  our 
county  {significantly  raises  his  finger).  I  have  learned  this 
from  most  trustworthy  people,  although  he  passes  himself 
for  a  private  individual.  Knowing  that,  like  all  people,  you 
have  flome  peccadilloes,  for  you  area  dever  fellow  and  don't 

let  things  slip  tlixongh  yoor  fingers  "    {^Stops^  Oh, 

tliat  '8  private  I  advise  you  to  take  the  praper  pncau- 

tion,  for  he  is  likely  to  oome  any  hour,  if  he  has  not  arrived 

yet  and  is  not  living  somewhere  ino^piito  Yesterday  " 

 Oh,  these  are  family  matters:    sister  Anna  Kirflovna 

has  heen  visiting  us  with  her  husband ;  Ivdn  Kirflovich  has 

grown  very  stout,  and  is  all  the  time  playing  the  fiddle  ' ' 

and  so  fortii,  and  so  forth.   So  that 's  the  way  it  stands! 

Judge.  But  that 's  an  unusual  afEair.  There  must  be 
something  back  of  it. 

Inspector.  But  what  is*  that  all  for,  Ant6n  Ant6novich 
(Burgomaster)  ?   Why  is  the  Reviz6r  coming  to  us  ? 

Burgomaster  {sighing).  Wh}'!  It  's  evidently  our  fate! 
(^Sighing  again.)  Thanks  to  the  Lord,  they  have  come 
down  on  other  towns  before  this;  but  now  our  turn  has 
come. 

Judge,  I  think,  Ant6n  Ant6novich,  that  there  is  a  ddi- 
cate  reason  of  a  political  nature  behind  all  this.  It'ssimply 
this:  Russia,  you  see,  is  about  to  wage  war,  and  the  Minis- 
ter has  sent  a  i^edal  oflteial  to  find  out  whether  there  is  not 
any  treason  here. 

BurgomtaUr,  What  a  guess!  And  you  call  yourself  a 
clever  man!  Treason  in  a  county  town!  Does  it  lie  on  the 
border,  eh  ?  Why,  you 'd  have  to  gallop  three  years  fsxm 
here  to  get  to  another  country. 

Judge,  No,  let  me  tell  you.  You  don't  no,  you  don't 


The  Nineteenth  Centuiy 


 The  goverament  is  pretty  shxewd  aboat  things:  never 

mind  its  being  far  away,  bat  the  goveminent  Is  on  the  look- 
out. 

Burgomaster.  Let  it  be  or  not,  but  I  have  given  you 
warning,  gentlemen,  so  take  notice!  I,  for  my  part,  have 
taken  some  precautions,  and  I  advise  you  to  do  the  same. 
Especially  you,  Art6mi  Fih'ppovich !  No  doubt,  the  official 
will  first  of  all  want  to  inspect  the  charitable  institutions 
under  your  charge,  and  so  you  had  better  give  everything  a 
decent  appearance.  Let  there  be  clean  caps,  and  don't  let 
the  patients  look  like  blacksmiths,  as  they  generally  appear. 

CnreOor.  Oh,  that  ia  not  haxdl  I  see  no  veaaoo  Ibr  not 
patting  on  dean  caps. 

Bufgomaster,  Yes.  And  let  there  also  be  written  over 

every  bed  in  Latin,  or  some  other  language  that  'a  your 

biiaiiieflak  Chiisdan  Ivtoovich,— the  name  of  eveiy  iUneas: 

when  any  of  them  got  ill,  what  day  of  the  month  ^It  ia 

not  rig^t  Ibr  yonr  patients  to  smoke  such  strong  tobacco  that 
one  has  to  sneeze  upon  entering.  Yes,  it  also  would  be  bet- 
ter if  there  were  not  so  many  of  them,  for  it  will  be  ascribed 
to  improper  care  or  the  physician's  lack  of  skill. 

Curator.  Oh,  Christian  Iv&novich  and  I  have  taken  our 
measures  in  regard  to  the  doctoring:  the  nearer  to  nature, 
the  better;  we  do  not  employ  expensive  medicaments.  A 
man  is  a  simple  affair :  if  he  is  to  die,  he  '11  die  anyway;  and 
if  he  is  to  get  well,  he  '11  get  well  anyway.  Besides,  it  would 
not  be  an  easy  matter  for  Christian  Ivdnovich  to  carry  on  a 
conversation  with  them,  he  does  not  know  a  word  of  Rus- 
sian. 

{jChrisHan  Ivd$uvieh  emHs  a  sounds  somewhere  between  ee 

Bmgmeaier,  I  ahould  advise  you  slso^  Amm6s  Fddoro- 
vich,  to  dkect  ywx  attention  to  the  oourt-house.  In  the 
antechamber,  where  the  people  wait  with  their  petitions, 
yonr  janitors  have  been  rsising  geese  with  their  goslings 
that  continually  get  between  one's  1^  I  admit  it  is  praise- 
worthy to  raise  your  own  geese,  and  there  is  no  resson  why 
janitors  should  not  rear  them;  only,  don't  you  know,  it 


Digitized  by  Google 


Nikol&y  Vasilevich  G6gol  191 


Isn't  quite  the  thing  to  niae  them  in  that  place  had  in 

mind  to  tell  yon  that  before,  bnt  I  somehow  forgoC 

ywfg^e,  WeU,  I  'II  Older  them  to  be  taken  to  the  kitchen 
this  very  day.    Can't  you  come  and  take  dinner  with  me  ? 

Burgomaster,  Then  again,  it 's  wrong  for  all  kinds  of  xags- 
to  be  bang  out  in  the  court-room  to  get  dry,  and  on  the  case 
with  the  documents  lies  a  hunting-whip.  I  know  you  are 
fond  of  the  chase;  but  it  would  be  better  for  the  time  being 
to  take  it  away,  and  as  soon  as  the  Reviz6r  has  gone,  I  don't 
see  why  you  can't  hang  it  back  there  again.    Then  again 

your  assessor  ,  of  course,  he  is  a  clever  fellow;  but  there 

is  an  odour  about  him  as  if  he  had  just  come  out  of  a  still, 
— that  won't  do  either.  I  had  intended  to  tell  you  about 
that  long  ago,  but  something  or  other  drew  my  attention 
away  from  it.  There  are  means  against  it,  if  it  \s,  indeed, 
as  he  says,  a  natmal  odoor  with  him:  yon  might  recommend 
him  to  eat  garlic,  onions,  or  something  else.  In  this  case 
Christian  IvdnoiHcfa  might  help  him  with  acme  of  his 
medicaments. 

(jOMsHan  IvdncviA  emUs  ike  same  semmd  as  btfere^ 

ym^e,  NObyoncan'tdriveit  ontof  him:  he  says  that  his 
nurse  once  hnrt  him  when  he  was  a  hahy,  and  ever  since  be 
has  had  a  brandy  smell  about  him. 

Bmfgomaster.  I  only  mention  it  to  you.  As  to  the  internal 
disposition  and  what  Audrey  Ivdnovich  in  his  letter  calls 
"  peccadilloes,"  I  can't  say  anything.  Strange  to  say,  there 
is  not  a  man  who  has  not  some  sin  to  answer  for.  God 
Himself  has  arranged  it  so,  and  the  followexs  of  Voltaire  are 
in  vain  preaching  against  it. 

Judge.  What  do  you  call  peccadilloes,  Ant6n  Ant6no- 
vich  ?  There  are  peccadilloes  and  peccadilloes.  I  tell 
everybody  openly  that  I  take  bribes,  but  what  bribes? 
Greyhound  pups.    That  's  an  entirely  different  matter. 

Bwgemasier,  Pnps  or  anything  else,  it 's  bribes  all  the 
ssme. 

yudge.  Not  at  all,  Antdn  Ant6novicb.  Bnt  anppose  a 
man's  fur-coat  costs  five  hnsdred  ronble8»  and  bis  wife's 
shawl— 


192         The  Nineteenth  Century 


Burgomaster.  What  of  it  if  your  bribes  consist  in  grey- 
*  hound  pups?  But  you  don't  believe  in  God;  you  never  go 
to  church.    I  am,  at  least,  firni  in  my  faith  and  attend 

church  regularly  every  Sunday;  whereas  you  Oh,  I 

know  you:  when  you  begin  to  talk  about  the  creation  of  the 
world,  my  hair  simply  stands  on  end. 

yudge.  I  have  reasoned  it  out  all  by  myself,  with  my 
own  intellect. 

Burgoma^,  Well,  in  this  case  much  tntelligetioe  is  wone 
than  none  at  alL  However,  I  only  mentioned  tbe  C^oonty 
Coort.  To  tell  the  troth,  there  b  not  mnch  likelihood  of 
anybody's  lodking  in  there:  it 's  an  enviable  place,  and  God 
Himself  proCeela  it  But  yon,  Luki  I^ikldi,  as  Inspector  of 
Schools,  must  take  especial  care  of  the  teachers.  They  are, 
of  course,  knowing  people,  and  have  been  educated  in  all 
kinds  of  colleges,  but  they  have  very  strange  ways  about 
them,  no  doubt  inseparable  from  their  learned  profession. 
One  of  them,  for  example^— the  one  with  the  fat  fistoe,  I  can't 
think  of  his  name, — can't  get  along,  upon  standing  on  the 
platform,  without  making  a  grimace  like  this  {imitaUs  him), 
then  he  begins  to  claw  his  beard  under  the  necktie.  Of  course, 
it  does  not  matter  much  if  he  makes  such  a  face  to  a  pupil  of 
his,  and  maybe  that  is  necessary,  for  I  am  not  a  judge  of 
that;  but  judge  yourself, — if  he  should  do  so  to  a  visitor,  it 
might  have  a  bad  effect :  the  Reviz6r,  or  someone  else,  might 
take  it  to  himself.   The  devil  knows  what  that  might  lead  to. 

Inspector,  I  declare  I  don't  know  what  to  do.  I  have 
talked  several  times  to  him  about  it  Only  a  few  days  ago, 
when  the  Marshal  of  the  Nobility  enteted  his  dassroom,  he 
made  a  hat  I  had  never  seen  before.  He  did  it  from  tbe 
goodness  of  his  heart,  hot  I  had  a  reprimand  for  instilling 
radical  thoughts  into  the  youths. 

Bwrgomtukr,  I  must  also  draw  your  attentkm  to  the 
teacher  of  history.  He  is  a  learned  man,  that 's  evident, 
and  is  chockful  of  knowledge,  only  he  lectures  with  sudi 
fervour  that  he  forgets  himself.  I  once  listened  to  his  lecture: 
as  long  as  he  was  talking  of  Assyrians  and  Babylonians, 
things  went  tolerably  well;  bat  when  he  got  to  Alexander 


Digitized  by  Google 


Nikoliiy  Vasilevich  G6gol  193 


the  GfCftt,  I  can't  tdl  you  what  became  ol  him.  I  thought 
there  was  a  fire,  upon  my  word!  He  ran  down  fimn  the 
platform  and  with  all  his  might  and  main  smashed  a  chair 
against  the  floor!  I  '11  admit  Alexander  the  Great  was  a 
hero,  but  why  break  chairs  over  him  ?  There  is  only  a  loss 
to  the  Crown  from  it. 

Inspector,  Yes,  he  is  fiery!  I  have  remarked  so  to  him 
several  times.  He  says:  "  I  don't  care,  I  'U  not  spare  my 
life  for  the  sake  of  science  I  ** 

Burgomaster.  Yes,  such  is  the  Inexplicable  law  of  fisite:  a 
dever  fellow  is  eitber  a  drunkard,  or  he  imikw>  fiion  to  that 
yon  have  to  cany  out  the  holy  images. 

Inipeetar.  God  piitaem,  ns  fiom  being  wphoolmaiteB. 
Yon  are  afraid  of  eveiytiilngl  Bverybody  neddlea  wiUi 
yon,  everybody  wants  to  ahow  that  he,  too^  la  a  dever  fellow. 

Burgomaster,  All  that  could  pass, — bat  the  accursed  In- 
COgnitol  He  '11  suddenly  poke  in  his  nose:  "Ah,  there  you 
•  are,  my  darling!  Who,"  will  he  say,  *'  is  the  judge  here  ?  " 
— *'  Lydpkin-Tydpkin."— "  Fetch  me  in  Lydpkin-Tydpkin ! 
And  who  is  the  Curator  of  the  Charitable  Institutions  ?  " — 
"  Zemlyanika.''— "  Fetch  in  Zemlyanfka! "  That'  a  what 
is  bad. 

SCBNB  2.    THB  SAME  AND  THB  POSTMASTBR 

Postmaster,  Tell  me,  gentlemen,  what  is  it, — what  official 
is  coming  ? 

Burgomasier,  Have  n't  you  heard? 

Butmadat.  1  have  heard  f  nom  Petr  Iv4«wridi  BdbdiiaabL 
He  was  just  in  my  olBoe. 

BufgimtuUr,  Wdl,  wfaatdoyoaHilnlecf  it? 

Auimusier.  What  I  tUnk?  Why,  there  will  be  a  war 
with  TttxkQT. 

That'aitl  I  thought  so  myad£ 

Burgomaster.  Well,  you  're  both  wrong. 

Postmaster,  I  insist,  with  Turkey.  It 's  all  the  Frendi- 
men's  doing. 

Burgomasier.  Nonsense^  war  with  Turkey  1  It 's  we 

VOL.  n.— 13. 


194         The  Nineteenth  Century 


who  11  catch  it,  sot  tiie  Turks.  So  mudi  is  certain;  I  have 

a  letter. 

Postmaster,  If  that 's  the  case,  there  will  be  no  war  with 
Turkey. 

*  Burgomaster.  Well,  how  do  you  feel  about  that,  Iv4n 

Kuzmich  ? 

PosHmatUr,  How  I  feel  ?  How  do  you  feel,  Anton  An- 
tdoovich? 

BurgotmuUr,  How  I  fed  ?  Not  cancUy  afraid,  but  jnat  a 
little  ahaky.  The  ahopkeqwrs  and  townspeople  wony  me. 
Th^  lay  I 've  laid  it  on  to  them;  hnt  I  dedare  that  if  I 
have  taken  here  and  there  a  thing  fram  one,  I  have  done  ao 
without  any  ill-feding.  I  even  think  {iaket  kit  eum  emd 
kadi  him  aside\  I  even  think  there  might  have  been  some 
dennndation  againat  me.  For  why  should  the  Revia6r 
come  to  na  ?  Listen,  Iv&n  Kuzmich,  could  n't  you,  for  onr 
common  good,  you  know,  just  open  a  little  and  read  every 
outgoing  and  incoming  letter  in  your  postofl&ce,  to  see 
whether  they  do  not  contain  some  denunciation  or  simply 
some  report  ?  If  there  is  nothing  in  them,  you  may  seal  the 
letters  again,  or  for  that,  you  can  return  the  letters  unsealed. 

Postmaster.  I  know,  I  know.  Don't  teach  me;  I  have 
been  doing  it,  not  exactly  as  a  precaution,  but  chiefly  from 
curiosity, — I 'm  awfully  fond  of  knowing  what 's  up  in  the 
wodd.  I  assure  you,  it  makes  most  interesting  reading! 
Now  and  then  there  is  a  letter  that  I  read  with  real  pleasure, 
— there  are  all  kinds  of  inddents  described  in  them,  and  they 
are  so  edifying,~hetter  than  in  the  Moaoow  Oasettel 

Bm^fmmuier,  Wdl,  tell  me,  have  n*t  yon  found  out  from 
them  something  about  an  offidal  from  St  F^tenbuig? 

Postmaster.  No,  there 's  nothing  in  them  about  anybody 
from  St.  Petersburg,  but  a  great  deal  about  Kostromi  and 
Saratov  people.  Really,  what  a  pity  you  do  not  read  letteni 
There  are  fine  passages  in  them.  For  example,  there  was  a 
lieutenant  who  in  a  letter  to  his  friend  described  a  ball  in 

a  most  playful  yes,  very  fine:  "  My  life,  my  dear  friend," 

says  he,  "  flows  in  the  empyrean:  there  are  plenty  of  young 
ladies,  music  is  playing,  the  flag  is  flying  ' '  he  described 


Digitized  by  Google 


Nikol^y  Vasilevich  G6gol  195 


it  with  great,  very  great  feeling.  I  purposely  kq»t  the  let- 
ter.   Do  you  want  me  to  read  it  to  you  ? 

Burgomaster.  Well,  this  is  not  the  right  time  for  it.  So 
do  me  the  favour,  Ivin  Kuzmfch:  if,  by  chance,  there 
should  be  a  complaint  or  denunciation,  keep  it  back  without 
any  further  ado. 

PosimasUr.  With  the  greatest  pleasure. 

Judge.  Look  out,  you  '11  get  into  tremble  yet. 

Pnimatler.  Good  gradoutt 

BurgonmOtr,  Not  at  all,  not  at  alt  It  would  be  a  differ- 
ent matter,  If  yon  were  to  make  a  puUie  affiUr  out  el  it,  but 
tins  ia,  so  to  say,  a  family  matter. 

ywig$*  Yea>  there  *a  mlaehief  hrewingl  I  was  really  com- 
log  to  tell  yon,  Aiit6ii  Antdiiovidi,  that  I  wanted  to  preaent 
to  yon  a  pnppy,  a  sister  to  that  dog  that  you  Imow.  Yon 
have  heard  that  Ch^ptovich  and  Varkhovinaki  have  ataited 
a  litigatloa;  so  I 'm  in  clover:  I  hunt  hares  now  on  one 
estate,  now  on  the  other. 

Burgomaster,  Lord,  what  do  I  care  for  your  hares  now! 
That  accursed  incognito  is  running  through  my  head!  I  am 
only  waiting  for  the  door  to  open,  and  

SGBNB  3.   TBF.  S^UCB,  BOBCHINSKI  AND  DOBCH&ISKI  BNTBR, 

OUT  OF  BREATH 

BMiSiM,  An  extraordinary  occnrrence! 
DMdnM,  An  nnexpeoted  ooennenoel 
Att.  What,  what  la  it? 

DMUmsU.  An  unHoireaeen  affair:  we  oome  to  the  inn  

Bobckinski  (JbUem^ikig  km),  Petr  Ivdnovidi  and  I  cooie 
to  the  inn  

DoMntnski  {intermpHHg),  Bh,  pefmit  me^  Petr  IvAno- 

vich,  let  me  tell  it. 

BohchinsH,  Oh  no^  let  me  ^let  me,  let  me— yon  are  n't 

a  good  speaker  

Dobchimki,  And  yon  'U  get  confaaed  and  you  '11  forget 

something. 

Bobchfnski,  No,  I  won't,  upon  my  word,  I  won't.  Don't 


19^         The  Nineteenth  Century 


bother  me,  let  me  tell  it,  don't  bother  me!  Please,  gentle- 
men, do  tell  Petr  Ivdnovich  not  to  bother  me. 

Burgomaster.  For  the  I/)rd's  sake,  do  tell,  what  is  it? 
My  heart  is  in  my  mouth.  Sit  down,  gentlemen!  Take 
aeats!  Petr  Iv&novich^  here  is  a  chair  for  you.  {All  sil 
tofmmi     im  Ptir  hthtoMt.)  Well,  fAatisit,  uluit? 

BoMiHtkL  AUMrme^  allovrme;  I 'H  teU  it  aU  in  oider. 
No  aooner  bad  I  the  pleaatiie  of  leaving  you,  just  as  you 
fiae  distiii!)ed  by  the  letter  yoa  liad  received, 

nut  oour,  please  doo't  intemipt  ae,       IvdnovichI  I 

know  it  all,  truly,  I  da  So^  yoo  see,  I  laa  to  Kof6bldii'a 
house.  As  I  did  not  find  him  at  home  I  turned  in  to  Ra» 
tdkovski's,  and  as  I  did  not  find  him  at  home  I  stopped  at 
Ivdn  Kuzmich's  house  to  infofm  him  the  piece  of  news  you 
had  received,  and  as  I  was  going  aw«y  tan  there^  I  fell  in 
with  Petr  Ivdnovich. 

Dobc/Umki  (JnUrrupting),  Near  the  booth  where  they  sell 
cakes. 

Bobchinski.  Near  the  booth  where  they  sell  cakes.  Yes, 
and  as  I  fell  in  ^dth  Petr  Ivdnovich,  I  said  to  him:  *'  Have 
you  heard  the  news  that  Anton  Ant6novich  has  received  in  a 
trustworthy  letter  ? "  But  Petr  Ivdnovich  had  already  heard 
that  from  your  housekeeper  Avd6tya,  who  had  been  sent  for 
something  or  other  to  Pflfp  Ivtfnovidi  Podiechdev. 

IhMimski  (pUemipiiHg),  For  a  keg  of  French  brandy. 

BoUkiiM(joafditigkimoffwiihkiskmU^  For  a  keg  of 
French  brandy.  So  Ivinovidi  and  I  came  to  Poche- 
chdev— Now,  Petr  Ivdnovidi,  please  don't— don't  in- 

termpt  me,  please,  don't  intermpt  me!  ^We  went  to 

Pochechdev,  and  on  the  way  Petr  Ivdnovidi  said  to  me: 
's  go,"  says  he,  '*  to  the  inn.  My  stomach, — I  have 
eaten  nothing  since  morning, — why,  there 's  a  rumbling  in 

my  stomach  "    Yes,  Petr  Ivdnovich' s  stomach         '*  In 

the  inn,"  says  he,  "  they  have  received  some  fresh  salmon, 
so  we  '11  have  a  bite."  No  sooner  had  we  entered  into  the 
inn,  when  a  young  man  

Dobchinski  {interrupting).  Of  good  appearance  and  in  dtL 
zen's  clothco 


Nikol^y  Vasilevich  G6gol  197 


BoMMH,  Of  good  appeaiaaoe  and  in  dthen's  doKhes, 
iwa  walking  up  and  down  the  room,  such  an  e»pitaiiion  in  his 

ftoe  phyaognomy— caxxiage,  and  np  here  {fHooes  kit 

hand  around  kis  forehead^  very  diatingniafaed.  I  had  a  kind 
of  pneaentiment,  and  I  aaid  to  Fetr  Ivdnovidi:  "  Theie  'a 
something  ap  here.*'  Yea.  And  Fetr  Ivdnovidb  beckoned  to 
the  innkeeper  and  called  him  t^^— *t  was  innkeeper  VlaSi — 
hia  wife  had  a  baby  three  weeks  ago,  such  a  lively  creature, 
he  '11  be  an  innkeeper  like  hia  father.  So,  calling  np  Vlas, 
Fetr  Ivinovich  asked  him  in  a  whisper:  "  Who,"  says  he, 
"  is  that  young  fellow  ?  "  to  which  Vlas  answered :  "  That," 

says  he  oh,  don't  interrupt  me,  Petr  Ivdnovich,  I  beg 

you,  don't  interrupt  me,  you  won't  be  able  to  tell  the  story, 
upon  my  word  you  won't:  you  lisp,  you  have  a  whistling 

tooth  in  your  mouth,  I  know          "That  young  man," 

says  he,  "  is  an  official,"  yes,  "  he 's  from  St.  Petersburg,  and 
his  name  is,"  says  he,  "  Ivdn  Aleksdudrovich  Khlestak6v, 
air,  and  he  is  on  his  way,"  says  be,  "to  the  Government  of 
Saxdtov,  and, ' '  says  he,  *'  he  is  acting  very  strangely :  he  has 
been  hm  neatly  two  weeks,  he  never  Inves  the  inn,  takes 
even^thing  on  credit*  and  won't  pay  a  kopdc."  When  he 
told  me  that,  a  light  dawned  upon  me  at  onoe.  "  Ohol  '* 
said  I  to  Petr  Ivinovich  

Dohcktnski.  No,  PetrIv^ovich,itwa8l  who  said  "Ohol" 

Bobchfnshu  Bint  yon  said  it,  and  then  I.  "  Oho! "  aald 
we.  "  What  reason  oould  he  have  to  stay  here,  when  hia 
foadistotheGovenunentof  Sar&tov?"  Yeakaur,heisthat 
very  official. 

Burgomaster.  Who — what  official  ? 

Bobchinski,  The  official  about  whom  you  have  received 
that  information, — the  Reviz6r. 

Burgomaster  {terrified).  Don't  say  that,  the  I^ord  be  with 
you!  it  is  n't  he. 

Dobchfnski.  He!  He  does  n't  pay  his  bill,  and  he  does  n't 
leave.  Who  else  could  it  be,  if  not  he  ?  His  passport  is 
made  ont  for  Sar&tov. 

BobMtM,  He — he — upon  my  word,  he  He  is  so  ob- 
serving :  he  watches  everything.  He  saw  Fetr  Ivdnovich  and 


198         The  Nineteenth  Century 


toe  eafting  salnum,— mainly  because  of,  on  account  of,  Petr 

Iviflovkh's  ntnmarh  yes,  lie  even  looked  into  oar  plates. 

I  just  trembled  with  fear. 

Bmrgomaster,  Lord,  have  mercy  upon  us  sinners!  Where 
Is  he  stajrhig  Uiere? 

DokiiiukL  Nnaiber  five,  under  the  staircase. 

BobMuki.  The  same  room  that  the  transient  officers  had 
a  fight  in  last  year. 

Burgonuister,  Has  he  been  here  long. 

Dobchfnshi.  Some  two  weeks.  He  arrived  on  the  day  of 
St.  Basil  the  Egyptian. 

Burgomaster.  Two  weeks!  {Aside.)  Friends  and  saints, 
help  me!  Within  these  two  weeks  the  sergeant's  wife  has 
been  flogged!  The  prisoners  have  received  no  provision. 
Drunkenness  and  dirt  in  the  streets!  Disgraceful!  Shame- 
ful !    (  Tears  his  hair. ) 

Curator.  Ant6a  Ant6novich,  had  we  not  better  make  an 
official  call  in  the  inn  ? 

Judge,  No,  nol  Plrst  send  the  Mayor,  the  clergy,  the 
merchants.  Itsaysin  the  bocdc  "John  the  Mason"  

BufgommtUr.  No,  nol  Let  me  attend  to  it!  I  *ve  had 
hard  cases  before  in  life,  and  I  not  only  got  ont  of  them 
hale,  but  even  received  thanks.  Maybe  God  will  anoconr  me 
nowtoo.  (TkruMif  toBiMMki,)  Yon  say,  heis  a  yoang 

man  ? 

Babckiiuki.  Yes,  about  twenty-three  or  -four  at  most 
Burgomaster^  So  much  the  better :  it  is  easier  to  get  at  the 
bottom  of  a  young  fellow.  It  is  a  tough  job,  if  you  have  an 
old  devil  to  deal  with;  but  a  young  fellow  is  all  on  the  sur- 
face. You,  gentlemen,  make  your  proper  arrangements, 
and  I  '11  go  myself,  or  maybe  with  Petr  Ivdnovich,  privately, 
just  for  a  walk  to  see  that  travellers  are  properly  treated. 
Here,  Svistun6v! 
SvistunSv.  At  your  service,  sir ! 

Burgomaster.  Fetch  me  at  once  the  captain— or,  no.  I  need 
yon.  Tell  somebody  there  to  fetch  me  the  captain  as 
quickly  as  possible,  and  come  back  here.  (Tlu  sergeant 
rtms  away,) 


Digitized  by  Google 


Nikol&y  Vasilevich  G6gol  199 


Otraiffr,  Letosgo,  lettugo,  Amm68p£do(ovich.  There 
snlgliti  indffwli  lupptfi  Mme  mbfortuiie. 
ymi^.  Whtft  m  you  afiraid  of?  Pot  ckan  nlgliteaps  on 

the  patients,  and  your  deed  is  done. 

Curator.  Bosh,  nightcaps!  The  patienti  are  supposed  to 
get  oat  gruel,  and  instead  there  is  such  a  smell  of  cabbagie  in 

the  corridors  that  you  are  compelled  to  hold  your  nose. 

yudge.  I  am  at  ease  on  that  score.  Indeed,  who  would 
think  of  looking  into  the  County  Court  ?  And  if  he  should 
take  it  into  his  head  to  glance  at  some  papers,  he  '11  wish  he 
had  not  done  it.  It 's  now  fifteen  years  I  have  been  occupy- 
ing the  bench,  but  when  I  look  into  a  brief,  I  g^ve  it  up  in 
despair.  Solomon  himself  could  not  make  out  what  is  right 
and  what  wrong. 

{The  yudge ^  Curator  of  Charitahk  /Hstiiutions,  Inspector 
€f  Schools,  mud  Potimtuler  go  out,  and  im  ike  door 
tfgaiiut  ike  ftlmrmng  sergeant.) 

FROM  "DBAD  SOULS" 
XRS.  kor6bocuka 

"  It  'a  a  fine  vOUife  yen  have  tiim^  mothokin.  Hdw 
many  aoula  ate  there  ?  *' 

'*  There  are  in  it  nigh  npoaeiglity  aocda»  my  firiend,"  aaid 
the  proprietwaa.  "  The  trooUe  ia»  timca  are  bad:  now,  laat 
year  there  was  aoch  a  fidlore  ot  crops;  God  save  na  from 
another!  ** 

"  Yet  your  peaaanta  are  rather  a  fine  lot,  and  their  cabins 
look  as  if  they  were  in  good  trim.  Oh,  please  tell  me  your 
name!  I  am  ao  distracted,  having  arrived  here  in  night 
tune  " 

"  Kor6bochka,  college  secretary." 

"  Much  obliged.  And  your  Christian  name  and  patro- 
nymic?" 

*'  NastAsya  Petr6vna." 

"  Nast^a  Petr6vna?  It's  a  fine  name—Nastlisya  Pe- 
tr6vna.  I  have  an  aunt»  my  mother's  aiater,  whoae  name 
ia  NaaUqra  Patrdvna." 


Digitized  by  Googlc 


XX)         The  Nineteenth  Century 


"And  what  is  your  name  ?  "  asked  the  propiielrcai:  "  yod 

are  the  tax-collector,  if  I  am  not  mistaken  ?  " 

"No,  motherkin!"  answered  Chidiikov  amiltilg:  "not 
the  tax-collector.    I  ara  travelling  on  my  own  account." 

"Oh,  then  you  are  buying  things!  What  a  pity  that  I 
sold  the  honey  so  cheap  to  the  merchants!  I  am  sore,  my 
friend,  you  would  have  bought  it  of  me." 

"  No,  it  is  n't  honey  I  am  after." 

"  What  then  ?  Hemp  ?  Why,  I  have  n't  much  of  it  just 
now, — something  like  half  a  pud," 

"  No,  motherkin,  it 's  different  goods  I  want.  Tell  me, 
liave  any  of  your  peasants  died  ?  " 

*'  Oh,  my  friend,  eighteen  of  them  ?  "  said  the  old  woman 
with  a  sigh.  *'Aiid  it  'a  all  good  worlcers  that  have  died. 
There  have  been  bom  acme  aince,  it  ia  true,  bat  what  good 
ia  there  in  them?  It 'a  all  small  fiy*  When  the  tax-ooUector 
cornea  anmnd,  1*11  have  to  pay  for  the  dead  ones  all  the  same 
as  if  tl^y  were  living.  I«aat  week  my  blacksmith  was 
honied;  he  was  such  a  fine  blackamith,  and  he  was  a  lock- 
smith too." 

"  Have  yon  had  a  fire,  motherkin  ?  " 

"  God  haa  flpared  me  that  misfortune.  A  fire  would  have 
been  worse;  no,  he  burnt  himself,  my  friend.  There  waa 
something  inside  of  him  that  caught  fire:  he  had  been  drink- 
ing hard.  A  blue  flame  came  out  of  him,  and  he  burnt  all 
up,  and  grew  black  like  coal.  Oh,  he  was  such  a  fine  black- 
smith! Now  I  can't  drive  out  at  all,  for  there  is  nobody 
here  to  shoe  the  horses." 

"  God's  will  is  in  everything,  motherkin!  "  said  Chfchikov 
heaving  a  sigh:  "  we  must  say  nothing  against  the  wisdom 
of  God         Turn  them  over  to  me,  Nast^ya  Petrdvna!  '* 

"Whom,  my  friend?" 

« I  mean  all  thoae  that  have  died." 
How  do  yon  mean,  to  torn  them  over  ?  " 

"  Why,  just  torn  them  over,  or,  if  yon  wish,  adl  them  to 
me.  I  *11  pay  yon  for  them." 

*'  How  do  yon  mean  that  ?  I  dedaie,  I  can't  aee  thraofl^ 
it  Do  yon  intend  to  dig  them  up  ?  " 


Nikoliy  Vasilevich  G6gol  201 


Chfchilcov  perceived  that  she  was  far  from  the  maxk,  and 
it  became  necessaiy  to  explain  to  her  the  buaiiiess.  He 
tdd  her  an  a  fisw  words  that  the  transfer  or  sale  would  be 
only  on  paper,  and  that  the  souls  would  be  mentknied  as  if 
they  were  still  alive. 

"  What  do  you  want  them  for  ?  "  said  the  old  woman,  as 
she  stared  at  him. 

That 's  my  affair." 

"  But  they  are  dead!" 

**  Well,  who  said  they  were  alive  ?  That 's  where  your 
loss  comes  in,  because  they  are  dead.  You  have  been  pay- 
ing for  them  all  this  time,  and  I  will  deliver  yon  £rom 
tffNtUe  and  expenses.  You  undentand?  I  wiU  not  only 
ddhrer  you,  but  I  '11  pay  you  fifteen  soubtes  to  boot  Well, 
is  it  clear  now?" 

"  I  oonftsa^  I  don't  know,"  said  the  pfopflctieas  ddiber- 
slely:  "  I  have  never  before  sold  dead  souls." 

"  I  guess  not!  It  would,  indeed,  have  been  an  odd  thing 
if  you  had.  Or  do  you,  really,  think  there  is  some  use  in 
them?" 

*'  No,  J  don't  think  exactly  that.  What  use  can  there  be 
in  them  ?  There  *a  no  use  in  them.  The  thing  that  troubles 
me  is,  they  are  dead." 

"  I  see  she  is  a  thick-skulled  old  woman,"  Chichikov 
thought.  "Listen,  raotherkin!  Just  consider  well:  you 
are  ruining  yourself  when  you  pay  taxes  for  them  as  if  they 
were  alive  " 

"  Oh,  my  friend,  don't  mention  it! "  the  proprietress  in- 
terrupted him.  "  It  is  n't  three  weeks  yet  that  I  had  to 
pay  one  hundred  and  fifty,  and  to  grease  the  taz-coUector 
besidea." 

"That  'a  it,  nodierkinl  Now,  just  consider  that  you 
will  not  have  to  grease  the  taz<co]lector  again,  for  it  is  I  who 
am  going  to  pay  for  them,  and  not  you.  I  tske  upon  my* 
sdf  all  obligatkms.  I  'U  even  have  the  deed  made  out  at 
my  expense,  do  yon  undentand  that  ? " 

The  old  woman  became  pen^ve.  She  saw  that  the  bnsi- 
ness  was  indeed  advantageous,  but  so  new  and  imnsnal  that 


202         The  Nineteenth  Centuiy 


she  was  growiog  auspicious,  lest  the  purchaser  shotdd  get 
the  better  of  her,  especially  since  God  knows  where  he  came 

from,  and  that,  too,  at  night  time. 

"  Well,  raotherkin,  is  it  a  bargain  ?  "  said  Chichikov. 

"  Really,  my  friend,  I  have  never  yet  had  a  chance  to  sell 
corpses.  As  for  living  ones,  it 's  only  three  years  hence  that 
I  sold  some  to  Protop6pov, — two  girls  at  one  hundred  roubles 
apiece, — and  he  's  been  thankful  for  them:  they  have  turned 
out  to  be  excellent  workers,  and  they  can  make  even  nap- 
kins." 

"  But  we  ate  not  ooaoerned  about  living  ones,— God  be 
withtheml  I  am  asking  Ibr  dead  ooea." 

*' Keally,  I  am  afraid,  to  with,  I  miglit  adl  them  at 
a  sacrifice.  Maybe,  my  friend,  you  are  dicaHng  me.  Who 
loiows  but  what  th^  are  worth  more  ?  " 

'*I«i8lea,  motherkin,^what  a  fiinny  woman  yoa  are! 
Whatwortfa  can  th^  have?  Think  of  it:  they  ate  dnat 
Do  yoa  imderstand  ?— th^  are  notiiing  bnt  dost.  Take  any 
naelcBB,  worthless  thing,  say,  a  common  rag,  and  that  haa 
some  value:  it  may  be,  at  least,  bought  in  the  paper  fiurtory, 
but  what  are  these  good  for  ?  Say  yoiind^  what  are  th^ 
good  for? " 

"I  '11  agree,  you  are  right.  They  are  good  for  nothing. 
The  only  thing  that  bothers  me  is  that  they  are  dead.** 

"  Confound  that  club-headed  woman! "  said  Chfchikov  to 
himself,  as  he  was  beginning  to  lose  patience.  **  Go  and 
straighten  things  ont  with  her!  She  has  made  me  sweat, 
accursed  woman! "  He  took  out  a  handkerchief  from  his 
pocket  and  began  to  wipe  off  the  perspbratioa  that  really  had 
come  out  on  hia  forehead.  In  reality,  Chfchikov  had  no 
apedal  reason  to  lose  his  patience:  there  ia  many  an  honour- 
able  man,  a  man  of  atste^  who  is  a  fine  reprodnction  of  ICia. 
Kof6bochka.  I«et  him  take  aome  notion,  and  you  will  not 
get  him  away  fram  It;  all  yoor  proofii  in  the  worid,  even  if 
they  are  as  clear  as  daylight,  will  rebound  from  him,  like 
a  rabber  ball  from  the  wall.  Having  wiped  off  his  perspira- 
tion, Chfchikov  resolved  to  try  her  fimn  another  aide,  hoping 
to  get  her  at  last  on  the  right  path. 


Digiiizc! 


Nikol&y  VasUevich  G6gol  203 


"  MoUieikm,  eifhar  yoa  do  not  want  to  nodentand  my 
wocds,  or  yon  afo  just  talking,  to  be  a-talking.  I  am  oflfer- 
Ing  70a  money,  fifteen  lonblea  in  aarignats, — do  yon  under- 
atand?  It  la  money  I  am  offering  you.  Yon  can't  pick  it 
np  In  the  street  No«r,  coo&ia,  what  did  yon  adl  yonr 
honey  at?" 

' '  Twelve  roubles  a  pud. ' ' 

"  You  are  sinoitig  a  little,  motherkin.  You  did  not  aell 
it  at  twelve." 

Upon  my  word,  I  did." 

*'  Well,  you  see,  but  it  is  honey!  You  have  been  gather- 
ing it  probably  for  a  year,  with  care,  and  trouble,  and  worry; 
you  had  to  be  about,  to  starve  the  bees,  to  feed  them  a  whole 
winter  in  the  cellar — while  dead  souls  are  not  of  this  world. 
Here  you  have  to  undergo  no  trouble:  it  was  God's  will 
that  they  should  leave  tl^  world  and  cause  your  estate  a 
loss.  There  you  received  a  oompenaation  for  your  labour 
and  your  care  at  the  rate  of  twdve  ronbles,  and  here  yon 
receive  for  nothing,  and  not  twelve,  but  fifteen,  and  not  in 
silver,  but  In  blue  aaajgnata." 

Chfebikov  did  not  doubt  that  after  such  convincing  proof 
the  old  woman  would  finally  capitulate. 

*'  Really,"  answered  the  proprietress,  "  I  am  audi  an  In- 
e^ierienced  widow!  I  think  I  had  better  wait  a  little: 
maybe  some  other  purcfaaaem  will  come,  and  I  '11  get  used  to 
the  price." 

*  *  Shame,  shame,  motherkin !  Simply,  shame !  Now,  j  ust 
think  what  you  are  saying !  Who  is  going  to  buy  them  ? 
Well,  what  use  can  anybody  make  of  them  ?  " 

*'  Maybe  they  are  some  good  on  the  estate  "  retorted 

the  old  woman  and  did  not  finish  her  speech.  She  opened 
her  mouth  and  looked  at  him  almost  with  terror,  wondering 
what  he  would  say  to  that. 

"Dead  souls  on  the  eatatel  What  a  guess  you  have  made! 
Wbatdoyon  want  to  do  with  them  F  Uae  them  fbr  acare- 
crows  to  drive  the  sparrows  out  of  your  garden  ?  " 

'*  The  power  of  the  CRMS  be  with  ua!  What  awful  thlnga 
you  aay  t "  muttered  the  woman,  making  the  sign  of  the  cross. 


204         The  Nineteenth  Centuiy 


"  Weil,  where  else  would  you  make  use  of  them?  Be- 
sides, I  leave  their  bones  and  gravca  to  you:  the  tranifer  Is 
only  on  paper.  Well,  what  doyoiaaay  ?  Give  me^at  least, 

some  kind  of  aa  answer." 
The  old  woman  fell  again  to  mnsing. 
*'  What  are  you  thhiking  about,  Nast&sya  Petr6vna  ?  '* 
"  Really,  I  can't  quite  make  it  oat;  let  me  better  sell  you 

some  hemp." 

"  What  do  I  want  with  the  hemp  ?  I  declare,  I  am  asking 
you  for  something  else,  and  you  foist  hemp  upon  me !  The 
hemp  is  all  right,  I  '11  come  another  time,  and  will  take 
your  hemp.    How  is  it  now,  Nastdsya  Petr6vna  ?  '* 

"  Upon  my  word,  it  *s  such  a  strange  article,  and  so  odd." 

Here  Chichikov's  patience  burst  all  bounds;  in  his  anger 
he  banged  achair  against  the  floor,  and  sent  her  to  the  deviL 

The  proprietress  was  dreadfully  put  out  by  the  deviL 
"Oh,  don't  mention  hhn,  God  be  with  himi "  she  cried  out, 
while  growing  pale:  "  Only  night  befine  last  the  aoeuned 
one  appeared  to  me  in  my  dream.  I  had  cardesdy  been  lay- 
ing cards  to  tdl  fortune  In  the  evening  after  prayers,  sathe 
Lord  evidently  sent  him  to  me  to  punish  me.  Oh,  he  looked 
so  horrible:  his  horns  were  longer  than  a  bull's." 

' '  I  wonder  how  it  is  they  don't  come  to  you  by  the  dozen. 
Out  of  mere  Christian  charity  I  wanted  to  help  a  poor  widow 
that  is  suffering  want—  Go  to  perdition  with  your  whole 
village!  " 

**  What  curses  you  are  uttering! "  said  the  woman,  look- 
ing at  him  in  terror. 

**  I  can't  find  the  right  words  with  you  I  Really,  not  to 
use  any  bad  words,  you  are  just  like  a  watchdog  that  is 
lying  on  the  hay:  he  does  n't  himself  eat  any  hay,  and  won't 
let  anybody  else  eat  it.  I  had  intended  to  buy  all  kinds  of 
produce  &om  you,  for  I  am  also  a  government  contrac- 
tor "  He  Bed  here^  just  in  passmg,  without  any  further 

thought,  Imt  It  came  In  unexpectedly  at  the  right  moment 
Government  oontrads  made  a  strong  impieMkm  on  Nastiorm 
Ftetx6vna;  at  least  she  spoke  la  an  almost  Implofflng  voice: 

"But  what  has  made  you  so  dreadftillyangzy?  If  I  had 


Digitized  by  Google 


Vissari6n  Grig6revich  Byelinski  205 


known  before  that  you  are  snch  an  excitable  man,  I  wouldn't 
have  contradicted  you  at  all." 

' '  There  is  really  no  cause  for  anger !  The  whole  busineflft 
is  n't  worth  an  empty  eggshell,  and  why  should  I  get  angiy 
over  it?" 

"  Well,  if  you  want  them,  I  '11  let  you  have  them  for  fifteen 
in  assignats !  Only,  my  friend,  let  me  tell  you  about  your 
government  contracts:  if  you  have  any  occasion  to  buy  up 
rye,  or  buckwheat,  or  grit,  or  meat, — please  don't  forget 
me." 

**  No,  motherkin,  I  won't,"  he  said  while  wiping  ofif  the 
sweat  that  esme  down  his  fiioe  in  three  streaks.  He  asked 
her  whether  she  did  not  have  in  town  aome  attorney  or 
friend  whom  ahe  could  give  the  power  to  make  out  the  deed 
and  evefjrthing  else  that  was  neceaaary. 

"Certainly!  The  son  of  Father  Cyril*  the  pfotopope, 
serves  in  the  court-house,"  said  Kor6bochka. 

Chfchikov  asked  her  to  write  a  letter  to  him  granting  him 
power  of  attorney,  and,  to  save  more  trouble,  began  to  com* 
pose  the  letter  himself. 

"It  would  be  nice,"  Kor6boGhka  said  to  herself  in  the 
meanwhile,  "if  he  bought  flour  and  beef  of  me  for  the 
government.  I  must  get  on  the  good  side  of  him:  there  is 
some  dough  left  from  last  night,  SO  I  '11  go  and  tell  Petiujra 
to  make  aome  griddle  cakes." 

Vis8ari6a  Grig6revich  ByeUoakL  (z8zz-z84a.) 

P%w  ptnoM  have  cacfted  avdi  a  liy^wiiphiiig  i&flncBee  upon 
RuMtaa  literatim  *•  the  critic  Byelinski,  and  a  whole  generation  of 
writers  was  cast  in  the  mould  of  his  sesthetic  views.  ByeKnski  was  the 
ton  of  a  district  physician  in  the  Government  of  P^nza.  His  home 
life  was  exceedingly  unhappy  and  his  childhood  was  neglected; 
from  the  district  idiool,  to  which  he  was  sent  np  to  his  fenrteealh 
year,  he  was  transfemd  to  the  Gjmnasinm  and  later  to  the  Moscow 
University,  but  he  was  a  very  poor  student  and  careless  about  his 
person.  In  Moscow  he  joined  the  Schelling  circle  of  the  students 
and  with  them  devoted  his  time  to  the  study  of  literatore,  especially 
of  Shskspere,  Goethe,  Schiller,  sad  Hoffinaan.  la  he  left  the 
QBifeirilyt  and  the  acit  two  yeais  he  pawed  in  uttet  wteldied&eia 


2o6         The  Nineteenth  Century 


and  poverty.  Then  be  took  hu  first  critical  caaay,  LiUrmy  Drtawu, 
tp«i— gMliitb  — d  MiUtwy  cMwr  bggan.  I^dar  SdH^ttagftlB* 
ftwBce  he  denied  fhe  pwfioi  ftnpoitanoe  of  Riuriaa  liteFatnxe»  and 
proclaimed  the  nascent  genius  of  G6gol,  who  had  jnst  made  his 
appearance.  Between  1836  and  1838  Byelfnski's  circle  of  Mends 
vanlted  over  to  H^el'a  philosophy,  and  onder  this  new  inflaeoce 
larcilfaild  faceted  aUljikt  and  Mlift  ataolcoMpilifeteiillliMiui. 
liiMMd,  oljeelive  cootcnplatioii  «r  the  plMM^^ 
credited  all  productions  that  dealt  with  the  living  questions  of  the 
day.  In  1839  be  was  called  to  St.  Petersburg  to  take  charge  of  the 
critical  and  bibliographical  departments  of  the  Memoirs  of  the  Father- 
Ind.  fitefebtcHillitllMeadaottinipQftantperiodof Uaactivity: 
he  MOB  nentod  Ut  Ibnm  nihetk  tlMOffat  «nd  cfOlved  Om  tbeoty 
ef  **Wt  fiir  Hie,**  which  hcnedbtdl  became  tlw  criterion  fcr  all 
literary  criticisms.  Of  his  many  excellent  essays  of  this  period 
dealing  with  Russian  belles-lettres,  the  best  is  A  yiew  on  Russian 
LUtnimrt  for  iht  Year  1847,  He  died  of  oooaiimptkMi,  hronght 
•bowt  flHdBljp    hit  BMBy  pcivelioflS* 

THE  NATURAL  SCHOOL 

Our  literature  has  been  the  fruit  of  conscious  thought;  it 
appeared  as  an  innovation,  it  b^an  by  imitation.  It  did 
not  stop  there,  bat  oontiiituilly  ftiove  to  be  independent, 
BBtloBal;  fiom  being  rhetoried  it  atfOfV*  to  Iweome  simple, 
nmhumL  This  tendoicy  has  been  made  perceptible  by  a 
cotitinmtis  progress,  and  fonns  the  meaning  and  soul  of  the 
history  of  our  Uteratnie.  We  will  say  without  reserve  that 
in  no  RnsBian  writer  has  this  tendency  been  crowned  by  such 
sttceeat  as  in  GdgoL  This  end  was  attained  only  thnragh 
the  exclusive  application  of  art  to  reality,  in  spite  of  all 
ideals.  1 1  becane  necessary  to  direct  all  the  attention  to  the 
people,  the  masses,  to  depict  common  men,  and  not  merely 
the  pleasant  exceptions  from  the  universal  rule,  that  invari- 
ably tempt  the  poets  to  idealise,  and  that  bear  upon  them- 
selves a  foreign  stamp.  That  was  G6gors  great  merit,  and 
it  is  that  precisely  which  the  men  of  the  old  culture  regard 
as  his  crime  against  the  laws  of  art.  By  his  manner  he  has 
completely  changed  the  view  on  art  itself.  One  may  ap- 
ply to  the  works  of  all  the  Russian  poets,  by  stretching  the 


Digitized  by  Google 


Vissari6n  Grig6revich  Byelinski  207 


point  a  little,  the  old  and  obsolete  definition  of  poetry  as 
"  Nature  adorned  "  ;  but  it  is  impossible  to  do  so  in  relation 
to  G6gors  works.  For  these  the  more  appropriate  definition 
is  "  a  reproduction  of  reality  in  all  its  tiiuth."  Here  the 
whole  matter  is  in  typ€s,  and  the  ideal  is  here  not  understood 
u  an  adominent  (consequently— 4  He),  tmt  as  tbe  oocfelatifm 
of  the  types  created  by  binit  ^  aocofdaaoe  with  the  thought 
which  he  wishes  to  develop  in  his  pioduction. 

Art  has  in  our  days  got  the  better  of  theory.  The  old 
theories  have  lost  all  their  credit;  the  very  people  that  had 
been  edncated  in  them  fi>llow  not  them,  but  a  certain  strange 
mixture  of  old  and  new  conceptions.  Thus,  for  example, 
some  of  them,  in  rejecting  the  old  French  theory  in  the 
name  of  Romanticism,  were  the  first  to  give  the  aggravating 
example  of  introducing  into  their  novels  persons  from  the 
lower  strata,  even  villains,  under  the  appropriate  appellation 
of  Pilferer  and  Cutter ;  but  they  immediately  rectified  them- 
selves by  bringing  out  moral  persons,  together  with  the  im- 
moral ones,  under  the  name  of  Truth-lover,  Charitable,  etc. 
In  the  first  case  was  to  be  seen  the  influence  of  new  ideas, 
in  the  second,  of  old  conceptions,  for  according  to  the 
recipe  of  ancient  poetics  at  least  one  clever  fellow  must  be 
added  to  a  number  of  fools,  and  at  least  one  virtuotis  man  to 
a  ntunber  of  good-fcr-nothings.  In  either  case  these  he- 
tneeners  left  out  of  sight  the  main  thing,  namely,  art;  for 
it  did  not  oocor  to  them  that  their  virtuous  and  vicious  per- 
sons were  not  men,  not  characters,  but  rhetorical  personifica* 
tions  of  sbstract  virtues  and  vices.  That  explsins  better 
than  anything  why  for  them  theory,  mle,  is  more  important 
than  fact,  reality:  the  latter  is  inaccessible  to  their  compre- 
hension. However,  not  even  talented  writers  and  geniuses 
are  always  able  to  escape  the  influence  of  theory.  G6gol 
belongs  to  the  number  of  the  few  who  have  entirely  avoided 
every  influence  of  any  and  all  theory.  Though  capable  of 
understanding  art  and  of  admiring  it  in  the  productions  of 
other  poets,  he  nevertheless  proceeded  in  his  own  way,  fol- 
lowing his  deep  and  true  artistic  instinct  with  which  Nature 
had  endowed  him  lavishly,  and  without  being  tempted  to 


2o8         The  Nineteenth  Century 


imitate  the  successes  of  others.  Of  coarse,  that  did  not  in 
itself  give  hira  any  originaUty,  but  enabled  him  to  preserve 
and  express  in  its  entirety  that  originality  which  was  the 
part  and  parcel  of  his  individuality,  consequently,  like 
talent,  a  natural  gift.  It  is  for  that  reason  that  he  appeared 
to  many  as  having  entered  Russian  lita^ture  from  without, 
while,  in  reality,  he  was  its  necessary  phenomenon,  which 
was  the  logical  oondtision  of  all  its  preceding  evolution. 

Gogol's  inflnenoe  on  Rnarian  Utentnve  has  heen  enotm- 
ona.  Not  only  did  aU  the  young  talents  throw  themselves 
on  the  path  which  he  had  indicated,  but  aome  writen  who 
had  already  gained  a  repntatioo  abandoned  tfadr  old  way 
and  proceeded  on  the  new.  G6gol  wrote  nothing  after  the 
Dead  Souls.  There  is  only  his  school  upon  the  arena  of 
literature.  AU  Uane  and  accusation  that  formerly  was 
hurled  at  him  is  now  directed  against  the  natural  school,  and 
whatever  attack  is  still  made  upon  him  is  on  account  of  that 
school.  What  is  he,  then,  accused  of  ?  There  are  but  few 
accusations,  and  they  are  nearly  always  the  same.  At  first 
they  attacked  the  school,  they  claimed,  on  account  of  its 
eternal  attacks  upon  the  officials.  In  the  representation  of 
the  life  of  this  class  some  saw  sincerely,  others  feignedly, 
evil  -  minded  caricatures.  These  accusations  have  been 
silenced  for  some  time.  Now  they  accuse  the  writers  of  the 
natural  school  for  loving  the  people  of  the  lower  occupations, 
for  making  heroes  of  their  novels  out  of  peasants,  janitors, 
coachmen,  for  describing  the  purUeus  and  refuges  of  naked 
poverty  and  frequently  of  all  kind  of  immorality.  To  put 
the  new  writers  to  shame,  the  aocnsers  point  with  triumph 
to  the  beautiful  days  of  Russian  literature,  refer  to  the 
names  of  Karamzfn  and  Dmftriev,  who  had  chosen  for  their 
productions  high  and  noble  objects,  and  adduce  as  an  ex- 
ample of  now  forgotten  prettiness  the  sentimental  song:  "Of 
all  the  flowerets  I  loved  most  the  rose! "  But  we  shall  re- 
mind them  that  the  first  noteworthy  novel,  was  written 
by  Karamzin,  and  its  heroine  was  "  PoDr  Lfza,"  a  peasant 

girl,  who  was  seduced  by  a  coxcomb          But,  they  will 

say,  everything  is  decent  and  pure  there,  and  the  Moscow 


Digitized  by  Google 


Vissari6n  Grig6revich  Byelinski  209 


peasant  girl  does  not  yield  to  the  best-brought-up  lady. 
Now  we  have,  at  last,  come  to  the  cause  of  the  dispute: 
you  see,  the  old  poetics  Is  to  be  blamed  for  it.  It  does  not 
sniiid  year  representing  peasants,  bat  not  otfaefwiae  than 
masqneniddlin  theatrical  costtunes*  wbo  display  ieelinga  and 
ideas  that  aiestiange  to thdr existence,  position,  andednca- 
tion,  and  who  express  themselves  in  a  langnage  no  one 
speaks,  and  least  of  all  peasants,^a  litenuy  language  that 
isemheUlsfaed  by  "wherewith,  aforementioned,  than  whkh," 

and  so  forth.        In  short,  the  ancient  poetics  permits  yon 

to  represent  an3rthing  you  please,  but  immediately  prescribes 
so  to  adorn  the  subject  under  discussion  as  to  make  it  utterly 
impossible  to  discover  what  it  is  you  had  intended  to  repre- 
sent. 

The  natural  school  follows  the  ver^^  opposite  rule:  the 
nearest  possible  resemblance  of  the  persons  represented  to 
their  prototypes  in  reality  does  not  form  its  all,  but  is  its  first 
condition,  a  non-compliance  with  which  would  vitiate  any- 
thing good  there  may  be  in  the  composition.  It  is  a  heavy 
condition  which  only  a  talent  can  comply  with.  After  that, 
how  can  those  writers  help  loving  and  honouring  that  ancient 
poetics,  who  formerly  oonld  without  talent  insinuate  them- 
selves snccessfttlly  in  the  fidd  of  poetry?  How  can  they 
help  regarding  the  natural  school  as  their  most  terriUe 
enemy,  since  it  has  introduced  a  manner  of  writing  whidi  is 
inaccessible  to  them  ?  That,  of  course,  refers  only  to  people 
with  whom  egotism  enters  in  the  discussion  of  this  question; 
but  there  will  also  be  found  many  who  in  all  sincere  con- 
viction do  not  love  the  natural  in  art,  through  the  influence 
of  the  old  poetics  upon  them.  Theae  people,  in  addition, 
complain  with  tpfdsl  bitterness,  because  art  has  now  forgot- 
ten its  former  purpose.  '*  Poetry,"  they  say,  "  used  to  in- 
struct while  amusing,  compelled  the  reader  to  forget  the 
tribulations  and  suflferings  of  life,  and  represented  to  him 
only  pleasant  and  smiling  pictures.  The  former  poets  used 
to  represent  also  pictures  of  poverty,  but  a  poverty  that  was 
neat,  washed,  and  expressing  itself  modestly  and  with  refine- 
ment; then,  at  the  end  of  the  novel  there  always  appeared  a 

VOL.  U.— 14. 


2IO         The  Nineteenth  Century 


aentimeotal  yoiuig  lady  or  nuuden,  a  daughter  of  fidi  and 
refined  parents,  or  at  least  a  philanthropic  young  man, — 
and,  in  the  name  of  these  kind  hearts,  was  enthroned  abond- 
ance  and  hapinness  where  there  was  poverty  and  misery, 
and  grateful  tears  watered  the  beneficent  hand, — and  the 
reader  involuntarily  raised  his  batiste  handkerchief  to  his 
eyes  and  felt  that  he  was  growing  better  and  more  senti- 
mental  

'*  But  now ! — See  what  they  are  writing  about  now!  Peas- 
ants in  bast  shoes  and  gabardines  who  often  smell  of  brandy; 
an  old  woman — a  kind  of  centaur,  by  whose  dress  one  can- 
not easily  tell  of  what  gender  that  creature  may  be ;  purlieus 
— refuges  of  misery,  despair,  and  debauch,  which  one  can 
reach  only  by  yards  knee-deep  in  mud;  some  drunkard, — 
a  scribe  or  a  seminarist  tnmed  teadier,  expelled  bam  serv- 
ice,—aU  that  is  described  fimn  natnve,  in  the  nakedness  of 
terrible  truth,  so  that  the  reading  of  it  win  give  yoit  some 
baddxeams  

Thus,  or  in  some  such  manner,  speak  the  intrepid  dis- 
ciples of  the  ancient  poetics.  In  reality,  their  complaints 
are  that  poetiy  has  quit  lying  shamdesdy,  that  it  has 
changed  from  a  nnrsery  tale  into  a  not  always  pleasant  nar- 
rative, that  it  has  ceased  being  a  rattle,  by  the  soond  of 
which  children  leap  about  or  fall  asleep.  Strange  people, 
happy  people !  They  have  succeeded  in  remaining  all  their 
life  children,  and  even  in  their  old  a^e  to  be  minors, — and 
now  they  demand  that  all  should  resemble  them!  Read 
your  old  fairy  tales,  nobody  will  keep  you  from  them;  but 
leave  to  others  the  occupations  that  suit  those  who  are  of 
age.  For  you — the  lie;  for  us— truth:  let  us  divide  without 
quarrelling.  You  do  not  want  our  share,  and  we  will  not 
take  yonrs  gratis  

But  there  is  another  cause  which  intefferes  with  this 
friendly  division,— egotism  which  regards  itsdf  ss  virtue. 
Itideed,  let  us  take  a  man  whois  wdl-off,  or  even  ridi.  He 
has  just  had  a  good,  savoury  dinner  (he  has  an  ezodlent 
cook),  has  seated  hiasdl  in  his  comfoftsble  axm-chalr,  with 
a  cup  of  coflfee,  in  front  of  a  glowing  fireplace;  he  feeb  good 


Digitized  by  Googl 


Vissari6n  Grig6revich  Byelinski  211 


and  maukt  a  leding  of  wdl^bdog  makes  liim  bappy;  lie 
takes  a  book  and  lazily  tarns  its  pages;  bis  brow  wrinkles 
over  bis  eyes,  the  smite  disappears  from  bis  rosy  lips,  be  is 

agitated,  disturbed,  annoyed         And  tbere  is  reason  Ibr  it  1 

The  book  tells  him  that  not  all  peopte  in  tbe  world  live 
as  Tvell  as  he;  that  there  are  purlieus  where  a  whole  family 
s^jiakes  with  cold  under  rags,  though  it  had,  probably,  but 
lately  known  of  ease;  that  there  are  people  in  the  world 
who  by  birth  and  fate  are  destined  for  misery, — that  the 
last  kopek  goes  for  "green  wine"  not  always  from  in- 
dolence, but  also  from  despair.  And  our  happy  man  feels  ill 
at  ease,  and  rather  ashamed  of  his  comfort.  The  whole 
trouble  is  in  that  wretched  book:  he  had  picked  it  up  for 
his  pleasure,  and  he  had  read  himself  into  melancholy  and 
ennui.  Away  with  it!  "A  book  is  to  give  you  a  pleasant 
pastime;  I  do  not  need  it  to  find  out  that  there  is  much  sor- 
row and  sadness  in  life,  and  if  I  do  road,  it  is  to  fofget  it 
all!*'  beexdabna. 

Yes,  dear  sybarite,  for  yotu:  peaee  books  ought  to  lie,  and 
tbe  poor  man  finget  bis  woe,  tbe  hnngiy  his  btmger,  tbe 
groans  of  sofiering  must  reach  your  ears  as  musical  notes, 

lest  yoor  appetite  be  qpolled,yoar  sleep  disturbed   Now 

let  OS  imagine  another  lover  of  pteasant  reading  in  the  same 
sitnatioa.  He  has  to  give  a  reception,  the  time  is  drawing 
near,  and  Ihero  is  no  money.  His  steward,  Nikita  P^orych, 
has  for  some  reason  been  alow  in  sending  the  amount.  At 
last  the  money  arrives,  the  reception  can  come  off.  With  a 
cigar  in  his  mouth,  happy  and  satisfied,  he  is  lying  on  the 
couch  and,  having  nothing  to  do,  his  hands  lazily  stretch 
out  towards  a  book.  Again  the  same  story !  That  damn- 
able book  tells  him  the  exploits  of  his  Nikita  F6dorych,  that 
low-bom  churl,  who  had  been  accustomed  from  childhood 
eagerly  to  pander  to  the  passions  and  whims  of  others,  who 
was  married  to  the  ex-sweetheart  of  his  master's  progeni- 
tor         Away  with  that  wretched  book ! 

Now  imagine  again  another  man  in  a  comfortable  ooodi- 
tion,  who  in  his  childhood  had  been  running  about  bare- 
footed, bad  been  a  messenger-bqy,  and  at  fifty  had  somehow 


212         The  Nineteenth  Century 


I 


risen  to  rank,  and  who  pMaeaMd  a  amall  competency. 

Everybody  reads,  so  he  must  too.  Bat  what  does  he  find 
in  the  book  His  biography  and,  at  that,  correctly  told, 
though  no  one,  but  himself,  knows  anjrthing  of  the  exped* 
ences  of  his  life,  and  no  author  could  possibly  have  discovered 

his  secret          He  is  not  merely  agitated,  he  is  mad,  and 

with  a  feeling  of  dignity  he  eases  his  anger  by  the  following 
consideration:  "That  's  the  way  they  write  nowadays! 
That 's  what  Free  Thought  has  come  to!  Did  they  write 
that  way  before  ?  No !  It  used  to  be  such  a  fluent  style, 
and  they  discussed  such  tender  and  elevated  subjects  that 
it  was  a  joy  to  read,  and  there  was  no  cause  for  annoyance!  ** 

There  is  a  special  class  of  readers  who,  from  a  sentiment 
of  ariatocratiam,  hate  to  maet  people  of  the  lower  strata  even 
in  books,  especially  those  that  hsve  no  senae  of  proprietiea 
and  refinement;  they  deapiae  dirt  and  miaery,  aa  the  veiy 
opposite  of  their  Inzniions  parionrs,  bondoirB,  and  cabinets. 
Theae  refer  to  the  natural  aduMl  only  with  a  hani^ty  con- 
tempt and  ironical  smile         Who  are  they,  theae  feudal 

barons,  that  they  loathe  the  '*  low-bom  mob  "  that  in  their 
eyes  is  lower  than  a  good  horse  ?  Be  not  in  a  hurry  to  lesm 
about  them  in  books  of  heraldry  or  at  European  courts:  you 
will  not  find  their  coats-of-arms;  they  do  not  go  to  Court, 
and  if  they  have  seen  the  fashionable  world,  it  was  only  in 
the  street,  through  brilliantly  lighted  windows,  as  much  as 
curtains  and  blinds  permitted  them  to  do  so.  They  cannot 
boast  of  ancestors:  they  are  generally  officials,  or  new-made 
nobles  that  are  rich  only  in  plebeian  traditions  of  a  grand- 
father who  was  a  steward,  an  uncle — a  cqiitractor,  and,  at 
times,  a  grandmother — a  baker  of  altar  breads,  and  an  aunt 
— a  huckstress. 

A  contempt  fer  the  lower  strata  of  society  la  in  our  dajrs 
no  longer  a  vice  of  the  higher  daaaea;  no^  it  ia  the  diaeaae  of 
tqpalarts,  a  nooatroua  outgrow th  ui  ignorance^  and  vulgarity 
of  feelings  and  conceptions.  A  wise  and  cultured  man  would 
never  manifest  thia  diaeaae,  if  he  were  at  all  anbject  to  it, 
becauae  it  does  not  comport  with  the  spirit  of  the  time,  be- 
cauae  to  proclaim  it  would  be  the  croaking  that  announoea 


Digitized  by  Google 


Vissari6n  Grig6revich  Byelinski  213 


the  raven.  It  seems  to  us  that,  though  doublefaceduess  is 
contemptible,  in  this  case  it  is  better  than  a  raven  sincerity, 
for  it  bears  witness  to  cleverness.  The  peacock  that  proudly 
opens  his  splendid  tall  before  the  other  birds  has  the  reputa- 
tioB  of  «  faeanftifal,  not  dever,  aniiiial.  What  is  to  be  said 
of  the  raven  that  banghtily  di^lays  its  bonowed  plnmage  ? 
Snch  haughtiness  is  always  devoid  of  sense,  and  is  generally 
a  plebeian  vice.  Where  is  there  more  display  and  pretence 
than  in  those  classes  of  society  that  oome  right  after  the 
lowest?  It  is  so,  becanse  there  is  most  ignorance  there. 
See  how  deeply  the  lackey  despises  the  peasant  who  is,  in 
every  respect,  better,  nobler,  humaner  than  he!  Whence 
that  pride  in  the  lackey  ?~He  has  adopted  his  master's 
vices,  and  therefore  he  regards  himself  as  more  cultured  than 
the  peasant.  Gztemal  lustre  is  ever  taken  by  coarse  natures 
for  culture. 

"What  sense  is  there  in  flooding  literature  with  peas- 
ants?" exclaim  the  aristocrats  of  a  certain  category.  In 
their  opinion  the  writer  is  an  artisan  who  is  to  furnish  work 
according  to  order.  It  does  not  enter  their  minds  that  in 
the  selection  of  the  subject  for  his  composition  the  author 
cannot  be  guided  by  the  will  of  others,  or  even  his  own  free 
dioloe,  for  art  lias  its  laws  that  must  be  complied  with  in 
order  that  one  may  write  wdl.  It  demands  above  all  that 
the  writer  should  be  true  to  his  own  nature,  his  talent,  his 
fancy.  How  are  we  to  explain  the  feet  that  one  likes  t» 
represent  happy  subjects,  another  sad  ones,  if  not  by  the 
nature,  character,  and  talent  of  the  poet?  What  one  loves 
and  is  interested  in,  that  one  knows  best,  and  what  one 
knows  best,  one  rqwesents  best.  That  is  the  most  Intimate 
justification  of  the  poet  who  is  blamed  for  the  selection  qf  his 
subjects;  it  is  not  satisfactory  only  to  those  who  have  no 
understanding  of  art  and  vulgarly  confound  it  with  the  arti* 
san's  profession. 

Nature  is  the  eternal  model  of  art,  and  the  greatest  and 
noblest  subject  in  nature  is  man.  And  is  a  peasant  not 
a  man  ?  But  what  can  there  be  of  interest  in  a  coarse, 
untutored  man?  Why,  his  sotd   mind,  heart,  passions, 


214         The  Nineteenth  Century 


indiaations, — in  short,  the  same  as  in  the  cultured  man. 
Granted,  the  latter  it  nuMtt  interesting  than  the  first;  but  is 
the  botanist  interested  only  in  axtfoUy  impnyved  garden 
plant8»  and  does  he  n^^ect  their  wild-growing  field  proto- 
types? Is  not  ftwr  the  anatomist  and  phyatologjat  theoigan- 
ismof  a  wild  Anstndian  as  interesting  as  the  ocganism  of  an 
enlightened  Bnropean  ?  For  whatreason  ahoold  art»  in  this 
respect,  differ  so  much  fixxn  sdenoe?  Then  yon  say  that  a 
cultnred  man  is  higher  than  an  nncultured  one.  One  haa  to 
agree  with  you  in  that,  but  not  unconditionaUy.  Of  course, 
the  most  frivolous  worldly  man  stands  incomparably  higher 
than  a  peasant,  bnt  in  what  respect  ?  Only  in  worldly  edu- 
cation, but  that  in  no  way  interferes  with  many  a  peasant's 
beinp  higher  than  he,  for  example,  as  regards  his  mind,  feel- 
ings, character.  Education  only  develops  the  moral  powers 
of  man,  it  does  not  give  them;  Nature  gives  them  to  man. 
In  this  distribution  of  her  precious  gifts,  she  acts  blindly, 
without  considering  the  classes.  If  from  the  educated  class 
of  society  there  issues  a  greater  number  of  remarkable  men,  it 
is  only  because  there  are  there  more  means  for  development, 
and  not  at  all  because  Nature  has  been  more  niggardly  with 
the  men  of  the  lower  classes  in  the  distribution  of  her  gifts. 

*'  What  can  one  learn  from  a  book  in  which  is  described 
some  miserable  wretch  who  has  drunk  himself  to  perdition  ? ' ' 
say  again  these  second-hand  aristocrats.  Why,  certainly 
not  worldly  manners  and  refinement,  hot  the  knowledge  of 
man  under  certain  coodttiooa.  One  man  gets  drunk  through 
indolence,  through  bad  bringing  up,  through  weakness  of 
character,  another  through  unfortunate  dicumstanoes  in  life 
for  which  he  may  not  bear  the  least  Uame.  In  either  case, 
they  are  instructive  and  curious  examples  for  observation. 
Of  course^  it  la  much  easier  to  turn  away  with  diagust  fsom 
a  fallen  man  than  to  stretch  out  to  him  a  consoling  and 
helpful  hand,  just  as  it  is  much  easier  to  judge  him  severely 
in  the  name  of  morality  than  with  sympathy  and  love  to 
enter  into  his  situation,  to  probe  the  cause  of  his  fall,  and 
to  pity  him  as  a  man,  even  when  he  appears  much  to  blame 
for  his  faU. 


Digitized  by  Google 


Vissari6n  Grig6revich  Byelinski  215 


The  Redeemer  of  the  httman  race  came  into  the  world  for 
all  men;  not  wise  and  edaqUed  men,  but  aunple-minded 
and  sunple-hearted  fishermen  He  called  to  be  *'  fishers  of 
men  " ;  not  rich  and  happy  men,  but  poor,  suffering,  fidlen 
men  He  sought,  in  order  to  console  some,  and  encourage  and 
raise  others.  Festering  sores  on  a  body  that  was  hardly 
covered  with  unclean  rags  did  not  offend  His  eyes,  which 
shone  with  love  and  charity.  He,  the  son  of  God,  loved 
men  humanely  and  sympathised  with  them  in  their  miser>', 
dirt,  shame,  debauch,  vices,  wrongdoings.  He  bid  those 
throw  a  stone  at  the  adulteress  who  could  not  in  any  way 
accuse  their  own  consciences,  and  put  the  hard-hearted 
judges  to  shame,  and  gave  the  fallen  woman  a  word  of  con- 
solation,— and  the  robber,  who  breathed  his  last  on  the  cross 
as  a  well-deserved  punishment,  for  one  moment  of  repent- 
ance, beaid  from  Him  the  word  of  fingiveness  and  peace. 
But  we,  fhe  sons  of  men,  we  want  to  love  only  those  of  our 
brothers  who  are  like  us,  we  turn  away  from  the  lower 
classes  as  from  pariahs,  fallen  ones,  lepers.  What  virtues 
and  deserts  luKve  given  as  the  right  to  do'so?  Is  it  not 
rather  fhe  very  absence  of  sU  virtues  and  deserts?  Bnt  the 
divine  word  of  love  and  brotheriiood  has  not  in  vain  been 
proclaimed  to  the  world. 

That  which  formerly  was  only  the  duty  of  persons  who 
had  been  called  to  serve  at  the  altar,  or  the  virtue  of  the 
chosen  few,  has  now  become  the  obligation  of  societies,  and 
no  longer  serves  as  a  token  of  mere  virtue,  but  also  of  cult- 
ure of  private  individuals.  See,  how  in  our  century  every- 
body is  interested  in  the  lot  of  the  lower  classes,  how  private 
philanthopy  is  everywhere  being  changed  into  state  institu- 
tions, how  on  all  sides  are  formed  well-organised,  richly 
endowed  societies  for  the  aid  of  the  needy  and  suffering,  for 
the  suppression  aud  prevention  of  misery  and  its  inevitable 
consequence  —  immorality  and  debauch.  This  imiversal 
movement,  so  noble,  so  hamanei  so  Christian,  meets  its  de- 
tractofs  in  the  persons  of  the  wondiippecs  cf  a  doll  and  stark 
patriarchalism.  They  say  that  fashion,  whim,  vainglory, 
and  not  phllantliropy,  are  active  here.  Suppose  it  is  so,  bat 


Digitized  by  Google 


2i6         The  Nineteenth  Centuiy 


when  and  where  have  similar  trifling  impolaes  not  taken 
part  in  the  best  of  human  actions  ?  But  how  can  one  assert 
that  only  such  impulses  have  been  the  cause  of  these  phenom- 
ena ?  How  can  one  think  that  the  chief  creators  of  these 
phenomena,  who  by  their  example  have  influenced  the 
masses,  are  not  inspired  by  nobler  and  higher  impulses? 
Naturally,  there  is  no  cause  for  admiring  the  virtue  of  peo- 
ple who  throw  themselves  into  charity  not  from  a  sense  of 
neighbourly  love,  but  from  fashion,  from  imitation,  from 
l^glory.  Bat  it  is  a  virtue  as  regards  society  which  is  so 
Idn  of  the  qririt  that  it  can  direct  the  activities  of  trivial 
people  tofwards  the  goodl  Is  it  not  an  extremely  encoor- 
aging  phenomenon  of  modern  civilisation,  of  progress  of 
mind,  edncation,  and  culture  ? 

Bntirely  admitting  that  art  must  above  all  be  art,  ive 
neverthdess  think  that  the  idea  of  some  kind  of  n  pnre^ 
exclusive  art  that  lives  in  its  own  sphere,  that  has  nothing 
in  common  with  the  other  sides  of  life,  is  an  abstract, 
visionaiy  idea.  There  has  never  and  nowhere  existed  such 
an  art.  No  doubt,  life  is  divided  and  subdivided  into  a 
multitude  of  sides  that  have  their  separate  existences;  but 
these  sides  continually  interact  in  a  living  organism,  and 
there  is  between  them  no  sharply  drawn  line.  No  matter 
how  you  may  parcel  out  life,  it  is  always  one  and  insepar- 
able. They  say:  for  science  we  need  mind  and  reason,  for 
art,  fancy,  and  they  think  that  they  have  thus  once  and  for 
all  settled  the  matter,  and  that  it  is  fit  to  go  in  that  shape 
into  the  archives.  Does  not  art  need  mind  and  reason  as 
weU  f  And  can  the  savant  get  along  without  fancy?  Nol 
The  tmth  is  that  in  art  &ncy  plays  the  most  active  and  im- 
portant  part,  while  in  sdenoe,  mind  and  xeason.  There 
are,  to  be  sure,  productions  of  poetry  in  which  nothing  is  to 
be  seen  except  a  strong,  brilliant  fancy;  but  that  is  not  a 
common  rule  for  artistic  productions. 


Sergy^  Timoftevich  AksAkor.  (I79x-x85g.) 

AkdUcov  repretenta  the  rare  example  in  Rnniaa  Uterfttnre  of  an 
author  wlio  pmed  fiom  the  pscudo^laulc  style  to  the  realistic 


Digitized  by  Google 


Sergydy  Timof(6evich  Aksiikov     2 1 7 


school  of  G6gol  without  taking  part  in  the  intervening  Romantic 
movemenL  Ue  was  born  at  lJf&,  and  graduated  from  what  was  then 
the  Kttftfn  Univenity  at  tiztoen  jtmn  of  agie.  He  then  aenred  aa  a 
SOmBntent  traoalator,  and  devoted  himself  to  ttteratare,  nMialy  to 
tisnslations  from  the  Frendi.  His  sympathict  wefe  tnHnHj  iriUi 
Slmhk6v,  Karamzin's  opponent  In  1837  he  was  made  a  censor,  in 
which  capacity  he  gained  an  unenviable  reputation  as  an  nnscrupul- 
oos  partiaan.  In  the  thirtiea  he  came  under  the  influence  of  G<^ol, 
Mdin  i893he^note  TkeSkmutaimt  which  naa  later  fiilloiMd  hy  an 
admirable  series  of  sketches  on  angling  and  on  hnnting,  containing 
charming  pictures  of  animal  life.  In  1856  appeared  his  great  work, 
TA^  Family  ChronicU,  in  which  he  gives  vivid  descriptions  from  the 
life  of  a  landed  proprietor  in  the  Orenburg  country,  abounding  in  ex> 
qniaite  landscape  pictnrea.  TTke  Fkmify  Cktvuide  difBen  from  all 
tiie  other  productions  of  the  realistic  school  in  that  there  ui  not  ft 
wmd  of  fiction  in  it,  bat  that  it  is  beaed  entirely  on  actual  freta. 

PROM  "THB  FAMILY  CHRONICA'* 

Towards  the  end  of  June  the  heat  was  oppressive.  After 
a  sultry  night  there  blew,  at  daybreak,  a  fresh  eastern 
breeze,  but  it  subsided  as  soon  as  the  sun  grew  warmer. 
Grandfather  awoke  at  sunrise.  He  found  it  warm  sleeping 
in  a  small  upper  room,  even  though  the  old-fashioned  win- 
dow frame  with  its  tiny  panes  was  lifted  up  to  its  fullest 
capacity,  because  his  bed  was  curtained  with  a  bar  of  home- 
spun netting.  This  was  a  necessary  precaution,  for  without 
the  bar  the  pestering  mosquitoes  would  have  eafeen  him  up 
and  would  have  kept  Itim  from  filling  adeep.  Tlie  winged 
musicians  swanned  around  in  douda  and  stuck  their  long 
stings  fhxough  the  thin  screen,  and  they  hnnuned  all  night 
their  wearisome  seienades.  It  is  fimny  for  me  to  say  80» 
hot  I  oan*t  help  confearing  that  I  like  the  descant  buzz  and 
even  tlie  biting  of  the  mosquitoes;  I  hear  in  it  the  oppressive 
summer,  the  luxurious^  deefdess  nights,  the  shores  of  the 
Bugiurusl^  that  are  overgrown  with  green  bushes,  from 
which  resound  on  all  sides  the  songs  of  the  nightingales;  I 
recall  the  rapture  of  my  young  heart  and  the  sweet,  unac- 
countable pining  for  which  I  would  now  gladly  give  the  rest 
of  my  flickering  life. 


3iS         The  Nineteenth  Century 


Gnuid&ther  awoke,  with  his  warm  hand  wiped  the  sweat 
from  his  straight,  high  forehead,  put  his  head  out  from 
under  the  bar,  and  began  to  laugh.  VAnka.  Mazdn  and 
Nik^norka  Tanaychdnok  were  snoring  on  the  floor  on  which 
they  were  stretched  out  in  laughable,  though  artistic,  pos- 
tures. "  I  declare,  the  dog's  children  are  snoring  1"  said 
grandfather  and  smiled  again. 

Stepda  Mikhdylovich  was  an  enigmatic  man.  After  such 
a  strong  verbal  exordium  one  would  have  expected  a  poke 
in  the  side  of  the  sleeper,  with  the  viburnum  cane  which 
always  stood  by  his  bed,  or  «  kick  wiUi  the  foot,  or  even  a 
greetiog  with  the  ehdr;  bnt  grandfiither  ooly  langhed  out 
loud  as  he  awoke,  and  thus,  as  th^  say,  got  into  a  good 
humour  for  the  whole  day. 

He  rose  without  any  noise,  made  one  or  two  signs  of  the 
cross,  stepped  with  his  bare  feet  into  leather  idippen  that 
were  worn  red,  and,  dressed  in  nothing  but  a  shirt  of  peaasat 
homespun  (grandmother  would  not  let  him  have  loom-woven 
linen  for  shirts),  he  went  out  on  the  porch  where  he  was  re- 
freshed by  a  whifif  of  the  morning  moisture.  I  just  said  that 
Anna  Vasilevna  did  not  give  him  any  loom-woven  linen  for 
shirts,  and  every  reader  would  be  right  in  remarking  that 
this  was  not  in  keeping  with  the  character  of  the  wedded 
pair.  But  really  I  can't  help  it,  and  I  beg  you  not  to  be 
angry  with  me,  it  was  as  I  said:  feminine  nature  carried 
the  day  over  the  male,  as  is  always  the  case !  Though  she 
was  frequently  beaten  for  giving  him  coarse  underwear,  she 
oootinned  to  ofe  him  the  same,  until  the  old  man  took  it  as 
a  matter  of  course.  Once  grandfather  made  use  of  the  last 
and  the  most  efficadoos  means:  he  chopped  up  with  an  axe, 
on  the  threshold  of  his  room,  all  the  underwear  that  had 
been  made  of  peasant  homespun,  in  spite  of  gnndmoiher's 
wail,  who  kept  on  imploring  that  Stepdn  Mikhdylovich 
might  strike  her,  but  should  spare  liis  own  property,  but 
even  this  means  was  of  no  avail ;  the  ooarBO  underwear  made 
its  appearance  again, — and  the  old  man  surrendered. 

I  am  much  to  be  blamed  for  interrupting  the  stor^'  about 
"  my  grandfather's  good  day,"  in  order  to  contradia  the 


uiyiii^uu  Ly  Google 


Sergy^y  Timofi&evich  Aks&kov  219 


reader's  poarible  lemaik.  Witlioat  disturbing -aajroae,  he 
took  down  a  fidt  blanket  which  always  lay  in  the  stoc«rooai» 
spfead  it  oat  on  the  upper  step  of  the  porch»  and  sat  down 
npon  it,  to  receive,  as  was  his  cnstom,  the  rising  sun. 

Before  sunrise  a  man's  heart  experiences  unconsciously  a 
happy  feeling;  but  grandfather  had  the  additional  pleasure 
of  looking  at  his  estate  which  was  then  already  well  provided 
with  all  necessary  farm  buildings.  It  is  true,  the  yard  was 
not  fenced  in,  and  the  cattle  from  the  peasant  yards,  which 
were  gathering  into  a  common  herd  before  being  driven  out 
into  the  pasture,  made  a  call  upon  him  in  passing,  just  as  on 
that  morning  and  as  always  happened  in  the  evenings.  A 
few  dirty  pigs  rubbed  and  scratched  themselves  against  the 
very  pouch  on  which  grandfather  was  sitting,  and,  grunting, 
feasted  on  lobster  shells  and  all  kinds  of  remnants  from  the 
dinner  which  were  nnceremonionsly  thrown  ont  near  the 
sameporch.  Cows  and  sheep  made  their  visits  too.  Natnr- 
ally  there  were  left  indecent  traces  of  their  calls^  but  grand- 
father  saw  nothing  disagreeable  in  all  that,  bat  on  the 
contrary  took  his  delight  in  watching  the  healthy  cattle, 
which  were  to  him  a  sore  sign  of  the  soffidency  and  well- 
being  of  his  peasants. 

Soon  the  loud  snapping  of  a  long  shepherd  whip  drove  the 
visitors  away.  The  servants  began  to  rise.  The  tall  g^room 
Spirid6n,  who  was  called  Spirka  to  a  good  old  age,  led  out 
one  after  another  two  roan  colts  and  one  bay,  hitched  them 
to  a  post,  groomed  them,  and  then  walked  them  around  by  a 
long  rope,  while  grandfather  admired  their  stature,  as  he 
also  took  delight  in  the  breed  he  expected  to  raise  from  them 
(he  was  later  completely  successful  in  that).  Then  awoke 
also  the  M  stewardess  who  slept  in  the  loft  of  the  cellar;  she 
came  oat  of  the  cellar,  went  to  the  Bugurodin  to  get  washed, 
sighed,  sobbed  (thai  was  her  anchangeable  custom),  prayed 
to  Qod  while  turning  to  the  east,  and  began  to  wash,  rinse^ 
and  dean  the  pots  and  dishes. 

The  swallows  and  martins  diirped  and  sang,  drding  mer- 
rily in  the  sky;  the  quells  cslled  loudly  in  the  fields;  the 
songs  of  the  dcylarks  rang  out  in  the  air;  the  crake  cried 


220         The  Nineteenth  Century 


hoarsely,  sitting  in  the  bushes;  the  whistling  of  waterhens, 
and  the  tocking  and  bleating  of  wild  snipes  were  borne 
thither  from  the  nearby  swamp,  and  the  blue-throated 
warblers  vied  in  mocking  the  nightingales. — The  bright  sun 
rolled  out  from  beyond  the  bill. 

Smoke  rose  from  the  peasants'  huts,  bending  with  the 
wind  in  light  grey  columns,  like  a  procession  of  river  boats 
flaunting  their  flags;  the  peasMits  started  for  the  field. 

Gcand&ther  wanted  to  wash  himself  In  cold  water,  and 
then  to  drink  lea.  He  awoike  his  di^iiacefDUy  deeping 
servants.  Th^  leaped  up^  like  half-witted  people,  in  fright, 
hut  Stepdn  Mikhdylovieh's  merry  voice  xeaasored  them: 
*'  llazdn,  fetch  me  some  water  I  Tanaych^ok,  wake  Aks- 
ydtka  and  the  lady,— and  teal  *'  There  was  no  need  of 
repeating  the  commands:  awkward  Mazdn  was  running  as 
fast  as  his  feet  could  carry  him  with  a  bright  brass  wash- 
basin to  get  some  water  at  the  spring;  and  agile  Tanaych6- 
nok  awoke  the  homely  servant  girl  Aksy<itka  who  only  fixed 
the  kerchief  that  had  slipped  from  her  head  and  at  once  went 
to  wake  the  good  old  lady  Arfna  Vasilevna.  A  few  minutes 
later  the  whole  house  was  on  its  feet,  and  everybody  knew 
that  the  old  gentleman  had  gotten  up  in  a  good  humour. 
Fifteen  minutes  later  a  table  was  placed  near  the  porch,  and 
it  was  covered  with  a  fine  white  cloth  of  home  make;  upon  it 
boiled  a  aamovdr  in  the  shape  of  a  huge  brass  tea-pot,  and 
Aksydtka  was  busy  attending  to  it;  the  old  lady,  Arlha 
Vasilevna,  bade  Stepdn  Mikhdylovich  good-morning,  with- 
out sighing  and  groaning,  as  would  be  proper  on  other  mom- 
ingSt  and  loudly  and  merrily  asked  his  heslth:  "  How  did 
you  rest  yourself,  and  what  kind  of  dreams  did  you  have?  " 

Grandfather  greeted  his  wife  kindly  and  called  her  Arisha; 
he  never  kissed  her  hand,  but  gave  her  his  hand  to  kiss  as 
a  token  of  bis  favour.  Arfna  Vasflevna  bloomed  out  and 
grew  younger.  Her  obesity  and  clumsiness  disappeared  as 
if  by  magic!  She  brought  a  little  stool  and  seated  herself 
on  the  porch  near  grandfather,  which  she  never  dared  to  do 
if  he  did  not  receive  her  graciously. 

"  I^et  us  have  tea  together,  Arisha! "  said  Stepdu  Mikhdy- 


Digitized  by  Google 


Seiigy£y  Timoftevich  Aks&kov  221 


lovich,  "  before  it  is  hot.  Though  it  was  sultry  to  I 
slept  so  well  that  I  had  no  dreams  ?   And  you  ?  ' ' 

Such  a  question  was  an  unusual  favour,  and  grandmother 
speedily  replied  that  she  slept  well  every  time  Stepdn  Mikh- 
dylovich  passed  a  good  night,  but  that  Tanyusha  had  tossed 
a  great  deal.  Tanyusha  was  the  youngest  daughter,  and  the 
old  man  loved  her  more  than  his  other  daughters,  as  is  often 
the  case.  These  words  disquieted  him,  and  he  ordered  not 
to  wake  Tanyusha,  but  let  her  awaken  herself.  Tatydna 
Stepdnovna  had  been  wakened  together  with  Aleksdndra 
and  Blizav^ta  Step&osmuL  and  they  were  all  dressed,  but 
they  did  not  dare  tell  him  that  Taujr^sha  immediately  un- 
dressed hefseU,  went  bai^  to  bed,  ordered  to  dose  the 
ahottesB  In  her  room  and,  thongb  sbe  coidd  not  fall  asleep, 
lay  for  two  hotun  in  tbe  dark;  grand&ther  was  satisfied  be- 
osnse  Tatydna  had  bad  a  goodrest  His  only  son,  wbo  was 
nine  years  old,  was  never  made  to  get  np  early. 

The  elder  daughters  appeared  at  once.  Stepdn  Mikhdy- 
lovich  gradously  gave  them  his  hand  to  kiss  and  called  one 
Lizdnka  and  the  other  Leksdna.  Neither  of  them  was  a 
silly  girl.  Aleksdndra  united  her  father's  vivacity  and 
excitability  with  her  cunning  mind,  but  she  did  not  have 
his  good  qualities.  Grandmother  was  a  ver>'  simple  woman 
and  was  completely  controlled  by  her  daughters.  If  she 
ever  undertook  to  outwit  Stepdn  Mikhdylovich,  she  did  so 
solely  by  their  instigation,  which  the  old  man  knew  all  by 
heart  and  for  which,  on  aocount  of  her  simple-mindedness,  she 
bad  often  to  pay  dearly.  He  also  knew  that  bis  daughters 
were  ready  to  deceive  blm  at  any  ocMivenient  moment,  and 
only  ficom  ennni,  or  In  order  to  preserve  bis  own  peace,  tbat 
Is^  only  wben  be  was  In  good  bnmoor,  did  be  allow  tbem  to 
tbink  tbat  fb^  were  really  deceiving  bim;  bat  In  tbe  first 
fit  of  anger  be  told  tbem  all  witbotit  mercy.  In  tbe  most  nn- 
ceremonious  words,  and  sometimes  he  even  beat  them.  But 
the  danghters,  liice  Bve's  real  grandchildren,  did  not  lose 
their  courage:  the  moment  the  hour  of  anger  passed  and 
their  father's  face  was  becalmed,  they  set  out  once  more  to 
try  their  old  tricks,  and  they  were  often  successf  oL 


222         The  Nineteenth  Centuiy 


Having  drunk  his  tea  and  talked  over  all  kinds  of  things 
with  his  family,  grandfather  got  ready  for  the  field.  He 
had  told  Mazdn  long  before :  ' '  The  horse ! ' '  and  an  old 
greyish  brown  gelding  was  already  at  the  porch;  it  was 
hitched  to  a  long  peasant  waggon  that  was  very  comfortable, 
being  woven  with  a  close  rope  netting  and  having  a  long 
seat  in  the  middle  that  was  covered  with  a  blanket.  Groom 
Spirid6n  was  seated  in  the  waggon  as  a  coachman;  his  livery 
was  q^te  simple,  that  i%  it  coiwiiited  only  of  his  shirt;  he 
was  havefooCed  and  wu  gilded  with  a  red  wooUen  girdle 
from  which  hang  a  key  and  a  brass  combb  On  a  previous 
occasion  ^pkidAn  had  ventnred  ont  on  such  an  expedition 
even  without  a  hat;  but  grandfather  sodded  him  ibr  it,  so 
he  had  prepared  this  tune  something  in  the  shape  of  a  hat 
out  of  broad  bast  bands.  Grandfather  made  fun  of  his  head- 
gear and,  patting  on  his  field  coat  of  unbleached  homespun 
and  a  cap,  and  placing  under  liim  a  doak  against  rainy 
weather,  seated  himself  in  the  waggon.  Spirid6n  placed 
under  himself  his  common  gabardine,  having  folded  it  three 
times;  it  was  made  of  white  cloth  but  was  painted  blood-red 
with  madder,  which  grew  very  profusely  in  the  fields.  This 
red  colour  was  so  customary  with  our  old  men  that  the 
neighbours  called  the  Bagrov  servants  '*  madderlings  " ;  I 
heard  that  nickname  myself  some  fifteen  years  after  my 
grandfather's  death. 

Stepdn  Mikhdylovich  was  satisfied  with  everything  in  the 
field.  He  looked  at  the  deflorated  rye  which  stood  like  a 
wall  and  as  high  ss  a  man's  stature.  A  soft  breese  was 
blowing,  and  bluish  waves  psssed  over  it,  appearing  now 
lighter,  now  darker  in  the  sun.  It  was  a  joy  for  the  master 
to  look  at  such  a  field!  Grandftther  surveyed  also  the 
young  oats  and  all  the  summer  crops;  then  he  went  to  the 
untilled  field,  and  had  himself  tidcen  up  and  down  his 
plonghed'Up  acres.  That  was  his  usual  way  of  judging  how 
well  the  ploughing  had  been  done;  every  clod  of  earth  which 
had  been  untouched  by  the  plough  gave  a  jerk  to  the  shaky 
waggon,  and  if  grandfather  happened  to  be  out  of  sorts,  he 
stuck  a  small  stick  or  a  withe  into  such  a  place,  aent  for  the 


Digitized  by  Google 


Sergydy  Timofdevich  Aks^ov  223 


village  elder,  if  he  was  not  with  him,  and  the  inquest  began 
right  on  the  spot.  This  time  everything  went  off  favour- 
ably; there  may  have  been  some  untouched  spots,  only 
Stepdu  Mikhdylovich  did  not  notice  them,  or  did  not  wish 
to  notice  them. 

He  cast  also  a  glance  at  his  prairie  meadows,  and  looked 
with  delight  at  the  dense  high  grass  that  was  to  be  mowed 
In  a  few  days.  Ha  vialtad  also  the  peasant  fields  in  ofder 
to  find  oat  for  himm*1f  who  was  going  to  have  a  good  harvest 
and  who  not  He  also  looked  at  thdr  nntHled  gnmnd,  in- 
vestigated mattafa  doady,  and  fergot  nothing.  Passing  by 
a  fellow  fidd  and  notidng  ripe  strawberries,  giand&ther 
stopped  and  with  the  aid  of  Maz&a  gathered  a  fine  bnnch 
full  of  fine,  large  berries  which  he  took  home  as  a  present 
for  his  Axisha.  In  spite  of  the  heat  he  was  away  until  noon. 
The  moment  they  noticed  grandfather's  waggon  coming 
down  the  hill,  the  dinner  stood  on  the  table,  and  the  whole 
femily  waited  for  him  on  the  porch. 

"  Well,  Arisha,"  merrily  spoke  grandfather,  *'  it  is  a  fine 
harvest  God  is  giving  us!  The  Lord's  mercy  is  great! 
Here  are  some  strawberries  for  you  I  ** 

Grandmother  beamed  with  joy. 

"  The  berries  are  nearly  all  ripe,"  he  continued,  "  so  let 
them  begin  picking  to-morrow  I " 

Saying  these  words,  he  went  into  the  ante-chamber;  the 
odour  of  warm  cabbage  soup  was  wafted  to  blm  from  the 
ban.  "All,  it  is  veady  1 "  Step&n  Mikhdylovidi  said  with  a 
happier  mien,  "  thanks!  '*  and  without  going  to  hia  room, 
lie  went  stndght  into  the  hall  and  seated  himself  at  the 
tahle.  I  must  mention  that  it  was  giandfetfaer's  custom, 
when  he  returned  from  the  field,  whether  it  wsa  early  or 
late,  to  find  the  dinner  on  the  table,  and  God  preserve  them 
if  they  did  not  get  ready  with  the  meal  upon  his  return. 
Such  mishaps  had  brought  about  some  sad  results.  But  on 
that  lucky  day  ever>'thing  went  as  if  greased,  without  a 
hitch.  A  sturdy  fellow,  Nik61ka  Ruzdn,  stood  behind  grand- 
father with  a  large  birch-branch,  in  order  to  drive  away  the 
flies.  The  hot  cabbage  soup,  which  a  Russian  will  not  refuse 


224         The  Nineteenth  Century 


in  the  hottest  weather,  grandfather  sipped  from  a  wooden 
spoon,  because  a  silver  spoon  burned  his  lips.  Then  fol- 
lowed cold  beet  soup  with  ice,  with  transparent  sterlet,  with 
salted  sturgeon,  which  was  as  yellow  as  wax,  and  with 
shelled  crawfishes,  and  similar  light  dishes.  All  that  was 
washed  down  by  home-brewed  beer  and  kvas,  also  with  ice. 
It  was  a  very  jolly  dinner.  Alt  apc^  alood,  jested,  laughed. 
There  were,  however,  dinneei  that  passed  in  terriUe  silenoe 
and  in  speechless  expeetatkm  of  some  outbreak.  AU  the 
boys  and  girls  of  the  estate  knew  that  the  master  was  dining 
in  a  good  mood,  and  they  packed  the  hall,  ezpecting  to 
catch  some  dainties.  Grand&ther  treated  them  lavishly, 
because  there  was  always  prepared  five  times  as  much  food 
as  was  necessary.  After  dinner  he  at  once  lay  down  to 
sleep.  The  flies  wm  driven  out  from  under  the  bar  which 
was  let  down  over  grandfather  and  tucked  down  tinder  the 
feather  mattress.  Soon  a  mighty  snore  gave  evidence  that 
the  master  was  sleeping  a  heroic  sleep. 

Everybody  went  to  his  place  to  take  a  nap.  Mazdn  and 
Tanaych^nok,  having  had  a  solid  meal  from  the  remnants  of 
the  master's  table,  stretched  themselves  out  on  the  floor  of  the 
ante-chamber,  near  the  very  door  into  grandfather's  sleeping- 
room.  They  had  already  had  a  nap  in  the  forenoon,  which 
did  not  keep  them  from  falling  asleep  again;  but  the  stifling 
air  and  burning  sun  which  shone  dirough  the  window  woke 
them  up  soon.  The  sleep  and  the  heat  had  dried  up  their 
throats.  They  wanted  to  cool  their  burning  throats  with  the 
master's  iced  home-brew,  so  these  bold  lazybones  had  recourse 
to  the  following  trick.  Through  the  open  door  they  reached 
for  grand&ther's  morning  gown  and  sleeping-cap  whidi  lay 
on  a  chair,  near  the  door.  Tanaych^nok  pat  on  his  master's 
garment  and  seated  himself  on  the  porch,  and  Mazdn  ran 
with  a  pitcher  to  the  cellar,  woke  the  stewardess,  who,  like 
everybody  else  in  the  house,  dept  the  sleep  of  the  dead,  and 
asked  in  a  hurry  for  some  iced  beer  for  the  master  who  had 
just  risen.  When  the  stewardess  expressed  her  doubt  about 
the  master's  waking,  Mazdn  pointed  to  Tanaych^nok's 
figure  that  was  sitting  on  the  porch  in  morning  gown  and 


Digiiized  by  Google 


Sergydy  Timoftevich  Aks&kov  225 


night-ci^.  The  pitdier  was  filled  with  beer,  ioe  was  pot 
into  it,  and  Masin  zan  speedily  away  with  liis  booty.  They 
divided  the  contents  in  a  bratheily  way,  pot  the  morning 
gown  and  night  cap  in  the  old  place,  and  had  to  wait  fior  a 
whole  hour  before  grandfiftther  awoke. 

The  master  awoke  in  even  a  better  frame  of  mind  than 
upon  the  previous  day,  and  his  first  words  were:  "  Cold 
beer!"  The  servants  were  frightened  out  of  their  wits. 
Tanaychdnok  ran  to  the  stewardess  who  saw  immediately 
that  they  had  themselves  drunk  the  first  pitcher.  vShe  gave 
the  liquor,  but  followed  the  messenger  to  the  porch  where 
the  real  master  was  now  sitting  in  his  morning  gown.  The 
deception  was  made  evident  from  her  first  words,  and  Mazdn 
and  Tanaych^nok,  trembling  with  fear,  fell  down  before  the 
master's  feet,  and  what  do  you  supp(^  grandfather  did? 
He  laughed  out  loud,  sent  for  Arfsha  and  his  daughters, 
and  laughing  loud,  told  them  the  trick  of  his  servants.  The 
poor  fellows  breathed  mote  fieely,  and  one  of  them  even 
smiled.  Stepdn  Mikhdylovich  noticed  that  and  came  very 
near  getting  angry.  His  brows  began  to  be  farrowed,  but 
his  soul  was  ao  full  of  calm  restfnlneas  from  the  whok  merry 
day,  that  his  forehead  cleared  off  right  away,  and  he  only 
looked  angrily  and  said:  "  Well,  God  will  forgive  yon  this 
time;  but  if  it  happens  another  time — "  It  was  not  neoes- 
sary  to  finish  the  sentence. 

One  can't  help  marvelling  how  it  is  that  the  servants  had 
dared  to  practise  such  a  sharp  trick  upK>n  their  master  who 
was  senselessly  excitable  and  who  during  his  excitement  be- 
came very  cruel.  I  have  frequently  noticed  in  the  course  of 
my  life  that  the  severer  the  master,  the  more  daring  were 
the  acts  of  their  servants.  That  was  not  an  exceptional  case 
with  my  grandfather.  The  same  Vdnka  Mazdu,  having 
once  swept  the  sleeping  room  of  Stepdn  Mikhdylovich  and 
just  getting  ready  to  make  the  bed,  was  ao  sednoed  by  the 
soft  feather  beds  and  pillows  that  he  took  it  into  his  hesd  to 
pamper  himself ;  so  he  lay  down  upon  the  master's  bed  and 
fdl  asleq>.  Grandiather  found  hUn  sleeping  in  that  bed, 
and  he  only  laughed  out  loud.  It  is  true,  he  gave  him  a 

VOL.  n.—ss. 


226         The  Nineteenth  Century 


blow  ivith  his  viburnum  stick,  but  that  was  only  fior  fbn,  to 
have  a  good  laugh  at  Mazdn's  fright. 

He  awoke  about  five  o'clock  in  the  afternoon,  drank  some 
iced  homebrew,  and,  in  spite  of  the  stifling  heat,  wanted  to 
drink  some  tea,  believing  that  a  hot  drink  would  make  the 
heat  more  bearable.  He  went  down  to  take  a  swim  in  the 
cool  Bugurusldn  which  flowed  under  the  very  windows  of 
the  house,  and,  upon  returning,  found  his  whole  family  wait> 
ing  for  him  at  the  same  tea  table,  which  was  now  placed  in 
the  shade,  with  the  same  boiling  teapot-samoWbr,  and  with 
the  same  Akay^tka.  Having  had  his  fill  of  his  fimurite 
sweat-pfodudng  drink,  with  thidc  cream  and  its  brownod 
skin,  grandfather  proposed  to  all  a  ride  to  the  milL  Of 
amsse,  all  gladly  consented,  and  two  of  my  annts»  Aldcs^n* 
dra  and  Taty^  Steplnovna,  took  aome  fiahing  rods  with 
them,  lor  th^  were  very  fond  of  angling.  In  a  minnte  two 
long  waggons  were  hitched  up:  in  one  of  them  seated  them- 
selves  grandfather  and  grandmother,  placing  between  them 
their  only  heir,  the  precious  scion  of  their  ancient  noble 
race.  In  the  other  sat  my  three  aunts  and  the  lad  Niko- 
lashka  Ruzdn,  who  was  taken  alonp;,  in  order  to  dig  for 
worms  in  the  dam  and  to  put  them  on  the  ladies'  hooks. 

At  the  mill  they  brought  a  bench  for  grandmother,  and 
she  seated  herself  in  the  shade  of  the  mill  bam,  not  far  from 
the  mill  trough,  near  which  her  younger  daughters  were 
fishing.  The  elder  daughter,  Elizav6ta  Stepanovna,  went, 
as  much  to  please  her  father  as  from  her  own  love  of  farming, 
with  Stepdn  Mikhdylovich  to  look  at  the  mill  and  the 
grinding.  The  young  boy  now  looked  at  the  sister's  an- 
gling (he  was  not  3^  allowed  to  fish  in  deep  places),  now 
played  near  his  mother  who  did  not  tarn  her  eyes  away  fiom 
him,  fearing  that  he  might  somehow  roll  into  the  water. 

Both  millstones  were  at  work:  in  one  of  them  they  were 
grinding  wheat  for  the  master's  table;  in  the  other,  rye  for 
strangers;  the  stamping  mill  was  crushing  millet.  Grand- 
fother  was  an  expert  in  every  part  of  the  farm ;  he  knew  well 
the  mechanism  of  the  mill,  and  was  explaining  all  its  details 
to  his  dever  and  attentive  daughter.  He  saw  at  a  glance 


Digitized  by  Google 


Sergy^y  Timofdevich  Aksiikov  227 


all  tbe  imperfectioiis  In  the  gearing,  or  all  the  migtakes  in 
the  position  of  the  milUtones.  He  ordered  to  let  one  down 
half  a  notch,  and  the  flour  came  out  much  finer,  which 
pleased  the  customer  very  much.  In  the  other  grinding 
apparatus  he  discovered  by  the  sound  that  one  pin  in  the 
wheel  was  beginning  to  be  worn  out.  He  ordered  to  shut 
off  the  water,  and  miller  Boltun^nok  jumped  down  to  examine 
the  wheel.    He  said: 

"You  are  right,  Father  Stepin  Mikhdylovichl  One  pin 
is  a  li'.tle  worn  off.'* 

*'  Yes,  yes,  a  little,"  replied  grandfather  without  any  dis- 
pleasure. "  If  I  had  not  come,  the  wheel  would  have  broken 
over  night." 

•*  It  is  my  fault,  Stepdn  Mikhdylovich,  I  did  not  notice  it." 

**  God  forgive  you!  I^et  us  have  a  new  wheel,  and  get  a 
new  pin  made  for  the  old  wheel ;  see  to  it  that  the  new  wheel 
Is  not  any  wider,  nor  nanower  than  the  fast,  that  la  the  main 
point" 

They  brought  a  new  wheel,  whidi  had  been  fitted  before, 
and  put  It  In  place;  they  oiled  it,  let  In  the  water,-^not  all  at 
once,  but  by  degrees  (also  by  ocder  of  gnmdfiither),— and  the 
millstone  started  to  hum  and  grind,  without  Interruption  or 
rattling,  but  smoothly  and  evenly.  Then  grandfiither  went 
with  his  daughter  to  the  stamping  mill,  took  out  of  the  Stamp 
a  handful  of  crushed  millet,  blew  the  dust  away  from  the 
palm  of  his  hand,  and  said  to  the  customer,  a  neighbouring 
Mordvinian:  ''Look  here,  neighbour  Vasyljkha!  Don't 
you  see  there  is  not  a  single  unbroken  grain  ?  If  you  let  the 
stamping  go  on,  there  will  be  less  of  flour."  Vasytikha 
tried  it  himself,  and  he  convinced  himself  that  grandfather 
was  telling  the  truth.  He  thanked  him  and  bowed,  that  is, 
he  only  shook  his  head,  and  ran  away  to  shut  off  the  water. 

From  there  grandfather  went  with  his  pupil  to  the  barn- 
yard. He  found  everything  in  excellent  order.  There  was 
a  large  number  of  geese,  ducks,  turkeys,  and  hens,  and  an 
old  woman  and  her  grandchild  looked  after  them  alL  As  a 
special  favour,  grand&ther  let  them  both  kiss  his  hand,  and 
he  ocdeced  that  the  fowlkeeper  should  leodve,  in  addition 


228         The  Nineteenth  Century 


to  the  usual  allowance,  twenty  pounds  of  wheat  flour  a 
month  for  cakes.  Stepdn  Mikhdylovich  returned  in  good 
spirits  to  Arina  Vasilevna,  and  he  was  satisfied  with  every- 
thing: his  daup^bter  was  clever,  the  mill  was  grinding  well, 
and  the  fowlkeeper  Tatydna  Gorochdna  was  looking  well 
after  the  fowls. 

The  heat  had  long  subsided.  The  coolness  from  the  water 
increased  the  freshness  of  the  approaching  evening ;  a  long 
doud  of  dust  rose  along  the  road  and  came  nearer  to  the 
village;  one  could  hear  in  it  the  bleating  and  lowing  of  the 
farm  animals;  the  declining  sun  disappeared  behind  a  steep 
hill.  Standing  on  the  dam,  Stepdn  looked  with  delight  at 
tbe  bfoad  pond  which  lay  immovable  like  a  minor  between 
its  low  banks;  fishes  kept  on  playing  in  the  water  and  leap- 
ing up,  but  Stepdn  Mikhdylovich  was  not  fond  of  fishing. 

"Axlslia,  it  is  time  to  start  home;  tlie  dder,  I  suppose^  is 
waiting  for  me,"  said  he.  Seeing  bim  in  a  happy  frame  of 
mind,  the  yonnger  danghten  b^an  to  beg  him  to  let  them 
stay  a  little  longer,  saying  that  at  sundown  the  fish  bite 
better,  and  that  tb^  would  walk  home  iu  half  an  hour. 
Grandfather  consented  and  drove  away  in  his  waggon  with 
grandmother,  while  Elizaveta  Stepdnovna  seated  heradUTwith 
her  brother  in  the  other  waggon.  Stepdn  Mikhdylovich  was 
not  mistaken.  The  elder  was  waiting  for  him  at  the  pK)rch, 
and  he  was  not  alone,  but  several  peasants  and  their  wives 
were  there  also.  The  elder  had  seen  the  master,  and  he 
knew  that  he  was  in  good  humour,  and  he  had  told  some 
peasants  about  it.  Some  of  them  who  had  some  special  re- 
quest to  make,  such  as  exceeded  any  usual  favour,  made  use 
of  the  favourable  opportunity,  and  they  were  all  satisfied. 
Grandfather  gave  some  graiu  to  a  peasant  who  had  not  yet 
paid  off  his  old  debt,  though  he  could  have  done  so;  he  per- 
mitted another  one  to  marry  off  bis  son,  withont  waiting  for 
winter,  and  not  to  tbe  giil  wbicb  be  bad  bimadf  selected; 
lie  permitted  a  guilty  soldier's  widow,  whom  be  bad  oidered 
to  be  driven  out  of  tbe  village,  to  live  with  her  father,  and 
so  forth. 

More  than  that  They  were  treated  each  to  a  silver  cup 


Digitized  by  Google 


Aleksy^y  Stepinovich  Khomyak6v  229 


of  strong  home-made  bnmdy,  and  tlds  cap  bdd  wm  than  a 
beakerful.  Grandfather  gave  short  and  dear  oideiiB  to  the 
elder,  and  hastened  to  the  supper  which  had  been  waiting 
for  him  for  some  time.  Thesnpper  table  difeed  little  from 
dinner,  and  widoiibtedly  ihey  ate  a  more  solid  meal,  becanae 
it  was  not  so  hot  After  sapper  Stepin  Mikh^yUnodi  was 
in  the  habit  of  sitting  up  another  half  an  hour  in  his  shift 
and  cooling  himself  on  the  porch,  after  his  family  had  been 
excused  to  retire.  This  time  he  jested  and  laughed  a  little 
longer  than  usual  with  his  servants.  He  ordered  Mazdn 
and  Tanaych^nok  to  have  a  boxing  match,  and  he  urged 
them  on  in  such  a  way  that  they  belaboured  each  other  not 
in  jest  and  tore  each  other's  hair.  Having  had  all  the  fun 
he  wanted,  grandfather  gave  the  command  for  them  to  come 
to  their  senses  and  stop. 

A  short,  marvellous  summer  night  lay  over  all  Nature. 
The  evening  twilight  had  not  yet  all  disappeared!  The 
azure  of  the  sky  grew  darker  from  hour  to  hour,  and  from 
hour  to  hour  the  stars  shone  more  brilliantly.  Louder  and 
louder  became  the  voices  and  calls  of  the  birds  of  the  night, 
as  if  they  were  getting  nearer  to  man!  mie  mill  sounded 
nearer,  and  the  stamping  mill  stamped  in  the  damp  night 

mist         Grandfather  rose  from  his  porch,  made  one  or 

two  signs  of  the  cross  towards  the  starry  heavens,  and  lay 
down  to  sleep,  in  spite  of  the  closeness  of  the  room,  00  the 
hot  feather  bed,  and  he  ordered  the  servants  to  lower  the 
mosquito  bar  over  nim* 

Alekqr^  StepAnovicb  Kbomyakdv.  (i804-z86a) 

Khon^alc^  was  born  in  Mbaeow,  where  he  passed  his  eaily  child- 
hood and  yontb,  and  there  early  came  in  oontaet  with  some  of  the 

representative  men  of  letters.  In  1821  he  was  fired  with  enthusiasm 
for  the  Greek  struggle  for  independence,  and  ran  away  from  home  to 
join  the  Greek  patriots.  He  wm,  howefcr,  Ofvertilcen  in  time  tqr  his 
Iklfaer,  aod  entered  the  Rnasiaa  army,  which  he  left  in  iSes*  Som 

after  began  to  appear  his  patriotic  and  religions  aoogs  that  attracted 

the  public  attention  by  their  artistic  perfection.  He  again  joined  the 
army  daring  the  Turkish  campaign  of  1828.  A  few  years  later  he 
wrote  two  tragedies,  bnt  they  were  a  complete  iiailure.   He  then 


230         The  Nineteenth  Century 


devoted  himself  to  prose,  derotiog  all  his  energies  to  the  caOM  of 
Slavophilism  and  the  propagation  of  Greek-Catholic  theology. 

Into  English  have  been  translated:  Kiev^  in  C.  T.  Wilson's 
Jiussiam  Lyrics,  homdoa,  1887 ;  To  My  OiiUrm,  In  SkoH  /bmu 
€md  ifymu,  the  latter  moatty  tnuaslatloiis,  by  W.  Palmer,  Oxford, 
1845  (reprinted  in  Russia  and  the  English  Church  during  the  LMsi 
Fifty  Years,  vol.  i.,  London,  1895,  and  in  The  Anglo-Russian  Literary 
Society,  No.  17,  and  in  Khomyak6v'8  Complete  Works^  vol.  iv., 
Moscow,  190Q) ;  The  IsUmd  and  To  Russia,  in  Russia  and  ike  Eng' 
lisk  Ckuftk,  v6L  i.  (reprinted  in  XlioaiyakdT*a  Qmplde  WbHks, 
vol.  iv.) ;  The  Eagle  and  several  extracts,  by  H.  Havelock,  in  The 
Anglo-Rnssian  Literary  Society,  No.  17  ;  RmsioM  SoHg,  by  N.  H. 
Dole,  in  Library  of  the  World's  Best  Literature. 

TO  MY  CHILDREN 

Time  «u  when  I  loved  at  adll  midnight  to  come^ 
My  diildien,  to  see  yon  adeep  in  your  room; 
The  cross,  hdy  sign  on  your  foreheads  to  trace, 
And  oommend  you  in  prayer  to  the  love  and  the  grace 
Of  our  gradons  and  mecdM  God. 

To  keep  gentle  guard,  and  watch  over  your  rest. 
To  think  how  your  spirits  were  sinless  and  blest, 
la  hope  to  look  forward  to  long  happy  years 
Of  blithe,  merry  youth,  without  sorrows  or  feais» 
Oh,  how  sweet,  how  deUciooa  it  wasl 

But  now,  if  I  go,  all  is  silence,  all  gloom; 
None  sleep  in  that  crib,  nothing  breathes  in  that  room: 
The  light  that  should  bum  at  the  image  is  gone: 
Alas!  so  it  is,  children  now  I  have  none, 
And  my  heart,  how  it  painfnlly  throbs! 

Dear  children,  at  that  same  midnight  do  ye, 
As  I  once  prasred  for  you,  now  in  torn  pray  for  me; 
Me  who  loved  well  the  cross  on  your  Ibceheads  to  trace; 
Now  commend  me  in  torn  to  the  mercy  and  grace 
Of  our  gradons  and  merdfhl  God. 

^TmnsL  by  Rev.  W.  Palmer,  in  S^M  Pf€ms 
and  Hymns,  Oxford,  1845. 


Digitized  by  Google 


Aleksy^y  Step^Lnovich  Khomyak6v  231 


TH9  BA6LB 

High  hast  thou  built  thine  ejrrie. 

Eagle  of  the  Northern  Slavs, 

Wide  hast  thou  spread  thy  wings, 

High  into  heaven  hast  thou  soared. 

Fly!    But  in  the  lofty  deep  of  ether, 

Where  thy  scarce-breathing  breast 

Is  warmed  by  the  passage  of  Freedom, 

Forget  not  thy  younger  kin! 

Look  to  the  Sotithem  Steppe, 

Look  to  the  ivr-oS  West: 

Many  are  then,  where  the  Danube  nge% 

Where  the  Alpine  doods  gather  way. 

In  the  mountain  deUs»  in  the  dark  Caipathiana^ 

In  the  Balkan  defiles  wood-clothed, 

In  the  dutches  of  faithless  Teutons, 

In  the  steely  chains  of  the  Tartar, 

And  thy  brothers  walk  in  fetters 

Till  thy  voice  shall  sound  in  their  ears, 

Till  thy  wings  thou  shalt  spread  protecting 

O'er  their  heads  growu  feeble  with  bondage. 

Forget  them  not,  Xorthern  Eagle, 

Send  them  thy  resouaut  call 

And  in  slavery's  night  console  them 

With  thy  free  and  cheering  light. 

Feed  them  with  thoughts  elating, 

With  the  hope  of  happier  days, 

And  warm  with  loving  kindness 

These  hearts  whose  blood  is  as  thine. 

Their  hoar  shall  come:  their  pinions 

Wax  strong,  and  their  talons  sliarp, 

Thqr  shall  cry,  full-grown,  and  shall  sunder 

At  a  breath  the  bonds  that  now  bind. 

— Transl.  by  H.  Havelock,  in  The  Anglo-Rusiiatt 
Literary  Society,  No.  17. 


23a 


The  Nineteenth  Century 


KIEV 

Kkvl  upaa  the  Dni^er  bnilt, 
Thy  lofty  walls  above  me  tower; 

Like  silver  from  the  fomaoe  pme* 
The  river  gkami  where  dark  hiUt  lonr. 

All  hail  to  thee,  thou  ancient  town ! 

The  cradle  thou  of  Russia's  fame! 
And  hail  to  thee,  O  Dnieper  swift, 

The  bath,  whence  glorious  Russia  camel 

In  the  calm  air  the  songs  resound, 
The  evening  bells  ring  out  their  note; 
Whence  come  ye,  Pilgrim-Brothers,  say. 
Your  homage  who  to  God  devote  ?  " 

*'  I  oome  from  where  the  qniet  Don 
Glides  forth,  the  beauty  of  our  homes"; 

"I  oome  vrtiere  stem  Yenisey 
In  boundless  waters  proudly  foams." 

"  My  home  is  on  the  Euxine  shore.** 
"  Mine  in  those  distant  realms  is  found 

Where  wide-extending  ice-fields  hold 
The  sea  within  their  rigid  bound," 

"  Savage  the  view  of  Altay's  ridge^ 

Bternal  is  the  snowy  glare ; 
My  native  town  ttme-honotired  Pskov, 

My  own  dear  home  is  there,  is  there." 

"  I  come  from  cold  Ladoga's  Lake  "  ; 

**  I  from  the  Neva's  soft  blue  face  **  ; 
"  I  come  from  Kama's  flowing  stream  ' '  ; 

"  And  I  from  Moscow's  fond  embrace." 

All  hail,  Kiev!  most  wondrous  town, 
With  turbid  stream  which  Dnieper  lavesl 

Grander  than  seats  imperial  are 
The  silent  shadows  of  thy  caves. 


Aleksy6y  Step&novich  Khomyak6v  233 


We  know  in  night  of  times  gone  by, 

In  darkness  of  antiquity. 
The  brightly  shining  Ksstem  son 

Glowed  ever,  Russia,  over  thee. 

And  now,  from  strange,  and  distant,  lands, 

From  far-off  steppes, — from  unknown  homes,— 
From  deepest  rivers  of  the  North, — 
A  crowd  of  pfaying  children  comes. 

In  loving  company  well  met, 

We  gather  in  thy  sanctuary; 
Where  are  thy  sons,  Volhynia  ? 

Galich,  where  is  thy  progeny  ? 

Woe !  woe !  as  though  by  savage  fires, 

They  all  by  Poles  consume  are; 
By  noisy  banquetings  deceived. 

They  yield  to  festive  charm  and  glare. 

Captives  to  sword  and  treachery, 
They  are  ensnared  by  falsehood's  flame; 

They  move  beneath  a  foreign  flag, 
They  bow  unto  a  stranger's  name. 

Awake,  Kiev!  again  arise, 

Upon  thy  fallen  children  call. 
On  them  let  father's  tenderness, 

With  voice  of  supplicatioo,  ML 

Thy  soos,  ent  ravished  from  fhy  breast, 

Win  listen  to  thy  soothing  cry; 
Will  tear  asunder  cunning  chain, 

The  foreign  flag  will  pass  it  by; 

Will  come  again,  as  in  past  days. 
Will  in  thy  love  themselves  disport, 


^34         The  Nineteenth  Centuiy 


Will  lay  their  faces  in  thy  lap, 
Will  bring  their  vessels  to  thy  port. 

And  all  around  their  native  flag 
Thy  strong  commands  they  will  await; 

Thtk  life's  full  spirit,— spirit's  life,— 
Wai  be  by  thee  regenerate! 

— ^Plrom  C.  T.  Wilson's  JhtssUm  LyHa. 

P€dor  iTftnovidi  Tsrfitcliev.  (1803-1873.) 

Bom  almost  at  the  same  time  with  P4shkin,  Tyiitchev  continued 
the  tradition  of  PAilikin*t  Mhool  ratil  the  aevcntiet.  When  oolj 
fonrteen  jem  of  agie^  he  ynm  dHMen  •  member  of  the  Society  of 
Lovers  of  Russian  Literature  for  his  maitedy  translation  of  poems 
from  Horace.  In  1823  he  was  attached  to  the  Russian  embassy  at 
Munich ;  then,  after  serving  in  various  capacities,  be  was  made 
pcetident  of  the  OommiMiott  of  9ofcigB  Censorship,  wUdi  office  he 
hdd  to  his  death.  Thoegh  ftegoeiitly  contribUng  to  the  periodico1i> 
Ty6tchev  remained  unknown  to  the  middle  of  the  oentoiy,  when 
Nekrdsov  and  Turg^nev  rediscovered  him.  His  tenet  we  vecy  nido> 
dious  and  tunable,  but  rather  narrow  of  scope. 

In  English  translation  are  to  be  found :  Scaru  cooUd  from  midday 
tuai  end  Tke  SfHu^'Storm^  by  John  PoUen,  in  Rhymes  Jvom  ikg 
/Russian,  London,  1891 ;  I  suffer  still  from  anguished  longings  by  A. 
C.  Coolidge,  in  Harvard  Monthly  Majsjazine,  1895,  and  The  Anglo- 
Russian  Literary  Society,  No.  15  ;  Spring  Waters,  Sunrise,  Evening, 
The  Leaves^  by  N.  H.  Dole,  in  the  Library  of  the  World's  Best 
Ifitetitaie.  A  few  poems,  tnmlettd  bj  M.  H.  Dole,  axe  given  in  0» 
Schbmer'sOeteto  Chornacs  fer  Hlsed  VoiGei,Ncw  Yoik;  theAw- 
rite,  by  Dole,  was  also  given  in  the  Ledysmith  Leader  and  Wd]inf> 
ton  Bstension  Nem^  Nov.  6^  190Z. 

Scarce  cooled  ftom  msddny  beat 

Sparkles  the  summer  night; 
O'er  sinfU  earth  a  thxeateniiig  cknid 

Tiembles  with  lightnings  bright 
Heaven's  sleepy  cgrdids  ope. 

And  tfanoogh  its  distant  gleam, 
The  threatening  orbs  of  One  above 

O'er  earth  to  kindle  seem. 
— From  J.  Pollen's  Rhymes  from  tke  Russiam. 


Digitized  by  Google 


F6dor  Iv&novich  Tyfitchev  235 


THE  SPRING-STORM 

I  love  the  storm  in  early  May, 

When  spring's  first  maiden  thunder  peali^ 
And,  laughing  in  its  frolic  play, 

Across  the  blue  sky  softly  steals. 

The  little  rumblings  roll  and  reel ; 

The  rain-shower  glistens;  flies  the  dust; 
The  rain-drop  pearls  in  clusters  ding, 

And  golden  gleams  the  fields  encmst. 

From  hillside  headlong  speeds  the  rill, 
In  groves  the  birds  keep  twittering, 

And  chattering  wood  and  murmuring  hill 
Echo  with  joy  the  thundering. 
— From  J.  PoUea's  Rhymes  Jrom  the  Russian, 


I  suffer  still  from  anguished  longing, 
Per  towards  thee  still  my  spirit  strives. 

In  a  twilight  of  memories  thronging 
B'en  now  thine  image  still  survives. 

Thine  image  sweet,  forgotten  never, 
Before  me  alwa3rs,  near  and  fiv, 

Unreachable,  unchanging  ever 
As  in  the  sky  of  night,  a  star. 

— Transl.  by  A.  C.  Coolidge. 

SUNRISB 

In  solemn  calm  the  Orient  waits, 
A  deep,  mysterious  silence  keeping; 
No  sign  to  tell  if  Day  be  sleeping 

Or  if  he  halt  before  her  gates. 

Now,  now  the  mountain  tops  grow  white, 
The  mists  the  vales  below  still  cumber. 


Digitized  by  Google 


236         The  Nineteenth  Century 


Still  towiM  and  peaceful  hamlets  slumber — 
Bnt  heavenward  turn  your  eager  aightl 

Behold  it !    Now  a  gleam  awakes 
And  like  young  Passion's  timid  blushes 
The  red  glow  brighter,  rosier  flushes, 

Then  high  above  the  zenith  breaks! 

A  mcmient  passes;  swift  the  light 
Throni^iont  the  Ether's  vast  dominions 
Sweeps  onward  on  her  glittering  pinions 
And  oonqueis  all  the  hosts  of  Night. 

— Transl.  by  N.  H.  Dole,  in  Schirmer's 
Octavo  Chomses,  Na  623. 

Aleksdndr  Ivinovicb  G^rtaen  (Henen). 
(2812-1870.) 

G^rtaen  was  the  boo  of  a  li^  landed  ptoprietor  by  tiie  name  of 

YAkovIev,  and  of  a  German  motfaer  (Herzcn).  He  was  Ixotight  op 
in  the  house  of  his  father,  where  he  early  acquired  several  languages 
and  a  love  for  the  German  literature  of  the  period,  especially  for 
Schiller  and  Goethe.  He  later  devoted  hinieeif  entindj  to  tiie  caact 
adeneee  and  gradnated  in  1833  from  the  Univeteity  of  Hoaeow  with  • 
silver  medal  for  his  thesis,  The  Historical  Evolution  of  the  System 
of  Copernicus.  While  attending  the  university,  G^rtsen  was  the  soul 
Qf  one  of  those  circles  of  the  thirties  where  all  kinds  of  philosophical 
and  social  themes  were  discussed  with  great  wit  and  enthusiasm.  He 
Uiter  aerved  in  erveral  government  oapadtica^  diiefly  in  St  Feteie- 
bmg^  where  he  continued  to  be  a  centre  erawid  which  gathered  all 
the  projSTcssive  forces  of  the  younger  generations.  In  1844  the  two 
extreme  literan,'  camps  completely  severed  their  connections  :  the 
Slavophiles  rallied  around  Khomyak6v  and  the  Aksikovs,  while  the 
Weatcmera  gathered  aronnd  G^iaen  and  Oger^v.  In  1847  Gdrtaea 
went  abroad  never  to  return.  In  the  leit  lew  years  of  his  residence 
in  St.  Petersburg  he  had  evinced  great  literary  talent :  his  best  known 
stories  are  The  Thicvitif^  Magpie  and  Who  is  to  be  Blamed?  During 
his  long  residence  abroad  he  published  the  famous  Bell,  in  which 
periodtcal  he  carried  on  a  relentleM  propaganda  for  oonatitntional- 
iam  In  Rnaaie.  In  From  the  Other  Skon  (originally  published  hi 
German)  he  expressed  his  disenchantment  with  the  West,  and  in 
At/  aud  Reflections  he  has  given  a  aeries  of  vivid  pictarea  of  his 


uiyiii^uLi  Uy  Google 


Aleks&ndr  Iv^novich  Gdrtsen  '  237 


times.  His  influence  as  a  political  agitator  and  as  a  nun  of  Ifetten 
may  be  traced  through  several  geuerations  in  Russia. 

G^rtsen  wrote  two  of  his  works  in  English :  My  Exile  in  Siberia^ 
a  vola.,  London,  1855,  and  Tk€  JbusioM  Peo^  and  TMr  SfdaUtm, 
A  LiiUr  to  M.JmUs  MidkM^  Bnntwood,  1855. 

SI«AVOPHILGS  AND  PANSLAVISM 

Side  by  side  with  our  circle  were  our  opponents,  nos  amis 
Us  ennemis,  or,  more  correctly,  nos  ennemis  ks  amis, — the 
Moscow  Slavophiles. 

The  ^rar  between  us  has  kmg  been  ended,  and  we  have 
shaken  each  otbeiB  hands;  but  In  the  beghining  of  the  forties 
we  had  to  meet  as  enemieSi— so  a  oonsiatent  adherence  to 
our  principles  demanded.  We  might  have  avoided  quarrel- 
ling with  them  for  their  childish  adontioo  of  the  childish 
period  of  onr  hiatoiy;  but  accepting  their  Orthodosar  at  full 
value,  and  seeing  their  ecclesiastic  intolerance  in  both  direc- 
tions»— in  the  direction  of  science  and  in  the  direction  of  the 
schism, — ^we  had  to  assume  a  hostile  attitude  towards  them. 
We  saw  in  their  doctrine  a  new  oil  with  which  to  anoint  the 
Tsar,  a  new  chain  imposed  up>on  thought,  a  new  suboidina- 
tion  of  conscience  to  the  ser\'ile  Byzantine  Church. 

It  is  the  Slavophiles'  fault  that  for  a  long  time  we  did  not 
understand  the  Russian  people,  or  their  historj- :  their  icono- 
graphic  ideals  and  incense  smoke  have  hindered  our  discern- 
ing the  national  life  and  the  foundations  of  the  village 
commune. 

The  Orthodoxy  of  the  Slavophiles,  their  hiatorical  patriot- 
ism and  exaggerated,  irritating  feeling  of  nationalitsr  were 
provoked  by  extremes  in  the  other  direction.  The  import- 
ance of  thehr  view,  its  truth  and  essential  part  are  not  in 
Orthodoacy  and  not  In  national  exdu8iveness»  but  in  those 
dements  of  Russian  life  whldi  th^  have  discovered  beneatii 
the  fertiliser  of  the  artificial  civilisation. 

The  idea  of  nationality  is  in  itself  a  conser\'ative  idea, 
baaed  on  the  ezdosivenessof  its  rights  and  the  dannishness 
of  its  associations;  there  are  in  it  the  Judaic  conception  of 
the  superiority  of  race,  and  the  aristocratic  pretensions  of 


238         The  Nineteenth  Century 


purity  of  blood  and  entailment.  Nationality,  as  a  banner, 
as  a  battle-cry,  only  then  is  surrounded  by  a  revolutionary 
aureole  when  the  nation  fights  for  independence,  when  it 
throws  off  a  foreign  yoke.  It  is  for  this  reason  that  national 
sentiments,  with  all  their  exaggerations,  are  full  of  poetry 
ill  Italy  and  in  Poland,  and  at  the  same  time  banal  in  Ger- 
many. 

It  would  be  even  moie  ndicnkiis  than  with  fbe  Gennans 
to  prove  our  satkoality,  for  even  thoee  do  not  doubt  it  who 
cuxBe  us.  Tbey  hate  ua  from  fear,  but  do  not  deny  ua,  as 
Mettemidi  denied  Italy.  We  ought  to  have  oppoaed  our 
nationality  to  our  Germaniaed  government  and  to  its  rene- 
gades. Thia  domestic  war  could  not  be  raised  to  an  epoe. 
The  appearance  of  .the  Slavophiles  as  a  school  and  as  a 
aeparate  doctrine  was  quite  proper;  but  if  they  had  fotmd  no 
other  flag  than  the  Orthodox  banner,  and  no  other  ideal 
than  the  Domostrdy  and  the  extremely  Russian,  but  exceed- 
ingly harsh,  period  before  Peter,  they  would  have  passed  for 
a  curious  party  of  transmogrified  odd  people  who  belonged  to 
another  time.  The  strength  and  the  future  of  Slavophilism 
lay  in  another  direction.  It  may  be  that  their  treasure  was 
really  hid  in  church  vessels  of  ancient  workmanship,  but  its 
value  was  neither  in  the  vessel,  nor  in  the  form.  They  did 
not  separate  them  at  first. 

To  the  historical  recollections  proper  were  added  the 
memories  of  aU  the  related  nations.  Our  Slavophiles  as- 
sumed the  qrmpathy  for  the  Western  Panslavism  to  be 
identical  in  &ct  and  in  direction,  forgetting  that  there  the 
exclusive  nationalism  was  at  the  same  time  the  lament  of  a 
people  that  was  oppressed  by  a  foreign  yoke.  Western 
Panslavism  was,  upon  its  appearance,  regarded  fay  the  Aus- 
trian government  as  a  conservative  step.  It  was  evolved 
during  the  sad  epoch  of  the  Vienna  Congress.  It  was,  in 
general,  the  time  of  all  kinds  of  resurrections  and  rehabilita- 
tions, the  time  of  all  kinds  of  Lazariises, — fresh  and  stinking 
ones.  The  Bohemian  Panslavism  arose  by  the  side  of  the 
Deuischthutn,  which  was  marching  to  the  resurrection  of  the 
happy  days  of  Barbarossa  and  the  Hohenstauf ens.  The  gov- 


uiyiii^uu  Ly  Google 


Aleks&ndr  Iv&novich  Gtosen  239 


emments  hailed  this  new  tendency,  and  at  firat  encooiaged 
the  development  of  international  hatred ;  the  maaaes  again 
dang  to  their  tribal  interrelatton,  of  which  the  knot  was  being 
dxawn  tighter,  and  again  were  departing  from  the  common 
demands  for  the  improvement  of  their  existence;  borders 
became  ever  more  impassable,  and  the  tie  and  sympathy 
between  nations  were  loosened.  It  goes  without  saying 
tliat  only  weak,  apathetic  nations  were  allowed  to  awaken, 
and  that  only  so  long  as  their  activities  were  limited  to 
scientific,  archeographic  labours  and  etymological  quarrels. 
In  Milan  and  in  Poland,  where  nationality  would  not  rest  at 
grammar,  it  was  held  down  with  spiked  hands. 

The  Bohemian  Panslavism  incited  the  Slavic  sympathies 
in  Rua^a. 

Slavism,  or  Rnssism,  not  aa  a  theory,  not  as  a  doctrine, 
but  as  an  ofiended  national  feeling,  as  an  indistinct  recollec- 
tion and  ooricct  Instinct,  as  a  zeastanoe  to  an  exdnsively 
foreign  Inflnence,  lias  existed  since  the  shearing  of  the  first 
besrd  by  Peter  the  Gieat 

The  resistance  to  the  St.  Petersbnrg  terrorism  of  education 
has  never  stopped  :  tortured  and  quartered  and  hung  out  on 
the  spikes  of  the  Kremlin,  to  be  shot  at  by  M^nahikov  and 
the  other  royal  jesters  in  the  shape  of'  savage  hunters, 
poisoned  in  the  ravelin  of  the  St.  Petersburg  fortress,  in  the 
shape  of  Tsar^vich  Alexis,  it  appeared  as  the  party  of  the 
Dolgortikis  during  the  reign  of  Peter  II.,  as  the  hatred  of 
the  Germans  under  Bir6n,  as  Pugach6v  under  Catherine  II., 
as  Catherine  II.  herself,  an  Orthodox  German,  under  the 
Prussian  Holsteinian  Peter  III.,  as  Elizabeth,  who  leaned 
on  the  Slavophiles  of  her  day,  in  order  to  seat  herself  on  the 
throne  (the  people  of  Moscow  were  waiting  for  all  the  Ger- 
mans to  be  killed  at  her  coronation). 

All  the  dissenters  are  Slavophiles. 

AU  the  white  and  fatai^  clergy  are  Slavophiles  of  a  differ- 
ent sort* 

The  soldiers  who  demanded  the  removal  of  Barday  de 
Tolly  for  his  foreign  name  were  .the  predeoessofs  of  Khom- 
yak6v  and  his  friends. 


Digiiized  by  Google 


340         The  Nineteenth  Centuiy 


The  «ir  of  1812  developed  a  strong  feeling  of  national 
consciousness  and  patriotism,  but  the  patriotism  of  1812  had 
no  Orthodox,  Slavic  character.  We  see  it  in  Karamzfn  and 
Pushkin,  and  in  Emperor  Alexander  himself.  It  was  prac- 
tically an  expression  of  that  instinct  of  force  which  all 
mighty  nations  feel  when  they  are  attacked  by  a  foreign 
people;  and  then  it  was  a  solemn  feeling  of  victory,  a  proud 
consciousness  of  a  successful  defence.  But  that  theory  was 
weak;  in  order  to  love  Russian  history,  the  patriots  trans- 
formed it  according  to  European  models;  they  in  general 
teanalated  the  Graeoo-Roman  patriotisni  from  French  into 
Russian,  and  did  not  go  beyond  the  verse 

Pmrum  amr  Hem  ni,  que  la  fiatrie     dUhe  i 

It  is  true,  Shishkov  even  then  raved  of  reestablishing  the 
ancient  style,  but  his  influence  was  limited.  The  real  popu- 
lar diction  was  used  only  by  the  Frenchified  Count  Rostop- 
chfn  in  his  proclamations  and  appeals. 

In  measure  as  the  war  was  being  forgotten,  this  patriotism 
cooled  down  and  finally  deteriorated,  on  the  one  hand,  into 
a  low,  cynical  flattery  of  Tlu  Northern  Bee,  on  the  other,  into 
the  trivial  patriatism  of  Zag6skin,'  who  called  Shiiya,' 
Kandiester  and  Shebiiyev,  a  Raphael,  and  ^viio  boaatod 
of  the  bayonets  and  the  eacpanse  from  the  ioe  of  TMneft  to 
the  Tauric  Mountains  

In  the  xdgn  of  Nicholas  the  patiiotisai  was  trsnsfbnned 
into  something  knont-like  and  offidsl,  especially  in  8t 
Peteiatmig,  where  tliis  nnoouth  tendency  ended,  aooording 
to  the  cosmopolitan  character  of  the  city,  in  the  invention  of 
a  national  hymn  from  Sebastian  Bach,  and,  by  Frok6pl 
JLyapundv,  from  Schiller. 

To  cut  loose  from  Europe,  from  enlightenment,  and  from 
revolution,  which  kept  him  in  terror  ever  since  the  14th  of 
December,  Nicholas,  on  his  side,  raised  the  banner  of  Ortha- 

>  Rnaiian  novdiat  of  die  beginaliig  of  the  ceatiuy. 
*  Kanafactuting  town  in  theOovenioieBt  of  Vladhnfr ;  fiunoos  Ac 
Us  nw  dieepddin. 


Diyiiized  by  Google 


Aleks&ndr  Iv&novich  Gdrtsen  241 


doxy^  OMioem^,  and  naHanaUiy^  wldch  was  worked  out  in 
th«  tnaniwr  of  a  Pnuaiaii  standard,  and  supported  by  any 
thing  and  everjrthing:.  by  the  nnconth  novda  of  Zagdsldn, 
the  uncouth  iconogiaphy,  the  uncouth  architecture,  by  Uvd- 
lov,  by  the  persecution  of  the  Uniates,  and  Xgy  The  kand 
of  the  Almighty  has  saved  the  fatherlands 

The  meeting  of  the  Moscow  Slavophiles  with  the  Peters- 
burgian  Slavophilism  of  Nicholas  was  a  great  misfortune  for 
them.  Nicholas  took  refuge  in  nationality  and  Orthodoxy 
from  revolutionary  ideas.  There  was  nothing  in  common 
between  them  but  words.  Their  extremes  and  insipidities 
were  all  unselfishly  insipid,  without  any  relation  whatsoever 
to  the  Third  Division, — which,  of  course,  did  not  in  the 
least  hinder  their  insipidities  from  being  exceedingly  insipid. 

Thofl^  for  instanee,  tliere  passed  tlirough  Moscow,  at  the 
end  of  fhe  ttdrties,  flie  Fandavist  Gaj,  wlio  later  played 
some  indefinite  rdle  as  a  Croatian  agitator  and  at  the  same 
time  was  near  to  Ban  Jelafic.  Muscovites  believe  in  foreign- 
ei8  in  general;  Gaj  was  more  than  a  focdgner,  and  more 
tlian  one  of  their  own,— he  was  both.  He»  conseqaently, 
had  no  di£Scnlty  in  engagiDg  the  sympathy  of  our  Slavs  for 
the  fate  of  thdr  suffering  Orthodox  brothere  in  Dalmatia 
and  Croatia;  an  enormous  subscription  was  taken  up  in  a 
few  days,  and  in  addition  to  that  Gaj  was  given  a  dinner  in 
Uie  name  of  all  the  Servian  and  Ruthenian  sympathies.  At 
the  dinner  one  of  the  Slavophiles,  who  by  his  voice  and  by 
his  profession  was  more  gentle  than  the  rest,  a  man  of  red 
Orthodoxy,  who,  no  doubt,  was  heated  by  the  toasts  for  the 
Montenegrin  ruler,  and  for  all  kinds  of  great  Bosnians, 
Bohemians,  and  Slovaks,  improvised  a  poem  in  which  oc- 
curred the  following  not  quite  Christian  expression: 

"I  shall  drink  the  blood  of  Magyars  and  of  Germans." 

All  who  were  still  in  their  senses  heard  this  phrase  in  dis- 
gust. Fortunately  the  witty  statistician  Andr6sov  saved  the 
bloodthirsty  bard:  he  jumped  up  from  his  chair,  grabbed  a 

'  A  line  in  (5zen>v»a  tragedy  DimUri  DomsMy  (aee  vol.  i,  p.  418). 


242         The  Nineteenth  Centuiy 


findt  knife,  and  aaid:  "  Gentkmen,  ptidon  me,  I  shall  leave 

you  for  a  moment;  it  baa  just  occurred  to  me  that  my  land* 
lord,  the  old  piano-tuner  Diez,  is  a  German;  I  '11  just  nm 
down  to  cut  his  throat,  and  I  '11  be  back  in  a  trice." 
A  thunderona  langhter  drowned  the  indignation. 

Nik<dAy  Plat6noyidi  Ogu€w.  (1813-1877.) 

Ogar^v  was  born  in  the  Government  of  P^nza,  in  the  estate  of  his 
ftHicr,  what  he  wo  educated  tOl  his  fourteenth  year.  He  then  at- 
tended the  Moscow  Univezitty,  hot  before  he  finished  his  eoune  he 

was  arrested  for  singing  some  revolutionary  songs,  and  was  exiled  to 
his  father's  estate.  He  later  passed  bis  life  abroad,  aiding  Herzen  in  his 
revolutionary  propaganda.  Though  mainly  known  as  a  propagand- 
ist, he  excds  even  more  as  a  poet.  EQs  tender  vcfses  remind  of 
LA'MKMilov,  with  whom  he  het  much  in  common.  Among  hie  best 
poems  are  his  Monologues,  The  t^iUtige  Waiekman,  The  Sea  of  Life. 

In  C.  T.  Wilson's  Russian  Lyrics  are  given :  Noitumo,  The  Old 
House,  The  Village  IVaichvtan,  The  Child,  Hidden  Love,  and 
Death;  in  Free  Russia:  by  Charlotte  Sidgwick,  in  vol.  xi.,  No.  11, 
To  Iskander^  in  vol.  zii.,  Noe.  6-7,  Summer,*  Iqr  J.  B.  I«ewii,  in  voL 
xiL,  Nos.  8-10,  Tkg  Qmmmidmenii  hy  Vmrj  Giaoe  Walker,  in  vol. 
xiL,  No.  3,  A  FMiytr* 

TO  ISKANDBR' 

In  days  of  my  boyhood  so  gentle  and  tender. 
In  daya  of  my  passionate  youth  in  its  splendotir, 
Thvoogh  manhood,  while  slowly  to  age  I  anrrender,-- 
Throngh  all  of  my  li£e  and  within  my  endeavour, 
One  woid  in  my  cars  there  is  ringing  ibr  ever— 
"Ubertyl  I4bertyl" 

Tormented  by  slavery,  sad  and  dejected, 
In  alien  lands  all  unknown  and  rejected, 
I  live  but  to  utter  that  name  long  neglected; 
Across  the  wide  seas  and  the  countries  that  sever, 
One  word  to  ray  motherland  calling  for  ever — 
'•liberty J  Liberty!" 

1  FMndonya  of  Henen ;  lee  p.93S. 


Digitized  by  Google 


Nikol^y  Plat6novich  Ogardv  243 


It  came  o'er  the  waves  to  the  place  of  my  wailing, 
'Mid  silence,  at  midnight, — a  rumour  assailing 
My  senses,  through  darkness  and  tempest  prevailing— 
I  hear  itl  my  heart  can  abandon  it  never, 
That  yoke  torn  my  country  that  sounds  on  for  eyq^— 
"I4bertyl  liberty!** 

My  heart,  long  accustomed  to  doubt  in  its  yearning, 
Sprang  up  as  it  throbbed  with  new  ecsta^  burning, 
IJkit  a  bird  from  its  cage  to  the  wide  world  returning; 
It  sings  a  forewell  to  its  prison  for  ever. 
While  soilemn  and  dear  rings  the  note  of  endeavour— 
"Liberty I  Liberty! " 

In  the  dreams  I  behold,  with  the  snows  that  surround  him, 
The  peasant,  long-bearded, — the  glad  news  has  found  him,— 
He  dmkes  from  his  great  limbs  the  fetters  that  bound  him, — 
And  qieaks  the  glad  wofd,  the  unchanging  for  ever 
Eternal,— the  future  can  ^enoe  it  nevet^ 
"Liberty!  liberty!" 

But  if  there  should  chance, — if  there  came  any  reason,-— 
To  fear  for  that  Liberty,  let  her  in  season 
Cry  out,  and  I  fly  to  encounter  the  treason  ; 
And  if  from  that  uttermost  struggle  I  never 
Return,  I  can  call  with  the  cry  "  Live  for  ever, 
"Liberty!  Liberty!" 

It  may  be  I  die  with  the  strangers  around  me, 
Yet  hope  and  belief  in  the  future  have  found  me, 
O  comrade!  ere  Death  in  his  shackles  has  bound  me; 
That  name  do  thou  whisper,  to  last  me  for  ever, 
Tliat  name — of  our  love,  of  our  faith  and  endeavour — 
Liberty!  Liberty!" 

— TransL  by  Charlotte  Sidgwick  in  Free 
Russia,  vol.  xi.,  Na  11. 


Digitized  by  Google 


244         The  Nineteenth  Century 


MONOIiOQUBS 

What  I  wish  ?    What  ?   Oh,  there  are  so  many 

wishes,  and  their  host  is  so  eager  for  a  sally,  that  at  times  it 
seems  that  by  their  inward  agitation  my  brain  will  burn  and 

my  breast  will  burst.    What  I  wish?          Everything,  in 

all  its  fulness!  I  thirst  to  know,  I  yearn  for  deeds,  I  stiil 
desire  to  love  with  senseless  pining,  I  want  to  feel  the  whole 
thriUollife!  . 

I  frd  bk  secret  •&  tlie  widtes  vain,  and  life  is  niggardly, 
and  inwaidly  I  am  feeble, — ^my  striving  will  be  silent  and 
unanswered,  and  in  endeavours  will  niy  strength  be  wasted* 
I  seem  nnto  myself,  oppressed  by  snffering,  akindof  misem- 
Ue,  pony  feol,  acreaturelost  in  endless  space,  wearing  away 
in  empty  fennentation. 

It  is  not  given  to  us  to  embrace  at  onoe  the  spirit  of  eter- 
nity,  and  the  cup ol  life  we  quaff  in  swallows;  what  we  have 
drunk  we  most  regret, — the  empty  bottom  shows  more  and 
more.  With  every  day  the  soul  feels  heavier  the  aging,  and 
it  is  more  painful  to  remember,  and  more  terrible  to  wish, 
and  to  live  appears  bold  recklessness, — but  the  pulse  cannot 
stop  beating.  And  I  live  on  in  hopeless  striving,  and  take 
upon  myself  the  cross  of  life,  and  all  the  fervour  of  my  soul 
I  bear  in  eager  motion,  grasping  and  losing  moments  after 
moments  

And  I  wish  all!   What?          Oh,  there  are  so  many 

widiea,  and  then:  host  is  so  eager  fer  a  sally,  that  at  times  it 
seems  that  by  their  inward  agitation  my  bndn  will  bum  and 
my  breast  wUl  burst 

THE  VIUAGB  WATCHMAN 

The  night  is  dark,  and  clouds  abound. 
Appears  the  white  snow  ever5^here ; 

The  crackling  frost  pervades  the  ground. 
And  frigid  is  the  atmosphere. 

On  either  side  the  long,  broad  street 
The  peasants*  cottages  are  seen; 


Digitized  by  Google 


Count  Aleksy^y  Konstantinovich  Tolst6y  345 


The  flolitaiy  watdmum's  feet 
Are  heazd,  as  he  moves  on  between. 

Cold  is  he  now;  the  hollow  gale 

Fills  with  violent  blast  the  air; 
The  frost  has  touched  his  visage  pale. 

And  whitened  aU  his  beatd  and  hair. 

Joy  has  fled  from  his  gloomy  brow, 

He  finds  it  hard  to  be  alone; 
Through  the  dark  night,  and  blinding 

His  song  reaoonds  witii  monmf  nl  tone. 

By  moonless  nights  he  paces  late, 
Watching  until  the  morn  comes  round; 

His  hammer  upon  the  iron  plate 
Gives  out  a  dreary,  dismal  sound. 

« 

And  swaying  ever  to  any  fro, 
The  board  prolongs  its  dreadful  moan ; 

The  heart  dies  down  with  fieelings  low, 
And  sonow  weighs  it,  lorn  and  Ume. 

—From  C  T.  Wilson's  Russian  Lyria, 

Count  Aldtsy^y  Konstantinovich  Tolst6y. 
(I8ir-x875*) 

OoiuitT<iMy*s  yonlh  iras  psMed  in  the  estate  of  Iris  vade  hi  Oie 
GcfvennBent  of  ChcrnlgoT.  He  was  esrly  attsdied  to  tho  Rvariaa 

legation  at  Frankfurt,  and  travelled  extensively  in  Germany,  Franoet 
.'»nd  Switzerland.  Upon  his  retnrn  to  Russia,  he  settled  in  St  Peters- 
burg and  devoted  himself  to  literature.  He  at  first  wrote  a  series  of 
lyrics  and  some  ballads  which  are  perfect  in  technique  bat  lack  ani- 
matioo.  After  the  Crimean  War  he  was  attadwd  to  the  Court,  and 
his  renewed  literaiy  actihrilgr  bote  better  fruits :  the  result  of  his  care- 
ful historical  investigations  was  the  novel  Princf  Sertbryany  and  the 
tragedy  The  Death  of  Ivdn  the  Terrible.  There  is  no  historical  novel 
in  Russian  that  surpasses  Prince  Seribryany  in  its  artistic  setting  and 
acrapnlona  adherence  to  &cts.  Tol8t6y  also  wrote  two  other  trage- 
dics  that  fimn  a  trilogy  with  The  Deaih  of  Ivftn  the  TnribU,  bat 


Digitized  by  Google 


246         The  Nineteenth  Century 


they  are  weaker  in  execution.  Towards  the  end  of  his  life  he  wrote 
a  number  of  ballads  in  the  style  of  the  ftndeot  BjUau»  of  which 
AUsha  P^pdvich  is  the  best. 

mmet  Stribryany  hat  been  tnoilated  three  timee :  Mmv  Sen^ 
bretmit  tranalated  by  Princeae  Galitzine,  a  vols.,  London,  1874 ;  Prince 
Srrbryani,  an  Historical  Novel  of  the  Times  of  Ivdn  the  Terrible  and 
of  the  Conquest  of  Siberia,  by  Jeremiah  Curtin,  New  York  and  Lon- 
don, [1893]  ;  The  Terrible  Czar,  translated  by  Capt.  H.  C.  Filmore, 
London,  1892  (and  1893.  1S95).  The  IbOowiqg  poemi  ere  to  be  fonnd 
in  Bnit^ldi  ttanahrtion :  BHieve  it  noi.  The  SeoUsngrt  in  John  FbUen's 
Rhymes  from  the  Russian  ;  Speys  the  Dwarf,  The  Sinner,  in  C.  T. 
Wilson's  Russian  Lyrics  ;  in  The  Anglo-Russian  Literary  Society,  No. 
a  I,  by  F.  P.  Marchant,  Prince  Mikhaiio  Repnin  and  Dearest  Country, 
No.  a3,  by  N.  Shishkoff,  You  know  Hike  to  seek.  Into  my  saml  so  full 
of  mim  iUmttoms,  Wkere  planets  foUt  and  Amt$mm,  No.  35,  by  H. 
Havelock,  7%e  Kurgan;  in  Free  Russia,  by  Elizabeth  Gibson,  in 
voL  xi.,  No.  3,  A  Payer  and  The  Convicts,  in  Nos.  6  and  7,  The 
Sorrows  of  Ages  Departed ;  in  the  Library  of  the  World's  Be5t  Liter- 
ature, reprint  of  J.  Pollen's  Believe  it  notf  and  Renewal^  by  Prince 
Wolkonaky. 

PROM  "PRINCB  SBRJ^BRYANY" 

Tsar  Ivfin  Vasilevich  was  prajdng.  The  perspiration  was 
already  rolling  down  his  face;  the  bloody  marks,  imprinted 
upon  his  high  forehead  by  former  prostrations,  were  now 
more  clearly  defined  by  the  new  devotion.  Suddenly,  a 
rustling  sound  in  the  room  caused  him  to  turn  arotmd.  He 
saw  his  nurse  On6frevna. 

His  ntu'sc  was  an  old  woman.  She  had  been  taken  to  tiie 
Upper  Apartments  by  Grand  Prince  Vasfli  Ivdnovich  of 
blessed  memory,  she  liad  served  under  Wha^.  Glinsld.  lodnn 
wsft  borne  in  bar  arms,  and  in  her  arms  did  tiie  dying  fother 
bless  bluL  Tb^  said  of  On^lfrevna  that  much  was  known 
to  ber  wbieb  nobody  even  snapeeted.  During  the  minority 
of  tbe  Taar,  the  Glfnskis  bad  been  afraid  of  ber;  the  Sbdyskis 
and  Bjrfiskis  tried  in  every  way  to  gain  ber  favour. 

Ottdf revna  discovered  many  bidden  things  through  divina- 
tion, and  she  was  never  mistaken.  She  predicted  of  Prince 
Tdepn^v  during  his  very  greatness, — lo&nn  was  then  only 
fouryeatsold,— that  he  would  die  of  starvation.  And  so  it 


Digitized  by  Google 


Count  Aleksy^y  Konstantinovich  Tolst5y  247 


hftppencd.  Ifany  yean  had  passed  since  fhen,  but  that  pre- 
dtetion  was  still  (ndi  In  the  memoiy  of  old  men. 

It  was  now  almost  the  tenth  decade  that  Oniifrevna  was 
ending.  She  was  bent  nearly  donUe;  the  skin  of  her  face 
was  so  wiinlded  that  it  resembled  tree  bark,  and  as  moss 
grows  out  on  old  bark,  so  grey  tufts  of  hair  bust  out  of  her 
diin.  She  had  long  ago  lost  her  teeth;  her  eyes,  it  seemed, 
could  not  see;  her  head  shook  convulsively. 

Ontifrevna  bent  with  her  bony  hand  on  a  staff.  She 
looked  at  loinn  for  a  long  time,  drawing  in  her  sered  lips, 
as  if  she  were  chewing  or  muttering  something. 

"Well?"  at  last  said  the  nurse  with  a  dull,  trembling 
voice,  "  are  you  praying,  father?  Pray,  pray,  Ivdn  Vasile- 
vich !  It  will  take  a  great  deal  of  praying  to  get  forgiveness. 
If  you  had  only  your  old  sins  upon  your  soul !  God  is  mer- 
ciful, and  He  m^ht  have  forgiven  yon !  Bnt  yon  add  every 
day  a  new  sin,  and  many  a  day  even  two  or  three  of  them." 

'*  Hash,  Ott^lfrevna,"  said  the  Tsar,  rising,  "  yon  do  not 
know  what  yon  are  saying!  *' 

"  I  do  not  know  what  I  am  saying!  Have  I  grown  in- 
8ane,-^liatf" 

And  the  Ulbless  eyes  of  the  old  woman  suddenly  sparkled. 

'*  What  have  yon  been  doing  at  the  table  to-day  ?  

Why  did  you  poison  the  boy&r?  You  thought  I  did  not 
know  it!  Well?  Why  do  you  frown  ?  Wait,  when  yonr 
hour  of  death  will  strike,  just  wait!  Your  sins  will  stick  to 
you,  like  a  thousand  thousand  puds;  they  will  pull  you 
down  to  the  bottom  of  hell.  And  the  devils  will  run  up 
and  will  catch  yon  on  their  hooks! " 

The  old  woman  again  began  to  chew. 

The  fervent  prayer  had  prepared  the  Tsar  for  pious 
thoughts.  His  irritable  imagination  had  more  than  once 
presented  to  him  a  picture  of  the  future  chastisement,  but 
his  power  of  will  Tanqniahed  the  terror  of  the  tonnents  be- 
yond the  grave.  lodnn  assured  himself  that  this  fear  and 
his  bites  of  conscience  were  provoked  in  him  by  the  fiend  of 
the  human  rsce,  in  order  to  distract  the  anointed  of  God 
fixNn  his  high  purposes.  The  Tsar  opposed  prayer  to  the 


2aB         The  Nineteenth  Century 


amsing  of  the  devil;  but  he  often  snccumbed  to  the  cruel 
onrush  of  his  imagination.  Then  despair  took  possession 
of  him  as  with  iron  claws.  The  unrighteousness  of  his  acts 
appeared  in  all  its  nakedness,  and  the  abyss  of  hell  yawned 
terribly  before  him.  But  that  lasted  only  a  short  time, 
loann  immediately  regretted  his  pusillanimity.  In  anger  at 
himself  and  at  the  spirit  of  darkness,  he,  to  spite  hell  and  to 
oppose  his  conscience,  again  started  upon  his  work  of  blood 
and  villainy,  and  never  did  his  cruelty  reach  such  dimensions 
as  after  an  involuntary  exhaustion. 

Now  the  thought  of  hell,  iUttminated  hy  the  approaching 
stonn  and  the  prophetic  vdoe  of  On^ftevna,  stined  him 
through  aod  thimigh  with  a  feverish  chill.  He  seated  him- 
self upon  the  bed.   His  teeth  chattered  against  each  other. 

"Wdl»  father?"  said  Ondfievna,  softening  her  Toioe. 
"  What  is  the  matter  with  yon  ?  Ate  you  ill  ?  That 's  it, 
you  are  ill!  I  have  given  yon  a  good  fright!  But  you 
need  n't  be  frightened,  father.  Only  repent,  and  stop  sin- 
ning.  I,  too,  am  praying  for  you,  day  and  night,  and  now 
I  shall  pray  more  than  ever.  Why  should  n't  I  ?  I  had 
rather  forfeit  heaven,  if  I  could  gain  forgiveness  for  you.'* 

lo^nn  looked  at  his  nurse,— she  seemed  to  be  smiling,  but 
her  stem  face  was  not  lit  up  by  a  smile  that  was  reassuring. 

"  Thank  you,  Ontifrevna,  thank  you.  I  am  feeling  easier; 
go,  the  Lord  be  with  you !  " 

"Yes,  yes,  easier!  Your  terror  leaves  you  the  moment 
yon  are  consoled !  And  you  at  once  drive  me  away!  The 
I<ofd  he  with  me,  you  say  I  But  3rou,  father,  had  better  not 
oonnt  too  much  upon  God's  long-suffiering.  Bven  Qod'a 
patience  will  give  way  in  your  case.  Beware^  He  will  re- 
nounce you,  and  Satan  will  rejoice  and— plumpi  will  enter 
into  yon.  There,  you  have  begun  to  ahalw  again!  It  will 
not  hurt  you  to  drink  a  glass  of  mulled  honey.  Drink  a 
glass*  £lther!  Your  father,  the  kingdom  of  heaven  be  his, 
used  to  drink  mulled  honey  at  night !  And  your  mother, 
God  grant  her  soul  rest,  was  fond  of  mulled  honey.  And  it 
was  with  mulled  hon^  that  the  accursed  Shdyskis  poisoned 
her.'* 


Digiiized  by  Google 


Count  Aleksydy  Konstantinovich  Tolstdy  H9 


The  old  woman  became  absent-minded.  Her  eyes  were 
dimmed;  ahe  again  b^gan  to  chew,  all  the  time  ahakiiig  her 
head. 

Suddenly  something  knocked  at  the  window.  Ivdn  Vaai- 
levich  shuddered. 

The  old  woman  made  the  sign  of  the  cross  with  her  trem- 
bling hand. 

"Just  see,"  she  said,  "  how  it  is  raining!  And  it  is  be- 
ginning to  lighten !  And  there  is  also  thunder,  father;  God 
have  mercy  npon  ns! " 

The  stonn  increased  in  foxy,  and  aoon  Ihe  sky  was  dl#> 
tnxlied  hy  wihitemipted  peala  of  thnnder  and  a  oonthmoiia 
abeet  of  lightning. 

lotam  dinddered  at  eveiy  thimdevekp. 

'*  What  a  cihiU  yon  have»  fiilher!  Wait  a  moment,  I  'U 
have  them  make  yon  some  mulled  hooey." 

"  It  is  not  neceaaaiy,  Ontfrevna,  I  am  well." 

"Well!  Why,  your  face  does  not  ahow  it!  You  had 
better  lie  down  on  your  bed  and  cover  yourself  with  a  quilt. 
What  a  bed  you  have  here!  Nothing  but  boards.  What  a 
queer  notion !  Is  that  proper  for  a  Tsar  ?  That  is  all  right 
for  a  monk,  but  you  are  not  a  monk !  " 

lodnn  did  not  answer.  He  was  intent  on  listening  to 
something. 

"  Ondfrevna,"  he  suddenly  said  in  fright,  **  who  is  walk- 
ing there  in  the  corridor  ?    I  hear  somebody's  steps!  '* 

"Christ  be  with  you,  father!  Who  should  be  walking 
now  ?   It  is  your  imagination. '  * 

*'No,  thm  is  aomeone  walking  thml  Somebody  ia 
coming  hetel  Go  and  look,  Ondfievna!  '* 

The  old  woman  opened  the  door.  A  cold  wind  bunt  into 
the  room.  Beyond  the  door  appeared  Malydta. 

"  Who  ia  that?'*  aaked  the  Tsar,  leaping  up. 

"  Your  red  dog,  father,"  answered  the  ntuae^  casting  an 
angry  glance  at  Maly^ta,  "  Grfshka  Sknxdtov.  How  the 
accursed  one  has  frightened  mel " 

' '  IfUky&nych  I' '  said  the  Tsar,  made  happy  by  the  arrival  of 
hisfavoorite,  "yonareweloome;  where  do  yon  oome  from?" 


2SO         The  Nineteenth  Century 


"  From  the  prison,  sir.   I  was  at  the  inquest,  and  I  have 
brought  the  keys." 
Malyiita  bowed  low  to  the  Taar  and  looked  askance  at  the 

nurse. 

**  The  keys!  "  grumbled  the  old  woman.  "  They  will  flog 
you  in  the  other  world  with  red  hot  keys,  you  Satan !  Upon 
my  word,  you  are  Satan !  Your  very  face  is  that  of  a  dexal! 
Though  somebody  else  may  escape  the  eternal  fire,  you 
won't.  You,  Grlshka,  will  be  licking  hot  pans  for  all  your 
calumnies!  You,  accursed  one,  will  be  boiling  in  pitch,  re* 
member  my  word! " 

Lightning  illuminated  the  threatening  woman,  and  she 
was  terrible  with  her  i^difted  staff  and  her  qiNvkling  eyes. 

Malydtahimsdffdt  a  little  uncomfortable;  butld&nnwas 
emboldened  by  the  presence  of  his  favourite. 

"  Pay  no  attention  to  her,  Lukydnych,*'  he  said,  know 
what  you  are  about,  and  don't  listen  to  women's  bobble. 
But  you,  old  fool,  go  away  and  leave  us!" 

Oniifrevna's  eyes  sparkled  once  more. 

"Oldfool?"  shexepeated.  "  You  wiU  think  of  me  in  the 
next  world !  All  your  companions,  V^nya,  will  receive  their 
retribution,  and  they  will  receive  it  even  in  this  world,  every 
one  of  them,  Gryazn6y,  Basmdnov,  and  Vyazemski.  Each 
of  them  will  receive  his  due,  but  this  one,"  she  continued, 
pointing  with  her  staff  at  Malyuta,  "  this  one  will  not  re- 
ceive his  due:  there  is  no  adequate  punishment  for  him  in 
this  world;  his  punishment  is  in  the  lowermost  pit  of  hell; 
there  a  place  is  ready  for  him,  and  the  devils  are  waiting  for 
him  and  rejoicing!  And  tbece  is  a  place  there  for  you,  too, 
Vdnya,— a  big,  warm  placet " 

The  cild  woman  went  out,  shuffling  her  feet  .and  making 
anoise  with  her  staff. 

lodnn  was  pale.  Malydta  did  not  speak  a  word.  The 
«le»oe  lasted  quite  a  while. 

"Well,  I^ukydnych?"  said  the  Tsar  at  last,  *'do  the 
Kolychevs  confess  ? " 

"  Not  yet,  air.  But  they  will,  or  they  won't  get  off  ao 
easily  (am  me?" 


Digitized  by  Google 


Count  Aleksy^y  Konstantinovich  Tolst6y  251 


lohm  Hiked  ftr  the  detaite  of  tlie  inquest  The  oonversa- 
tion  about  the  Kolychevs  gave  another  direction  to  his 
thoughts.  It  appeared  to  him  that  he  might  be  able  to  fall 
asleep.   He  sent  Malydta  away,  lay  down  upon  his  bed,  and 

lost  consciousness. 

He  was  awakened  as  if  by  a  sudden  push.  The  room  was 
weakly  lighted  by  the  lamps  before  the  images.  A  moon- 
beam passed  through  the  low  window  and  glittered  on  the 
painted  flourishes  of  the  couch,  A  cricket  chirped  behind 
the  couch.    A  mouse  nibbled  somewhere  at  the  wood. 

Ivda  Vasilevich  was  again  terrified  amidst  this  silence. 

Suddenly  it  seemed  to  him  as  though  the  floor  was  being 
raised  and  a  poisoned  boyir  looked  out  ftam  underneath. 

Sudi  viskms  were  common  occurrences  with  lodnn.  He 
ascribed  them  to  the  persecutions  of  the  devil.  To  get  rid 
of  the  apparitioo,  he  made  the  sign  of  the  cross. 

But  the  apparition  did  not  disappear,  as  it  did  formeriy. 

The  dead  boy^  kept  on  lopking  at  him  awry.  The  eyes 
of  the  old  man  bulged  out,  and  his  £Rce  was  as  blue  as  then, 
at  dinner,  when  he  drank  the  cup  sent  him  by  lodnn. 

"  That  *s  again  the  devil's  incitement!  "  thought  the  Tsar. 
"  But  I  will  not  submit  to  the  power  of  Satan,  and  I  will 
crush  the  cunning  of  the  deviL  Let  God  arise,  and  may 
His  foes  be  dispersed ! ' ' 

The  dead  man  slowly  rose  from  the  floor  and  came  nearer 
to  lodnn. 

The  Tsar  wanted  to  cry  out,  but  he  could  not.  There 
was  a  terrible  din  in  his  ears. 

The  dead  man  bowed  before  the  Tsar. 

"Hail,  Ivin!"  spoke  a  hollow,  unearthly  voice.  "I 
greet  you,  who  have  destroyed  an  innocent  man." 

These  words  re-echoed  in  the  very  depth  of  Io&nn*s  soul. 
He  did  not  know  whether  he  heard  them  from  the  appari- 
tion, or  whether  his  own  thought  found  agression  in  sounds 
tangible  to  the  ear. 

Then  another  board  was  raised;  underneath  appeared  the 
Isoe  of  Danda  Ad^bhev  who  had  been  executed  by  lo&nn 
four  years  before. 


Digitized  by  Google 


The  Nineteenth  Centuiy 


Ad^ev,  too,  rofle  from  the  floor,  bowed  to  the  Tsai,  and 

said: 

' '  Hail,  I 1  I  greet  you  who  have  executed  an  innocent 
man!'* 

After  Adashev  there  appeared  the  boydr's  wife  Maria  who 
had  been  executed  together  with  her  children.  She  rose 
from  the  floor,  with  her  five  Mm.  They  all  bowed  to  the 
Tier,  end  ell  eeid: 

**HaU,IWUil  Igreatyonl" 

Then  eppetred  Prince  Knrly^llev,  Prince  Obolfaski, 
Nikita  Sherem^tev,  and  other  peraons  who  had  been  killed 
or  executed  hy  lo^bm* 

The  room  wee  fiUed  with  deed  people.  Tbqr  eU  bowed 

low  to  the  Tsar,  aod  all  said : 

"  Hail,  hail,  Iv4nl  Igreetyoor* 

And  there  rose  monks,  hermita^  nnna^  aU  in  blad:  gai^ 

ments,  all  pale  and  blood-covered. 

And  there  appeared  warriors  who  had  been  at  Kazdn  with 
the  Tsar.  Upon  them  gaped  terrible  wounds,  that  were  not 
gained  in  battle,  but  were  inflicted  by  the  executioner. 

And  there  appeared  maidens  in  torn  garments,  and  young 
women  with  suckling  babes.  The  children  stretched  their 
bloody  hands  to  lodnn  and  lisped: 

"  Hail,  hail,  Ivdn,  who  have  made  us  innocent  ones  to 
peiiflht*' 

The  room  was  ever  more  filled  with  apparitfona*  The 
Tear  could  no  longer  diaringniah  his  imagination  from 
reality.  The  worda  of  the  apparitions  were  rqieated  in 
hnndred'ibid  echoes^  while  the  pmyera  for  the  dead  and  the 
ainging  of  the  yigils  resounded  above  lodnn'seaxB.  Hiahair 
stood  on  end. 

*'  In  the  name  of  the  living  God,"  he  spoke,  "  if  you  are 
evil  spirits  sent  by  the  power  of  the  devil, — ^perish !  If  you 
are,  in  truth,  the  souls  of  those  I  have  executed, — wait  for 
the  terrible  judgment  of  the  Lord !   God  will  judge  us  all !  '* 

The  dead  j>eople  moaned  and  circled  around  loinn,  like 
autumn  leaves  driven  by  the  whirlwind.  The  singing  of 
the  vigils  sounded  more  pitifully,  the  rain  again  beat  against 


uiyiii^uu  Ly  Google 


G>unt  Aleksy^y  Konstantfnovich  Tolst6y  253 


the  window,  and  amidst  the  howl  of  the  wind,  the  Taar 
thought  he  heard  the  sonnd  of  tnmipets  and  a  voice  calUng: 

*'  Ivdn,  Ivdn,  to  the  judgment,  to  the  judgment!" 

The  Tsar  died  out  aloud.  The  sleeping  gnards  na  from 
the  adjoining  apartments  into  the  bedroom. 

"  Rise,"  cried  the  Tsar,  '*  all  who  are  asleep  now!  The 
last  day  has  come !  The  last  hour  has  cornel  I^et  us  to  the 
church,  all  after  me!  '* 

The  courtiers  bestirred  themselves.  The  large  bell  was 
rung.  The  opHchniks  who  had  just  fallen  asleep  heard  the 
familiar  sound,  and  they  jumped  up  from  their  couches  and 
hastened  to  dress  themselves. 

Many  were  feasting  at  the  house  of  VydzemskL  They 
were  aittiiig  at  the  wine  cttps  and  singing  drinking  songs. 
When  they  heard  the  aoand  of  the  beU,  they  jumped  up 
from  their  seats,  donned  black  cloaks  over  their  rich  gar- 
ments, and  covered  their  heads  with  high  hoods.  The 
whote  palace  quarter  came  into  motion.  Tht  dntreh  of  the 
Mother  of  God  was  brilliantly  illtiminated.  Theezdted  in- 
habitants rushed  to  their  gates  and  saw  a  mnltitnde  of  lights 
that  wandered  in  the  palace  from  room  to  room.  Then  the 
lights  formed  a  long  chain,  and  the  procession  meandered 
akmg  the  outv^ard  oonidors  that  cotmected  the  palace  with 
the  temple  of  God. 

All  the  oprfchniks,  who  were  dressed  in  the  identical  black 
cloaks  and  hoods,  carried  pitch  torches.  Their  light  was 
wonderfully  reflected  upon  the  carved  pillars  and  wall  deco- 
rations. The  wind  scattered  the  cloaks,  and  the  moonlight 
and  the  light  of  the  torches  was  reflected  on  the  cloth,  the 
pearls,  and  the  costly  stones.  The  Tsar  marched  in  front, 
dressed  as  a  monk,  and  he  beat  his  breast  and  called  out, 
sobbing  aloud: 

"Lord,  have  merpy  on  me,  sinful  man!  Have  mercy  00 
me,  stinking  dog!  Have  mercy  on  my  evU  head!  Fsd^, 
O  I/xd,  the  souls  of  those  who  have  been  innocently  killed 
bymel" 

Before  the  doors  of  the  temple  lodnn  feU  down  exhausted. 
The  tofcfaes  fllnminated  an  old  woman  that  was  sitting  on 


254         The  Nineteenth  Century 


the  steps.  She  stretched  out  her  tiemblmg  hand  to  the 

Tsar. 

"  Rise,  father!  "  said  Ondfrevna.  **  I  will  help  you.  I 
have  been  waiting  for  you  loir  a  long  while.  Come,  Vdaya, 
let  us  pray  together!  '* 

Two  opn'chniks  held  up  the  Tsar  under  his  arms.  He 
entered  the  church. 

New  processions,  also  in  black  cloaks,  also  in  high  hoods, 
were  hastening  over  the  streets  with  lighted  torches.  The 
doors  of  the  temple  swallowed  ever  new  oprkhniks,  and  the 
gigantic  forms  of  the  saints  looked  at  them  with  disfavour 
ffom  the  walls  and  the  vault  of  the  ehnidh 

In  the  night,  which  had  till  then  heen  speechless,  ftnett 
was  suddenly  heard  the  singing  of  several  hundred  voices, 
and  the  sound  of  the  bell  and  the  chant  of  the  psalms  were 
home  afar. 

The  prisooeis  awoke  in  their  dungeons  and,  rattling  their 

chains,  began  to  listen. 

' '  The  Tsar  is  reading  the  matinsl '  *  they  said.  '  *  O  I«ord, 
soften  his  heart,  put  mercy  into  his  soul !  " 

Small  children  that  were  sleeping  by  the  side  of  their 
mothers  awoke  in  terror  and  began  to  cry.  Many  a  mother 
could  not  quiet  her  babe  for  a  long  time. 

' '  Hush  1 ' '  she  finally  said.  ' '  Hush,  or  Malyuta  will  hear 
you!" 

At  the  mention  of  Malyuta  the  child  stopped  crying  and 
in  its  fright  pressed  close  to  its  mother,  and  during  the  still- 
ness of  the  night  there  were  again  heard  the  psalms  of  the 
opcichniks*  and  the  continuous  ringing  nt  the  bdL 


Diyiiized  by  Google 


Count  Aleksy^y  Konstantinovich  Tolst6y  255 


THE  DEATH  OP  IVJLn  THE  TERRIBLE 

ACT  I.    SCBMB  2. 

(7i4^  Tsar's  bedchamber.    Ivdn,  pale  and  exhausted,  in  a  black 
cassock,  is  sitting  in  an  arm-chair,  beads  in  his  hand. 
Near  Aim,  on  a  ia^le,  Ues  the  Cap  of  Monamdkh  ;  on  the 
other  sUkt  an  a  stool^  are  the  royal  vestmemts,  Gr^M 
N^gSy  is  handing  him  a  gohletJ) 

Nagdy.  O  Tsar!  one  drop  of  wine  thou  'It  drink. 
One  drop  refuse  not.    Thou  these  many  days 
Dost  wear  thyaelf  out.   All  this  time  thy  lips 
Have  nothing  touched. 

/mffi.  The  body  needs  no  find 

When  the  soul  is  fed  on  anguish.  Henceforth 
Remorae  shall  be  my  food. 

Nagfy.  O  mighty  Taarl 

Is 't  true  thou  wouldst  forsake  us  ?   How  will  it 
With  the  Tsarftaa  be  ?  with  the  Taai6vidi 
ThyDimitri? 

Jvdn,  God  will  not  forsake  them. 

NagSy.  But  who  can  hold  the  reins  of  government 
Except  thyaelf  ? 

Ivdn.  My  mind's  edge  is  blunted; 

My  heart  is  faint ;  my  hands  are  powerless 
To  hold  the  reins;  already  for  my  sins, 
To  th'  pagau  God  hath  given  victory, 
Commanded  me  my  throne  that  I  give  up 
Unto  another;  my  iniquities 
Axe  more  tiian  sands  o*  th*  sea:  a  cannibalr— 
Tofmentof  lecher  chuich-profamer  I; 
The  boundlessness  of  God's  toog-snffering 
Have  I  exhausted  by  the  last  misdeed. 

Nagfy,  OTaarl  Thoa  dost  eautggerate  thy  shi; 
Thy  mind  went  not  with  it  Thon  meantest  not 
To  slay  the  Tsar6vich:  thy  staff  by  accident 
Did  give  the  blow. 


Diyiiized  by  Google 


256         The  Nineteenth  Century 


Ivdn.  *T  is  false!    I  knowingly, 

On  purpose,  of  free  will  did  slay  him.  Or 
Was  I  then  mad,  knew  not  where  fell  my  blow  ? 
No — I  slew  him  purposely !   On  his  back 
He  fell,  bathed  in  his  blood,  aye,  kissing 
These  my  hands;  and  dying  he  forgaire  me 
My  moostrons  sin»  tmt  I  foigive  mysdf 
Such  crimes  dare  not. 

(JSpeakshw,) 

Tliia  vefy  sJight  to  me 
Appeared  he,  badDoned  with  bloody  hand. 
And,  pointing  to  a  cowl,  he  waved  me  on 
With  him  along,  unto  the  holy  dwelling 
By  the  White  Lake,  ev'n  there  where  lie  the  relics 
Of  Cyril  the  Wonder-worker. 

There  loved  I  formerly  alone  to  be 
At  times  from  out  the  tempests  of  the  world ; 
There  loved  I,  far  from  every  care,  to  think 
Of  future  rest,  and  the  unthankfulness 
Of  man,  and  the  malicious  wiles  of  foes  forget; 
Mournfully  sweet  it  was  to  me  within 
Some  cell  to  rest  me  from  the  day's  exertions, 
In  evening  homr  to  watdi  the  doods  float  by, 
Hear  bat  the  winds  sough,  and  the  cries  of  gollsi 
And  of  the  hike  the  plash  monotonons, 
All  silent  there.  There  passion 's  all  foKgotten. 
There  will  I  take  the  oowl»  and  it  may  be 
By  prayer,  by  life-long  fasting  and  contrition. 
That  I  ahaU  merit  pardon  of  my  curse. 

{A  sUeme,) 
Go  tlioo,  and  learn  the  reason  that  so  long 
Their  conference  lasts.   Soon  shall  I  know  their  sentenoet 
When  come  they  with  their  Tsar  ?    I  '11  lay  on  him 
At  once  the  regal  mantle  and  the  crown ! 

The  end  of  all!    And  hither  am  I  brought 

Along  the  lengthened  path  of  majesty. 

What  have  I  met  with  on 't  ?   Sufferings  alone. 


Count  Aleksyfy  Konstantinovich  Tolst6y  257 


E'en  from  my  youtli  but  knowing  of  unrest, 
Now  on  the  steed,  amid  the  whistling  shot, 
The  heathen  subjecting,  now  in  the  Council 
Struggling  against  the  bo3'drs  in  revolt, 
I  see  behind  me  but  a  long-drawn  line 
Of  sleepless  nights  and  troubled  days. 

I  have  not  gracious  to  my  people  been — 
No!   I  had  never  mastery  o'er  myself. 
Father  Sylvester,  my  good  old  tutor, 
Would  say  to  me,  *'  Ivdn,  take  care!  In  thee 
Satan  would  seat  him.  Open  not  thy  soul 
To  him,  Iv^.'*  But  I  was  deaf  unto 
The  holy,  aged  man,  and  oped  my  aonl 
Unto  the  devil.  No,  no  Tsar  am  I. 
A  wolf!  a  stinking  cur!  a  tyrant! 
My  aoQ  I ' ve  slain !   Cain' s  crime  I  have  outpast! 
A  leper  in  aoul  and  mind!   The  sores 
That  eat  away  my  heart  are  countless! 
O  thou,  God  Christ,  heal  me,  and  forgive  me 
From  my  unheard-of  foulness,  and  among 
The  choir  of  the  blessed  count  my  soul. 

— From  The  Death  of  Ivdn  the  Terrible, 
trausl.  by  I.  H.  Harrison. 

THE  KURGAN 

Where  the  broad  level  steppe  lies  bare 

There  stands  a  lonely  mound, 
Beneath  a  famous  warrior  eist 

His  latest  honour  found. 

Three  days  the  funeral  feast  endured. 

Three  days  his  meinie  strove; 
His  wives  tiie  priests  did  ofEer  there, 

The  war  horse  he  did  love. 

But  when  at  length  he  buried  lay. 
The  noisy  rites  were  o'er, 

VOL.  11.-17. 


The  Nineteenth  Century 


Singers  foretold  his  fame  to  be, 
Golden  the  lute  be  bore. 

*'  O  hero,  yet  thy  deeds  shall  be 

A  mighty  nation's  boast, 
Nor  shall  thy  loudly-sounded  name 

Through  ages  all  be  lost. 

**  Nay,  should  thy  lofty  tomb  be  laid 

Low  as  this  barren  plain, 
Yet  far  thy  fame  shall  ever  spread, 

Hooouxed  fhy  dust  xieiiiaiii.*' 

And  see!  the  years  have  passed  amain, 

And  oentnries  have  ranged, 
Natkma  to  natloas  given  place. 

Countries  their  fidl  have  changed. 

But  fltill  that  mound  its  head  lifts  high. 
Where  the  great  chief  doth  rest, 

Nor  levd  with  the  ground  it  lies; 
Still  proudly  soars  its  crest 

But  through  the  years  his  glorious  name 

Was  lost,  nor  lived  till  now. 
Who  was  he,  and  what  coronets 

Gmoed  his  victorious  brow  ? 

What  blood  was  it  he  shed  in  streanis» 

What  towns  in  ashes  laid  ? 
What  death  was  it  he  died,  and  when 

Was  his  sepulture  paid  ? 

This  lonely  mound  doth  naught  reply, 

The  warrior  is  forgot, 
And  games  no  more  nor  songs  record 

His  once  lamented  lot. 


Iv&n  Aleks&ndrovich  Gonchar6v  259 


Only  the  wild  giraffe  darts  by, 

Bounding  across  the  plain, 
Or  locusts  in  a  flnttering  swarm 

Settle^  then  on  again. 

Anon  the  cranes  from  high  in  air, 

Their  goal  is  now  in  sight, 
Descend,  shrill  wayfarers,  to  rest 

And  preen  for  their  last  flight. 

And  there  the  timid  jerboa  leaps 

When  slowly  dies  the  day, 
Or  rider  high  on  mettled  steed 

Takes  there  his  headlong  way. 

And,  as  across  the  sky  they  sail, 

The  doods  let  drop  their  teara^ 
And  Uglitly  thence  the  passhig  breese 

The  dust  unheeded  bears. 
— Tranal.  by  H.  Havelock,  in  The  Anglo-RoaBian 
I4terary  Society,  Na  35. 

iT&a  Alcks^ndrovich  Gonchar6v.  (2812-1891.) 

Gonchardv  was  bora  in  Simbfnk  where  his  father  was  a  wealthy 
merchant.  His  first  ten  years  he  passed  in  his  home  amidst  the  sloth 
and  indolence  of  the  old  Russian  patriarchal  ism.  In  1822  he  was 
placed  iu  au  educational  institution  at  Moscow,  and  twelve  years 
kter  he  gnduted  from  the  nnivesrity.  He  began  early  to  trandate 
from  the  Flench  and  from  other  languages,  in  which  he  was  versed, 
but  his  first  original  story  appeared  only  in  1847.  This  novel,  A 
Usual  Story,  at  once  attracted  attention  by  its  realistic  pictures  of 
details,  and  by  the  fine  raillery  at  the  Romantic  extravagancies  of  its 
hero.  In  1Q5S  Goncbaidv  was  iaTited  by  the  Miniitay  of  Marine  to 
accompany  an  csKpedilion  whieh  was  to  drenmnavlgate  the  world 
on  a  mission  to  Japan.  The  restilt  of  this  vojrage  was  hia  memoirs, 
Ffigate  Palldda,  which  for  brilliancy  of  description  surpass  any  book 
in  the  Russian  language  on  travels.  During  his  voyage  he,  at  the 
aame  time,  worked  om  his  great  novel,  06idmav,  for  which  he  had 
Idd  the  plan  long  before.  It  was  pnUiahed  In  18158  and  cicated  a 
•eniation  nnlike  any  other  previooa  prodnctioa  hi  Rnaiia.  The 


36o         The  Nineteenth  Century 


country  was  on  the  eve  of  the  emancipation,  and  everybody  was  filled 
with  the  optimism  that  the  native  indolence  was  soon  to  come  to  an 
end,  when  Gonchar6v  with  marvellous  plasticism  generalised  that 
veiy  indolence  in  hi*  liero^  and  made  him  ■occnmb  to  it :  everybody 
who  reed  the  book  xeoogniaed  himself,  and  trembled  lest  he  afaoold 
also  become  a  victim  of  Russian  fataliam,  Gonchar6T*a  later  novd* 
Th^  Decliinly,  was  less  successful. 

In  English  there  are  some  extracts  translated  from  Obldinov  in  the 
Iiifanij  of  the  Worid'a  Beat  Litecatnie  and  In  Oeraettf a  Univenal 
Anthology. 

FROM  •  OBLOMOV" 

**  Go  ahead  with  the  description  of  the  ideal  of  your 

life         Well,  good  friends  axoond  yon:  what  next?  How 

woold  yon  pass  your  days  ?  *' 

*'  Well,  I  should  rise  in  the  morning,"  began  Obl6moT, 
placing  his  hands  back  of  his  head,  and  an  expression  of  rest 
came  over  his  face:  he  was  in  thought  already  in  the 
country.  "  The  weather  is  fine,  the  sky  deep-blue,  and 
there  is  not  a  cloud,"  he  said.  "  One  side  of  my  house  is 
turned  with  its  balcony  to  the  east,  facing  the  garden  and 
fields,  the  other  towards  the  village.  While  waiting  for  my 
wife  to  get  up,  I  should  put  on  my  smoking-jacket  and 
should  saunter  through  the  garden,  to  breathe  the  morning 
evaporations;  there  I  should  find  the  gardener,  and  we 
shotild  together  water  the  flowers,  and  lop  the  bushes  and 
trees.  I  cull  a  bouquet  for  my  wife.  Then  I  take  a  bath 
In  the  bath-tttb  or  in  the  river;  I  retnni,  the  balcony  Is 
open ;  my  wife  has  on  a  blouse  and  a  light  morning  cap  that 
barely  stays  on  the  head  and  that  will  be  wafted  away  by 
the  Slightest  breeze.  She  is  waiting  for  me.  '  Tea  is  ready,* 
she  says.  What  a  kissi  What  teat  What  a  xestfhl  arm- 
diair!  I  seat  myself  at  the  table:  upon  it  are  toast,  cresm, 
fresh  butter  " 

"Then?" 

"  Then  I  don  a  comfortable  coat  or  jacket,  and  lose  my- 
self with  my  wife  in  an  endless,  deep  avenue  of  trees:  we 
walk  softly,  lost  in  meditation,  or  think  aloud,  dream,  count 
the  moments  of  happiness^  like  the  beating  of  the  pulse,  and 


Digitized  by  Google 


Iv&n  Aleks&ndrovich  Gonchardv  261 


listen  to  tlie  beating  and  Minting  of  the  heart;  we  look  for 

sympathy  in  Natnie  and  by  degrees  we  reach  a  bnxik  or 

a  fidd         The  river  bardy  spkshes;  the  ears  of  com 

wave  with  the  wind.  *T  is  warm  ^we  seat  oniaelves  in 

the  boat,  my  wife  rowa^  barely  raising  the  oars  " 

"  Yes,  you  are  a  poet,  Ilyd!  "  Stolz  interrupted  him. 

"  Yes,  a  poet  of  life,  for  life  is  poetry.  It  is  the  privilege 
of  people  to  distort  it !  Then  we  can  enter  the  greenhouse,  *  * 
continued  Obl6mov,  himself  becoming  intoxicated  with  the 
ideal  which  he  was  depicting.  He  extracted  from  his 
memory  ready,  long-present  pictures,  and  therefore  he  spoke 
with  warmth,  and  without  stopping.  "  We  look  at  the 
peaches,  at  the  grapes,"  he  said:  "  We  tell  what  to  send  to 
table;  then  we  return,  take  a  light  breakfast  and  wait  for 
friends — ^  There  is  a  note  for  my  wife  from  some  Mdrya 
Petr6vna,  with  a  book  or  music;  or  a  pine-apple  has  been 
sent  ns  as  a  present,  or  in  oar  own  garden  a  monster  mdon 
has  ripened,  and  we  send  it  to  some  good  friend,  for  to- 
morrow's dinner,  and  we  go  there  ooraelves         In  the 

meantime  everything  is  busy  in  the  kitchen;  the  cook  is 
running  around  in  an  apron  and  cap  as  white  as  snow:  he 
puts  down  one  pot,  takes  up  another;  there  he  stirs,  here  he 
begins  to  mix  the  dongh;  there  he  poors  ont  some  water 
—the  knives  are  rattling— th^  aie  diopping  some  spinach 

— there  they  turn  the  ice-cream  freezer          'T  is  a  pleasure 

to  look  into  the  kitchen  before  dinner,  to  open  a  saucepan, 
sniff,  take  a  glance  at  the  making  of  the  cakes,  and  beating 
of  the  cream.    Then  to  lie  down  on  the  sofa ;  the  wife 

reads  aloud  something  new;  we  stop,  quarrel  a  bit   But 

there  are  guests  coming,  say,  you  and  your  wife." 

*'  Bah,  you  are  getting  me  married,  too?  " 

**  By  all  means!  Two,  three  friends  more, — the  same  old 
feces.  We  take  np  the  nnfinished  conversation  of  yesterday. 
Then  come  jokes,  or  there  falls  upon  ns  an  eloquent  ailenoe, 
a  meditatioo, — not  on  acooont  of  the  loss  of  some  plaoe^  not 
on  aoooont  of  some  affsir  of  the  Senate,  hot  from  the  foliiesB 

of  satisfied  desire, — a  meditation  of  enjoyment   Yon 

will  hear  no  philippics,  with  foam  npon  the  lips,  against  an 


262         The  Nineteenth  Century 


abaeiit  person;  you  will  not  notice  a  glance  cast  at  you  that 
promises  you  the  same  the  moment  you  have  closed  the 
door.  You  will  not  dip  your  bread  in  his  salt  cellar  whom 
you  do  not  love,  who  is  not  good.  In  the  eyes  of  the  inter- 
locutors you  will  perceive  sympathy,  in  their  jests,  a  sin- 
cere, harmless  laughter   Everything  from  the  soul! 

What  is  in  the  eyes,  is  in  the  words  and  hearts.  After  din- 
ner— a  mocha,  a  Havana  dgar  on  the  terrace  ** 

"  You  are  painting  me  there  the  same  that  has  been  with 
our  fathers  and  grandfathers." 

"  No,  not  the  same/'  lelorted  Obl6auMr,  almost  offended. 
"  How  can  you  say  so?  Do  yoa  suppose  my  wife  would 
be  preserving  jams  and  mushrooms?  Would  she  be  count- 
ing dceins^  and  looking  after  the  homejqmn?  Would  she  be 
boadng  the  servant  girls*  ears?  Don't  yon  hear?— There 
would  be  music,  bodes,  piano^  fine  fumitnie! " 

"  Well,  and  you  yourself  ?  " 

"  I  myself  would  not  be  reading  last  year*s  newspapers, 
would  not  travel  in  a  kolymdga,  would  not  eat  noodles  and 
goose  meat,  and  would  have  my  cook  taking  lessons  in  the 
English  club  or  at  the  ambassador's." 

"And  then?" 

**  Then,  when  the  heat  would  subside,  I  should  send  a  car- 
rii^  with  the  samovar,  with  a  dessert,  to  the  birch  forest, 
or  else,  to  the  field,  on  the  newly  mown  grass,  I  should  have 
carpets  spread  between  the  hayricks,  and  there  we  should 
be  staying  in  bliss  until  cold  hash  and  beefsteak.  The 
peasants  are  returning  from  the  field,  with  their  scythes  over 
tiieir  dumlders;  there  creeps  by  a  waggon  with  hay  that  con- 
ceals the  vehide  and  the  hofse;  above,  a  peasant's  cap, 
adorned  with  flowen,  and  a  child's  head  stick  out  of  the 
hay;  there,  a  crowd  of  barefiMted  old  women,  with  siddea, 

ta^  aloud         Suddenly  they  notice  their  masters,  and 

they  grow  silent,  and  bow  low. 

"  *T  is  damp  in  the  field,  and  dark;  a  mist,  like  an  in- 
verted sea,  hovers  over  the  rye;  the  horses  jerk  their  shoul> 
ders  and  stamp  their  hoofs:  'jt  is  time  to  go  home.  In  the 
house  the  fires  are  lit;  in  the  Idtchen  there  is  a  mighty  rattle 


uiyiii^uu  Ly  Google 


Ivin  Aleks&ndrovich  Gonchar6v  263 


of  knivw;  tfam  is  a  pan  of  tmuhtoocns,  eadeta»  berries  

theve  is  music  Cista  diva— Casta  diva!"  sang  out  Ob- 

16mov.  '*  I  cannot  mention  with  indififereiioe  Cssta  diva," 
he  said,  after  singing  the  beginning  of  the  cavatina;  "  how 
that  woman  weeps  her  heart  away !  What  melancholy  there 
is  in  those  sounds   And  no  one  aronnd  her  knows  any- 
thing        She  is  alone         The  secret  weighs  heavily 

upon  her;  she  confides  it  to  the  moon  " 

*'  Do  you  like  that  aria?  I  am  very  glad:  Olga  Ilinski 
sings  it  beautifully.  I  '11  introduce  you  to  her, — what  a 
voice,  what  singing !  And  what  a  charming  child  she  her- 
self is!  However,  maybe  I  am  a  prejudiced  judge:  I  have 
a  small  weakness  for  her^—  But,  don't  let  me  distract 
you,"  Stolz  aMed:    Qo  ahead  with  your  description! " 

"Wdl,"  continued  Obl6mov,  "what  more?  yes,  that's 

all         The  guests  scatter  to  the  side  buildings,  to  the  pa- 
vilions; the  next  day  they  go  in  different  directions:  one  to 
•  fish»  another  to  hunt;  a  tfaird,^wdl,  Just  sits  down  " 

"  How,  with  nothing  in  his  hands  ?  "  aaiked  Stolz. 

"  What  do  you  want?  Wdl,  with  a  handkerchief,  if  yon, 
please.    Why,  would  you  not  like  to  pass  such  an  ex- 
istence  ? "  asked  Obl6mov,  "  or,  is  n't  that  an  existence?" 
All  my  life  that  way  ?  "  asked  Stolz. 

"  To  your  grey  hair,  to  the  grave.  Thisislifel" 

"  No,  it  is  not." 

"How  not?  What  is  lacking  here?  Just  consider  that 
you  would  not  see  a  single  poor,  suffering  face,  no  care,  not 
a  single  question  about  the  Senate,  exchange,  shares,  re- 
ports, audience  at  the  minister's,  ranks,  increase  of  salar>'. 
Nothing  but  soul-felt  conversations.  You  would  never  have 
to  move  from  one  house  to  another, — that  in  itself  is  worth 
sometfaingl  And  you  say  that  is  not  life?  " 

"  That  is  not  lilel "  Stolz  repeated  stabboraly. 

"  What  is  it  then  acooiding  to  you?  " 

"That  i»— "  Stolz  fell  to  musing  and  was  trying  to  find 
a  proper  expression  for  such  a  life,  "  I  should  csU  it— 
Obl6movism! "  he  finally  said. 

"Ob-16m-ofv-i8ml"  Obl6inov  nttered  slowly,  wondering 


264         The  Nineteenth  Century 


at  the  strange  word,  and  pronouncing  it  by  syllableB:  '  *  Ob- 
l6m-ov-ism! " — he  looked  strangely  and  fixedly  at  Stolz. 
*' What,  then,  in  your  opinion,  is  the  ideal  of  life  ?  What 
is  not  Obl6movism?"  he  asked  timidly,  without  passion. 
"  Do  not  all  strive  for  the  same  thing  that  I  am  dreaming 
of?  Say  yourself,"  he  added  more  boldly,  "  is  not  the  aim 
of  all  our  runuing,  passions,  wars,  commerce,  politics  the 
obtaining  of  peace,  is  it  not  a  striving  for  that  ideal  of  a  lo6t 
paradise  ?  '* 

"Your  very  Utopia  is  of  the  Obl6mov  kind,"  retorted 
Stolz. 

"  Everybody  is  in  aeaich  of  rest  and  quiet,*'  Obl6ni07  de- 
fended himsdt 

"  Not  all,  and  you  youxself  did  not  look  for  that  In  life 
ten  years  ago." 

"  What  did  I  look  for  ?  "  Obl6aunr  aaked,  peiplezed,  as  he 
mentally  transferred  himsdf  into  the  past 

"  Try  to  recall  it.  Where  are  your  books  and  transla- 
tions?" 

"  Zdkhar  has  put  them  someirhere^*'  answered  Obl6oio7, 

*'  they  are  somewhere  in  the  corner  here." 

"In  the  corner!"  Stolz  said  reproachfully.  "In  this 
same  comer  lie  your  intentions  *  to  ser\'e,  while  strength 
lasts,  because  Russia  needs  hands  and  heads  to  exploit  its 
inexhaustible  resources* — I  am  quoting  your  words:  *  to 
work,  in  order  to  rest  more  sweetly ;  and  to  rest  means  to 
live  with  the  other,  aristocratic,  artistic  side  of  life,  the  life 
of  artists,  poets.'  Has  Zakhar  stored  away  all  these  inten- 
tions also  in  the  comer?  Do  you  remember,  you  had  in- 
tended, after  having  studied  from  books,  to  travd  in  foreign 
coimtries»  in  order  to  know  and  love  yoofs  better?  'All  life 
is  thought  and  work,'  3rou  used  to  repeat  then:  '  an  tm- 
notioed,  dark,  but  incessant  work,  and  to  dfe  with  the  con- 
sciousness of  having  done  your  work  *-^well,  in  what  cotner 
doesall  that  lie  now?*' 

"Yes  y^  "  said  Obl6mov,  restlessly  following 

every  word  of  Stolz's,  "  I  do  remember,  I  really  did  it 

seems         That 's  so  r '  be  suddenly  exclaimed,  as  the  past 


Digitized  by  Google 


Iv&n  Aleks&ndrovich  Gonchar6v  265 


retnnied  to  him.  "  Why,  Andt^y*  we  liad  made  up  onr 
minds  to  criaicnMe  Burope,  to  walk  thnnigh  all  of  Switzer- 
land, to  bum  oor  feet  00  Mount  Vesuvius,  to  go  down  to 
Herenlaneum.  We  almost  went  insanel  Hiom  many  fioolish 

things!  " 

"  Foolish  things!  "  Stolz  repeated  reproachfully.  *'  Did 
you  not  say  in  tears,  as  you  looked  at  the  engravings  of 
Raphael's  Madonnas,  at  Correggio's  Night,  at  the  Apollo 
Belvedere:  '  Lord!  Shall  I  really  never  be  able  to  gaze  at 
the  originals  and  be  dumb  with  terror  at  the  thought  that 
I  am  standing  before  the  productions  of  Michael  Angelo, 
Titian,  and  that  I  tread  the  soil  of  Rome  ?  Shall  I  pass  my 
life  seeing  these  myrtles,  cypresses,  and  orange  trees  in  hot- 
houses, aud  not  in  their  native  home  ?  Not  to  breathe  the  air 
of  Italy,  not  to  drink  in  the  azure  of  its  sky ! '  And  what 
superb  fisewoiks  you  used  to  send  <mt  of  your  liead.  Fool- 
ish tfaingsl " 

"  Yes»  yesi  I  remember,'*  said  Obldmov,  as  be  lost  him- 
sdf  in  tbepast.  *' You  once  took  me  by  my  band  and  said 
to  me:  '  I«et  us  promise  not  to  die  before  having  seen  aU 
thatl  •» 

"  I  remember,"  continued  Stolz,  "  how  you  onoe  brought 

me  a  translation  from  Say,  with  a  dedication  to  me  upon  my 
birthday :  I  still  have  the  whole  translation.  How  you  shut 
yourself  up  with  the  teacher  of  mathematics,  and  wanted  by 
all  means  to  find  out  what  good  there  was  in  knowing  circles 
and  squares,  and  then  you  gave  it  up  before  you  were  half 
way  through,  without  having  found  it  out!  You  began  to 
study  English  —  and  you  did  not  learn  it!  And  when  I 
made  a  plan  of  a  journey  abroad,  and  asked  you  to  come  to 
see  me  at  the  German  universities,  you  jumped  up,  embraced 
me,  and  solemnly  gave  me  your  hand:  '  I  am  with  you, 
Andr6y,  eversrwhere  with  you/  those  are  all  your  words. 
You  have  always  been  something  of  an  actor.  Well,  Ilyd  ? 
I  have  been  twice  abroad;  after  having  been  crammed  full  of 
our  native  wisdom,  I  sat  modestly  on  the  student  benches  at 
Boon,  Jena,  Brlangen,  then  I  studied  Europe  like  my  estate. 
But  one  might  say,  a  journey  is  a  luxury  and  not  all  are 


Diyiiized  by  Google 


366         The  Nineteenth  Century 


able  or  obliged  to  make  tise  of  that  means  ;  what  about 
Russia  ?   I  have  seen  Russia  up  and  down.   I  work  " 

'*  Sometime  you  '11  stop  working,"  Obl6nunr  remarked. 

"  I  shall  never  stop.   Why  should  I  ?  " 

"  When  you  have  doubled  your  capital,"  aaid  Obldmov. 

"  Not  when  I  increase  it  fourfold." 

'*  What  is  all  this  unrest  for,"  he  said  after  a  silence,  "  if 
it  is  not  your  aim  to  provide  for  the  future  and  to  retire  later 
for  a  rest  ?  ** 

**  Country  Obl6movisni ! ' '  said  Stolz. 

"  Or  by  service  to  gain  importance  and  position  in  society, 
and  then  in  lioooanlile  inddenoe  to  enjoy  a  wett-deaemd 

"  Petenbnig  Obltfmovianil "  ezclaimcd  StoU. 

**When  is  one  to  live,  prey?"  Obldmov  repUed  with 
annoyance  to  Stolz's  remarks.  **  Why  should  one  wony  a 
whole  life  away?*' 

"  For  fvoik's  sake,  and  for  nothing  else.  Work  is  the 
image,  contents,  dement,  and  aim  of  life,  at  least,  of  my  life. 
You  have  driven  work  out  of  life  :  what  is  it  like  now? 
I  '11  try  to  raise  you,  maybe,  for  the  last  time.  If  you  will 
be  staying  here  after  that,  with  your  Tar4ntevs  and  Alek- 
sy^vs,  you  will  go  to  perdition,  and  be  a  burden  to  your- 
self.   Now  or  never!  "  he  concluded. 

Obl6mov  listened,  fixing  his  excited  eyes  upon  him. 
His  friend  had,  so  to  say,  placed  a  mirror  before  him,  and 
he  became  frightened  as  he  recognised  himself. 

"  Do  not  scold  me,  Audrey,  but  really  help  me!  **  he  be- 
gan with  a  sigh,  '*  I  am  tormented  myself  by  it,  and  If  you 
had  seen  or  heard  me  only  to-day,  how  I  am  digging  my 
own  grave  and  lamenting  over  myself,  you  would  never  have 
had  the  courage  to  blame  me  so  much.  I  know  and  under- 
stand all,  hut  I  have  no  strength  and  no  will.  Give  me 
your  will-power  and  mind,  and  lead  me  where  you  wish.  I 
shall  probably  go  with  you,  but  alone  I  will  never  move  from 
the  spot.  You  are  saying  the  truth:  'Now  or  never!' 
Another  year,  and  it  will  be  too  late!  " 

"  Is  it  you,  Uyd  ?  "  said  Andriy .     I  remember  you  as  a 


Dili 


Iv&n  Aleks&ndrovich  Gonchar6v  267 


flknder,  Ixvdy  boy,  as  yoa  ^rolked  cway  day  from  Fnchis- 
tenka  to  K^drino;  there,  in  the  gaxden  ^yon  have  not  for- 
gotten the  two  sisten?  You  have  not  forgotten  Rooaaean, 
Schiller,  Goethe,  Bynm,  which  you.  naed  to  carry  to  them, 
and  you  took  away  from  them  the  novels  of  Cottin,  Janlis 

 ^yoa  put  on  sndi  importance  before  them,  yon  wanted  to 

purify  their  taste  ?  " 

Obl6mov  j ump>ed  up  from  his  bed.  "  What,  you  remem- 
ber that  too,  Audrey?  That  is  so!  I  dreamt  with  them, 
whispered  hopes  of  the  future  to  them,  develop>ed  plans, 
ideas,  and — feelings  too,  secretly  from  you,  lest  you  should 
ridicule  me.  All  that  is  dead,  it  was  never  repeated! 
Where  has  it  all  gone  to,  and  why  has  it  been  extinguished  ? 
Inoompfdienalble!  There  have  been  no  atonna,  no  vfolent 
perturbations  with  me;  I  have  not  lost  anythisig;  no  yoke 
bnrdena  my  conscience;  it  is  as  pure  as  glaas;  no  stroke  haa 
killed  ambition  in  me.  God  knows  why  sll  that  lias  gonel " 
He  siglied.  "  Do  yon  know,  Andr^y?  There  has  never 
burnt  in  my  life,  neither  a  redeeming,  nor  a  destructive  fire! 
It  has  never  resembled  a  morning  upon  which  gradually  fall 
colours  and  fire  until  it  is  changed  into  day,  as  with  others; 
and  then  it  flames  up,  and  boils,  moves  in  the  brilliant  mid- 
day, and  then  softly,  very  softly,  becomes  paler  and  paler, 
and  naturally  and  gently  dies  out  towards  evening.  No, 
my  life  began  with  the  extinction!  Strange  to  say,  it  is  so! 
From  the  first  moment  that  I  have  been  conscious  of  myself, 
I  have  felt  that  I  am  already  being  extinguished.  I  began 
to  go  out  when  I  was  writing  documents  in  the  chancery;  I 
was  going  out  when,  later,  I  read  in  books  truths  that  I  did 
not  know  what  to  do  with  in  life;  I  was  going  out  among 
my  friends,  as  I  listened  to  the  disputes,  gossips,  malicious 
teasings,  ill-minded  and  cold  prattle,  emptiness,  and  as  I 
looked  at  the  friendship  that  was  supported  by  aimless  and 
unsympathetic  meetings;  I  was  going  out  in  tlie  languid  and 
inddent  saunterings  along  the  Ndvski  Proqiect,  among  rac- 
oon fnrooats  and  beaver  coHara, — at  evening  entertain- 
ments, receptions,  where  I  was  gladly  received  as  a  possible 
prospective  bridegroom;  I  was  going  out  and  trifling  away 


268         The  Nineteenth  Century 


USt  and  reason  when  I  migrated  from  tbe  city  to  the  oonii* 
try,  and  from  the  country  back  to  the  Gor6kho\raya 
street,  measuring  spring  by  the  arrival  of  oysters  and  lob- 
sters, autumn  and  winter  by  reception  days,  summer  by 
excursions,  and  life  in  general  by  an  indolent  and  restful 

dreaming,  like  the  rest   Even  my  ambition,  what  did  I 

waste  it  upon  ?  To  order  a  garment  from  a  well-knov\Ti 
tailor,  in  order  to  find  ray  way  into  a  certain  house,  in  order 
that  Prince  P.  should  press  my  hand.  And  ambition  is  the 
salt  of  life!  What  has  become  of  it?  Either  I  did  not 
understand  this  life,  or  it  is  good  for  nothing,  and  I  knew 
and  aaw  nothing  better,  and  no  out  AamA  it  to  me.  Yon 
naed  to  appear  and  diaappear  like  a  comet,  brilliantly, 
swiftly,  and  I  forgot  all  about  it,  and  went  out  *' 

Stolz  no  longer  answered  with  a  caxekaa  banter  OUdmov'a 
speech.  He  listened  and  kept  a  grim  siknoe. 

' '  Yoo  told  me  lately  that  my  ftoe  was  not  quite  fredi,  that 
it  was  crushed,*'  continued  Obldmov.  **  Yes,  I  am  a  thread- 
bare, old,  worn-out  coat,  but  not  from  the  effect  of  the 
dimate^  and  labour,  but  because  for  twelve  years  light  was 
imprisoned  within  me;  it  sought  an  exit,  and  only  burnt 
the  prison,  and  did  not  get  its  liberty,  and  went  out.  Thus, 
my  dear  Audrey,  have  passed  twelve  years  of  mine,  and  I 
lost  the  desire  to  awaken." 

"  Why  did  you  not  tear  yourself  away  and  run  somewhere, 
instead  of  perishing  in  silence  ?  *'  Stolz  asked  impatiently. 

"Whither?" 

**  Whither  ?  If  you  could  do  nothing  better,  with  your 
peasants  to  tbe  V61ga:  there  is  more  motion  there,  there 
are  there  some  kind  of  interests,  aims,  work.  I  dionld  have 
gone  to  Siberia,  to  Sitka  " 

"  You  prescribe  such  dresdfnlly  strong  measures!  **  Ob* 
Iteov  remarked  languidly. 

*'  I  am  not  alone  in  that  There  is  MIkhiylov,  Petr6v, 

Sem^ov,  Aleksydev,  Stepdnov         You  can't  count  them 

all:  our  name  is  legion ! " 

Stdls  was  still  under  the  influence  of  that  conHearion  and 
he  was  silent  Then  he  sighed.   "  Yes,  much  water  has 


Ivin  Aleksiindrovich  Gonchar6v  269 


flowed  since  then! "  he  said.  "  I  will  not  leave  you  as  you 
are;  I  '11  take  you  away  from  here,  first  abroad,  and  then 
into  the  country:  you  will  grow  a  little  thinner,  you  will 

stop  pining  away,  and  we  shall  find  some  work  for  you  '* 

"  Yes,  let  us  get  away  horn  here! ' '  the  words  escaped  from 
Obl6mov. 

**  To-morrow  we  will  apply  for  a  passport  abroad,  then  we 
will  pack  up          I  will  not  leave  you,  do  you  hear,  Ilyd?  '* 

"  It  is  always  to-morrow  with  you!  **  retorted  Obl6mov,  as 
though  coming  down  tan  the  doodSh 

"  Yon  would  pfefer,  *  Don't  pnt  off  for  to-mofxow  what  you 
can  do  to-day? '  What  a  hurry  1  It  is  too  late  now,"  Stolz 
added.  *'  In  two  weeks  we  shall  be  &r  away  " 

"  Yon  tslk  ui  two  weeks»  my  friendl  How  so?  Let  ns 

consider  it  properly  and  get  ready         I  '11  have  to  get 

some  carriage  say  rather  in  three  months.'* 

"  Tolk.  of  a  carriage!  We  shall  travel  to  the  border  in  a 
stage  coach,  or  in  a  steamer  as  far  as  Lubeck,  that  will  be 
much  more  convenient  There  we  shall  find  railroads  in 
many  places." 

"And  what  about  the  bouse,  and  Zdkhar,  and  Obl6i$)vka  ? 
Some  kind  of  arrangements  will  have  to  be  made,"  Obl6mov 
defended  himself. 

'*  Obl6movism,  Obl6movisra!  "  said  Stolz,  laughing;  then 
he  took  a  candle,  wished  Oblomov  good-night,  and  went  to 
bed.  ' '  Now  or  never ! — Remember !  "  he  added,  as  he  turned 
back  to  Obl6mov  and  closed  the  door  behind  him. 

"  Now  or  neverl "  were  the  first  threatening  words  he 
thooght  of  as  he  awoke  in  the  morning.  He  rose  fitom  his 
bed,  walked  three  times  up  and  down  the  room,  and  looked 
into  the  sitthig-room  where  Stolz  was  sitting  and  writing. 
"Ztiehart"  he  called  out,  bnt  he  did  not  hear  him  jumping 
down  from  the  oven  bed.  Z^ikhar  did  not  make  his  appear- 
ance,—Stolz  had  sent  him  to  the  post-office.  Obl6aiov 
walked  up  to  his  dusty  table,  sat  down,  picked  up  a  pen, 
dipped  it  in  the  inkstand,  but  there  was  no  ink  in  it,  looked 
for  some  paper,  but  there  was  none.  He  fell  to  musing,  and 
mechanically  began  to  draw  with  his  finger  in  the  dust,  then 


270         The  Nineteenth  Century 


be  looked  down  to  see  what  he  had  written :  it  turned  out  to 
be  **  Obl6movism. "  He  hurriedly  wiped  away  the  writing 
with  his  sleeve.  That  word  he  had  been  dreaming  of  in  the 
night:  it  was  written  in  flaming  letters  upon  the  wall,  as  at 
Belshazzar's  feast.  Zdkhar  arrived  and  when  he  found 
Obl6mov  not  in  his  bed,  he  dimly  looked  at  his  master, 
wondering  why  he  should  be  on  his  legs.  In  that  dull 
glance  of  astonishment  was  written:  "  Obl6movism! '* 
"One  single  word,"  thought  Uyd  Ilyfch,  "but  how 
poiaoooiis!  " 

Z6khar  took,  as  unial,  the  comb,  brush,  and  towel,  and 
stepped  towards  his  master  to  fix  his  hdr.  "  Go  to  the 
devill "  Obl^Bunr  exdaimed  angrily  and  knocked  the  brash 
out  of  Zikhar's  hands,  and  ZHkbax  himself  dropped  the 
oomb  on  the  floor. 

"  Would  yon  not  like  to  lie  down  again?"  asked  Z6khar. 
"  If  so,  I  shall  fix  the  bed  for  yoo.*' 

"  Bring  me  ink  and  paper,"  answered  Obldmov. 

He  fell  to  musing  over  the  words:  **  Now  or  never! "  As 
he  listened  inwardly  to  this  despairing  appeal  of  reason  and 
willpower,  he  consciously  weighed  the  little  willpower  that 
was  left  to  him,  whither  he  would  carry  it,  into  what  he 
would  put  that  paltry  remnant.  After  having  pondered  over 
it  painfully,  he  seized  the  pen,  dragged  a  book  out  of  the 
comer,  and  in  one  hour  wanted  to  read,  write,  and  think  all 
that  he  had  neglected  to  read,  write,  and  think  in  ten  years. 
What  was  he  to  do  now  ?  To  go  ahead,  or  to  remain  ?  This 
Obl6nio7qnestion  was  of  more  import  to  him  than  Hamlet's. 
To  go  ahead,<»^hat  would  mean  at  onoe  doffing  his  comliDrt- 
aUe  dresnng-gown,  not  only  from  the  shoulders,  but  torn 
the  soul  and  mind;  together  with  the  cobweb  on  the  walls  to 
sweep  away  the  o6bweb  from  the  eyes^  and  regain  eyesight! 
What  first  step  should  be  made  for  this?  Wherebegin?  "I 
do  not  know^I  cannot — no,  I  am  begging  the  ques* 

tion,  I  do  know,  and          And  here  is  Stolz  by  my  side;  he 

will  tell  me.  What  will  he  tell  me  ?  '  In  a  week,'  he  will 
say,  '  you  must  sketch  a  detailed  instruction  for  your  pleni- 
potentiary and  send  him  into  the  village.   Get  your  Obl6m- 


Diyiiized  by  Google 


NikoUy  Alekscindrovich  Dobrolyiibov  271 


ovka  mortgaged,  buy  some  more  land,  send  a  plan  of  new 
buildings,  give  up  your  house,  procure  a  passport,  and  go 
abroad  for  six  months,  to  get  rid  of  your  surplus  fat,  to  throw 
off  the  weight,  to  refresh  the  soul  with  the  atmosphere  of 
which  you  have  dreamed  long  ago  with  your  friend,  to  live 
without  a  dressing  gown,  without  Zakhar  and  Tardutev,  to 
pnt  on  your  own  socks  and  take  off  your  own  boots,  sleep  only 
at  night,  tiavd  where  all  travel,  on  railroads,  steamboats, 

and  then         Tlien  to  settle  in  Obl^movka,  to  find  out 

what  sowing  and  threshing  is,  why  peasants  are  poor  or 
wdl*to-do,  walk  over 

tocy,  to  the  nuU,  the  docks.  At  the  same  time  yon  are  to 
read  aewspapew^  hooks,  and  beoome  excited  why  the  Bng- 

liah  have  sent  a  warship  to  the  East  '   That 's  what  he 

will  say!  That 's  what  is  meant  by  going  ahead,  and  thus 
it  is  to  be  all  my  life !  Farewell ,  poetical  ideal  of  life  I  That 
is  some  kind  of  a  blacksmith  shop,  not  lifel   There  is  in  it 

an  eternal  fire,  hammering,  heat,  din          But  when  is  one 

to  live  ?  Would  it  not  be  better  to  stay  ?  To  stay  means 
to  put  on  a  shirt  over  all,  to  hear  the  patter  of  Zdkhar's  feet 
as  he  jumps  down  from  his  couch,  to  dine  with  Tardntev,  to 
think  less  about  anything,  never  to  finish  the  "  Voyage  to 
Africa,"  to  grow  peacefully  old  in  these  chambers,  at  the 
house  of  Tardntev 's  ladyfriend.'* 

"Now  or  never!"  **To  be  or  not  to  be ! "  Obl6mov 
was  about  to  rise  from  his  chair,  but  his  foot  did  not  at  once 
find  its  wtyhito  the  slipper,  and  he  sat  down  again. 

NlkolAy  Aldkaiadrovich  DobrolyfiboT.  (Z836-Z861.) 

Dobrolydbov  was  the  most  powerfnl  of  critics  belonging  to  the 
•diool  of  ^d&Mki  In  the  dictt  period  of  three  yMus  in  whidi  he 
devoted  himself  cxcliiriTely  to  criticism,  he  prodnced  four  latge  vol- 
umes of  minute  analyses  of  the  intellectual  and  social  movements  at 
the  end  of  the  fifties.  His  most  famous  essay  is  IVAai  is  Obldmoi'- 
ism  t  in  which  he  places  all  the  heroes  of  previous  novels  in  the  same 
category  with  the  heio  in  GeDdisfdv*s  stoiry.  DobralyilboT  wts  bom 
in  Nfshni-Ndvgacod  ss  tlie  son  of  a  poor  priest.  He  studied  st  a 
Seminary  and  at  the  Pedagogical  Institute  at  St.  Petersburg,  strug- 
gling all  the  time  against  want.  He  practised  much  ascetism. 


Digitized  by  Google 


The  Nineteenth  Century 


and  kept  strict  account  of  himMlf  and  his  mental  evolution  by  means 
of  a  diaiy.  He  later  transferred  this  ascetism  and  aciupalons  ael^ 
ewmlmtion  to  his  Iftersiy  work. 

WHAT  IS  OBI<dMOVISM? 

It  was  remarked  long  ago  that  all  the  heroes  of  the 
most  noted  Russian  stories  aud  novels  suffer  from  not  seeing 
any  aim  in  life  and  from  not  finding  any  proper  occupation 
lor  theniMlvea.  Oo  acoonnt  of  fhit  they  fed  ennui  and  a 
dislike  fiv  all  kinds  of  work,  thuspfesentltig  a  striking  sbnl* 
larity  to  Obldmov.  Indeed,  open,  for  example^  Etghd 
Ony^^  TkeHenefOurltme,  Wko  it  ia  h  Biamed,  JUdim, 
or  CMess  Mem,  or  HmmUi  cf  Skck^grSv  Cmcii^,'— in  eveiy 
one  of  them  you  will  find  traits  that  are  literslly  identical 
with  those  in  ObI6mov  

 One  feels  the  breeze  of  a  new  life  when,  after  reading 

Obl6mov,  one  stops  to  think  what  it  is  that  has  called  forth 
this  type  in  literature.  It  cannot  be  ascribed  solely  to  the 
personal  talent  of  the  author  and  to  the  breadth  of  his  views. 
Great  talent  and  the  broadest  and  humanest  conceptions  are 
to  be  found  also  in  the  authors  who  have  produced  the 
former  types,  mentioned  above.  But  the  fact  is  that  since 
the  appearance  of  the  first  of  these,  Ony^gin,  up  to  the 
present,  thirty  years  have  passed.  What  was  then  in  the 
embryo,  what  was  then  whispered  in  indistinct  words,  has 
now  assumed  a  definite,  concrete  form,  has  been  prodahned 
openly  and  aloud.  The  trite  phrase  has  lost  its  meaning; 
there  has  arisen  in  society  itself  the  need  for  actual  work. 

BdtOY  *  and  Rddin,  men  with  reslly  high  and  noble  tend- 
encies^ not  only  could  not  grasp  the  necessity,  but  oonld 
not  even  imagine  the  near  poasitdlity  of  a  terrible^  mortal 
conflict  with  actualities  that  oppressed  them.  They  entered 
into  a  deep  unknown  forest,  walked  over  a  dangerous  bog, 
saw  under  their  feet  various  reptiles  and  serpents,  and 
dimbed  a  tree,— partly  to  see  whether  they  coold  not  dis- 

*  These  works  are  by  the  following  aothocs:  PAdildn,  I«teaoatov» 

G^rtsen,  Turg^nev,  Saltyk6v,  Turg^nev. 

•  Hero  in  Who  is  to  be  Blamed? 


Digitized  by  Google 


Nikol^y  Aleksimdrovich  Dobroly^bov  273 


cover  a  nwd  aomewhere,  partly  to  rest  and  for  a  time  at  least 
to  IKVe  themaelves  from  the  danger  of  sinking  into  the  mire 
or  bdng  stung.  The  people  who  followed  them  waited  for 
them  to  say  somethings,  and  looked  at  them  vAth  respect  as 
at  people  who  had  taken  the  lead.  But  these  leaders  saw 
nothing  from  the  elevation  to  which  they  had  climbed:  the 
forest  was  very  extensive  and  dense. 

However,  while  climbing  the  tree,  they  have  scratched  their 
faces,  wounded  the  feet,  spoiled  their  hands.  They  suffer, 
they  are  fatigued,  they  must  rest  themselves,  after  having 
fixed  a  comfortable  place  upon  the  tree.  It  is  true,  they  do 
nofUng  fiir  the  mmmon  good,  they  lunre diacovcred  noway, 
and  they  say  nothing.  Those  who  stand  beneath  them 
must,  without  their  aid,  dear  for  themaelves  a  road  through 
the  forest  But  who  wDl  dare  to  throw  a  stone  at  these  un- 
fortunate men  in  order  to  make  them  fall  down  from  their 
height  in  which  they  have  settled  after  such  difficulties» 
having  in  view  the  public  good  ?  They  have  the  sympathy 
of  the  others,  they  are  not  even  required  to  take  part  in  the 
clearing  of  the  forest;  another  work  fell  to  their  lot,  and  they 
did  it  If  it  led  to  nothing,  it  is  not  their  fault.  Every  one 
of  the  former  authors  could  look  at  his  Obl6mov  hero  from 
that  standpoint,  and  he  was  right.  To  this  was  also  added 
the  circumstance  that  the  hope  of  finding  a  way  out  from  the 
forest  upon  the  road  was  long  maintained  by  the  whole 
crowd  of  the  travellers,  just  as  their  confidence  was  long 
maintained  in  the  far-sightedness  of  the  leaders  who  had 
climbed  the  tree. 

But  by  degrees  the  affdr  beoomes  dearer,  and  it  takes  a 
difoent  turn.  The  leaders  have  taken  a  liking  to  the  tree: 
they  very  eloquently  discuss  the  ways  and  means  of  issuing 
from  the  bog  and  from  the  forest,  They  have  found  on  the 
tree  some  kind  of  fruit  which  they  enjoy,  after  throwing 
down  the  shdl.  They  invite  a  few  of  the  select  from  the 
crowd  to  come  to  them,  and  these  climb  up  and  stay  there, 
not  to  look  for  the  road,  but  to  eat  the  fruit  They  are  now 
Obl6movs  in  the  true  sense.  The  poor  travellers  who  stand 
below  sink  in  the  mire,  serpents  sting  them,  reptiles  frighten 

VOL.  n.— 18. 


1274         The  Nineteenth  Centuiy 


them,  and  brandies  strike  their  faces.  At  last,  the  crowd 
decides  to  be  doing  something,  and  want  to  get  back  those 
who  have  lately  climbed  the  tree;  but  the  Obl6movs  keep 
silent  and  glut  themselves  on  the  fruit.  Then  the  crowd 
turns  to  its  former  leaders  and  begs  them  to  come  down  and 
to  help  them  in  the  common  work.  But  the  leaders  again 
repeat  the  old  trite  phrases  that  it  is  necessary  to  find  the 
road,  but  that  it  is  useless  to  think  of  dearing  the  forest. 

It  is  then  that  the  poor  tntvellen  see  their  mistake,  and 
tnm  thdr  badcs  on  them  and  say:  "  Sore  enough,  you  axe 
aU  Obldmovs! "  And  thcybegin  to  work  with  a  vim  and 
without  caseation:  they  cat  down  the  trees*  make  a  bridge 
with  them  thiongh  the  bog,  lay  out  a  path,  kill  the  serpents 
and  reptiles  that  are  in  their  way,  and  no  longer  pay  any 
attention  to  those  dever  fdlows  with  their  strong  natures, 
those  Pecb6rins  and  Rfidins,  on  whom  tbey  had  all  their 
dependence  before  and  whom  they  so  admired.  At  first  the 
Obl6movists  look  calmly  at  the  common  movement,  but 
later,  as  is  their  wont,  they  lose  courage  and  begin  to  cry: 

"Oh,  oh!  Don't  do  that;  leave  oflf!"  they  cr>'  as  they 
notice  that  the  tree  upon  which  they  are  sitting  is  about  to 
be  cut  down.  "  Consider,  we  might  be  killed,  and  then 
there  will  perish  with  us  all  those  beautiful  ideas,  all  those 
elevated  sentiments,  all  those  humane  tendencies,  that  elo- 
quence, that  pathos,  that  love  for  everything  beautiful  and 
noble,  which  ever  lived  in  us.  Stop,  stop!  What  are  yon 
doing?'* 

But  the  travellers  have  heard  these  beautiM  phrsses  a 
thousand  times*  and  they  oontinne  their  wock,  without 
paying  any  attention  to  them.  The  Obldmovists  have  an- 
other chance  to  save  their  reputation:  let  them  dimb  down 
fiom  the  tree,  and  &11  in  with  the  work  of  the  others.  But, 
as  usual,  they  are  at  a  loss  what  to  do.  ' '  How  do  you  ex- 
pect  us  all  of  a  sudden  ?  "  they  repeat  in  despair,  and  they 
continue  to  hurl  their  futile  curses  against  the  stupid  crowd 
that  has  lost  respect  for  them. 

The  crowd,  however,  is  right.  If  it  has  become  consdous 
of  the  necessity  for  actual  work,  it  can  be  of  no  consequence 


Digitized  by  Google 


Nikoljiy  Aieksimdrovich  Dobrolyiibov  275 


to  it  whether  Pech6rin  stands  before  it,  or  Obldmov.  We 
do  not  assert  that  Pech6rin  would  act  in  the  given  ciicam- 
stanoes  precisely  like  Obldmov;  these  very  dicumatances 
cause  him  to  develop  in  an  entirely  dififereut  direction.  But 
the  tj'pes  which  a  mighty  genius  creates  are  lasting:  there 
are  even  now  some  men  living  who  represent,  so  to  say,  a 
chip  of  Ony^giu,  Pech6rin,  and  so  forth,  not  in  the  form  in 
which  they  might  have  developed  in  other  circumstances, 
but  just  exactly  as  they  are  represented  by  Ptjshkin,  L^r- 
montov,  and  Turg^nev.  But  in  the  social  consciousness 
they  are  evermore  changed  into  Obl6mov. 

It  cannot  be  aaid  that  this  change  is  already  accomplished: 
00^  ev«n  now  thousands  of  persons  axt  wasting  their  time 
in  taUdng,  and  thousands  of  otheis  are  ready  to  regard  this 
talking  as  work.  Bnt  that  this  transfonnation  is  beginning, 
is  proved  by  the  type  of  Obldmov  which  Goncfaar6v  has 
created.  Its  appearance  would  be  impossible,  if  the  con- 
victiom  had  not  grown  ripe  in  at  least  a  small  part  of  society 
that  those  quasi-talented  natures  that  caused  so  much  de- 
light in  former  days  are  quite  insignificant.  Formerly  they 
were  cloaked  by  all  kinds  of  mantles,  adorned  with  all  kinds 
of  coiffures,  and  they  attracted  to  themselves  by  all  kinds  of 
talents.  But  now  Obl6mov  appears  before  us  divested  of  his 
adornments,  just  as  he  is,  uncommunicative,  removed  from 
a  beautiful  pedestal  to  a  soft  divan,  covered  with  an  ample 
morning  robe,  instead  of  a  mantle.  The  question,  What  is 
he  doing  ?  Wherein  is  the  meaning  and  aim  of  his  life  ?  is 
put  directly  and  clearly,  and  it  is  not  obscured  by  side  ques- 
tions. This  is  so,  because  the  time  for  social  labour  has  at 
lastcomeor  is  justooming.  For  this  reason  we  say  that  we 
see  in  Gonchar6v's  novel  a  sign  of  the  time. 

Let  us,  indeed,  see  how  the  point  of  view  has  changed 
which  was  held  in  regard  to  those  cultivated  and  glib  aocum- 
bents  who  in  former  days  were  taken  for  real  sodal  workers. 

Here  is  before  yon  a  young  man;  he  is  very  handsome, 
agile,  and  cultured.  He  makes  his  entry  in  fashionable 
society  and  he  has  success  there.  He  drives  to  the  theatre, 
to  balls  and  masquerades;  he  dresses  and  dines  superbly;  he 


276         The  Nineteenth  Century 


leads  books  and  writes  ver>'  orthograpliically.  His  heart  is 
•gitaled  only  by  the  routiiie  of  fashionable  life,  but  he  has 
also  mo  id«i  about  higher  qneaUooSi  He  likes  to  talk  ol 
pasBionn 

Of  prejudices  centuries  old 

And  fateful  mysteries  of  the  tomb. 

He  has  a  few  honourable  rules;  be  is  capable 

Of  changing  to  light  tenant  pay 
The  yoke  of  old  manorial  labour; 

he  is  capable  of  not  taking  advantage  of  the  inexperience  of 
a  girl  whom  he  does  not  love;  he  Is  capable  of  not  aacribiug 
any  special  value  to  his  woridly  succcBsefl.  Hestandsso&r 
above  the  fashionable  society  whidi  snrnmnds  him  that  he 
has  arrived  at  the  ooaadoasness  of  its  inanity;  he  is  even 
able  to  leave  that  society  and  to  settle  in  the  ooontry;  only, 
not  knowing  what  work  to  find  for  himself,  time  weighs 
heavily  upon  him.  Having  nothing  to  do,  he  quarrels  with 
his  friend  and  frivolously  kills  him  in  a  duel.  A  few  years 
later  he  again  makes  his  appearance  in  society  and  falls  in 
love  with  a  woman  whose  love  he  himself  rejected  before, 
because  he  would  have  been  compelled  to  renounce  his  rov- 
ing life  for  her.  You  recognise  Onydgin  in  this  man.  But 
take  a  good  look  at  him :  it  is  Obl6mov. 

There  is  another  man  before  you,  with  a  more  passionate 
soul,  with  a  broader  egoism.  He  has,  as  it  were,  all  that 
by  nature  which  forms  an  object  of  care  to  Onyegin.  He 
does  not  worry  about  his  toilet  and  apparel;  he  is  a  man  of 
the  wodd  without  all  that.  He  does  not  need  to  pick  his 
words  and  to  ahine  with  his  tinsel  knowledge:  without  all 
that  hb  tongue  Is  as  sharp  as  a  rasor.  He  actually  deaplses 
men,  wdl  knowing  their  weaknesses;  he  reslly  knows  how. 
to  conquer  the  hearts  of  women,  not  for  a  sfaMt  moment;  but 
for  a  long  time,  often  for  ever.  Everything  that  hampeis 
his  way  he  knows  bow  to  remove  or  destroy.  He  has  only 
one  misfortune:  he  does  not  know  whither  to  go.  His  heart 


Digitized  by  Google 


Nikolay  Aleks^ndrovich  Dobrolydbov  277 


is  empty  and  cold  to  everything.  He  has  experienced  every- 
thing, and  even  while  a  young  man  all  pleaauiea  which  one 
can  get  fiar  money  palled  on  him;  he  alao  loathes  the  love  of 
worldly  heauties^  because  it  has  given  nothing  to  his  heart; 
he  is  tired  of  the  sciences,  because  he  sees  that  neither  glory 
nor  happiness  depend  upon  them»  that  ignoramuses  are  the 
h^piest  people*  and  that  glory  is  a  matter  of  success;  dan- 
gers of  war  soon  wearied  him,  because  he  saw  no  sense  in 
them  and  because  he  readily  got  used  to  them. 

In  fine,  even  the  sincere,  pure  love  of  a  country  girl  whom 
he  really  likes  annoys  him:  he  does  not  find  even  in  her  any 
satisfaction  for  his  impulses.  But  what  impulses  are  they  ? 
Whither  do  they  draw  him  ?  Why  does  he  not  g^ve  himself 
over  to  them  with  the  whole  power  of  his  soul  ?  It  is  be- 
cause he  himself  does  not  understand  them  and  does  not  take 
the  trouble  of  thinking  what  to  do  with  his  power  of  soul. 
So  he  passes  all  his  life  in  making  witticisms  at  the  expense 
of  fools,  in  disquieting  the  hearts  of  inexperienced  maidens, 
in  mixing  up  with  the  affairs  of  others'  hearts,  inviting 
brawls,  showing  bravado  in  trifles,  fighting  without  any 

provocation         You  recollect  that  this  is  the  histoiy  ci 

FechdriUy  that  with  almost  audi  words  he  explains  his  char- 
acter to  Matsftn  Maksfmydi.  Please,  do  take  a  good  look 
at  him:  you  wiU  see  Obl6mov  even  in  him. 

Here  is  another  man  who  walks  upon  his  path  with  greater 
sdf-consdousness.  He  not  only  understands  that  he  is  en- 
dowed with  greet  power,  but  he  also  knows  that  he  has  a 
great  purpose.  It  seems  he  even  suspects  what  that  ptirpose 
is  and  where  it  is  to  be  found.  He  is  noble,  honest,  though 
he  frequently  does  not  pay  his  debts;  he  discusses  with 
ardour  not  trifles,  but  higher  questions;  he  assures  us  that 
he  is  ready  to  sacrifice  himself  for  the  good  of  humanity.  In 
his  mind  all  questions  are  solved,  everything  is  brought  into 
a  living,  harmonious  connection ;  by  his  mighty  speech  he 
entices  inexperienced  youths  so  that,  hearing  him,  th^  feel 
that  they  have  been  called  to  something  great. 

Now,  what  does  he  spend  his  life  on?  On  beginning 
everything  and  not  finishing  it,  on  scattering  himself  in  all 


378         The  Nineteenth  Centuiy 


directions,  on  following  up  things  with  ardour,  without  ac- 
complishing them.  He  falls  in  love  with  a  girl  who  finally 
tells  him  that,  in  spite  of  her  mother's  prohibition,  she  is 
ready  to  belong  to  him;  whereat  he  answers:  *'  Heavens!  so 
your  mother  does  not  give  her  consent!  What  a  sudden 
shock!  lyord,  how  soon!  There  is  nothing  to  be  done, — 
we  must  submit."  And  that  is  a  real  picture  of  all  his  life. 
You  already  know  that  this  is  Rudin.  No,  that 's  again 
Obl6mov.  If  you  will  take  a  good  look  at  this  person,  and 
will  place  him  face  to  face  with  the  demands  of  contemporary 
life,  you  will  yourself  come  to  this  conclusion. 

All  these  people  have  tliis  in  oommon :  they  have  no  work 
in  life  as  tfadr  vital  neoesrity,  as  thair  hearfa  hoUnasa^  their 
religion,  that  might  organically  grow  up  with  them  ao  that 
to  deprive  them  of  it  would  mean  to  take  their  life  away. 
Everything  is  eztemal  with  them,  nothing  has  any  roots  in 
their  natnres.  They  may  be  doing  something  if  coaipeUed 
by  outward  necessity,  just  as  Obl6mov  made  calls  wherever 
Stolz  took  him,  bought  music  and  books  for  Olga,  and  read 
what  she  made  him  read.  Bttt  they  have  not  their  souls  in 
the  work  which  accident  imposes  upon  them.  If  they  were 
offered  gratis  all  the  external  comforts  which  their  labour 
gives  them,  they  would  gladly  turn  away  from  their  work. 
By  dint  of  his  Obl6movisni,  the  Obl6mov  official  will  stop 
going  to  his  ofl5ce,  if  that  would  not  interfere  with  getting 
his  salary  and  his  promotions.  The  warrior  will  make  a 
vow  not  to  touch  his  arms,  if  he  is  offered  the  same  con- 
ditions, pro\4ded  they  permit  him  also  to  keep  his  beautiful 
uniform  which  is  very  useful  upon  certain  occasions.  The 
professor  1HII  abandon  his  lectures,  the  student  his  stndieSk 
the  writer  his  authorship,  the  actor  will  not  appear  on  the 
stage,  the  artist  will  break  his  chisel  or  his  palette,  to  express 
myself  in  eloquent  style,  if  they  can  see  their  way  of  obtain- 
ing for  nothing  that  which  th^  now  get  by  woik. 

They  talk  of  higher  aims,  of  the  consdousness'  of  mors! 
obligations,  of  being  imbued  with  the  interests  of  society, — 
but  investigate  it  all,  and  you  will  find  that  it  is  nothing 
but  words  and  words.  Their  sincerest,  most  heartfelt  aim 


Digitized  by  Google 


NikoUy  Aleks&ndrovich  Dobrolytibov  ^79 


is  their  aim  for  rest,  for  the  morning  gown,  and  their  very 
activity  is  nothing  dae  hot koMmroNe  mamii^gotm  (the 
expression  does  not  belong  to  me),  with  which  they  cover 
their  inanity  and  apathy.  Even  the  most  cultivated  people, 
such  as  possess  a  vivid  nature  and  a  warm  heart,  in  practical 
life  very  easily  depart  from  their  ideas  and  plans,  very  readily 
make  their  peace  with  the  reality  that  surrounds  them, 
though  they  do  not  cease  speaking  of  it  as  low  and  contempt- 
ible. This  means  that  everything  of  which  tliey  speak 
and  dream  is,  in  their  case,  foreign  and  external;  but  in  the 
depth  of  their  soul  is  rooted  one  dream,  one  ideal, — a  most 
undisturbed  rest,  quietism,  Obl6movism.  Many  go  even  so 
far  as  not  to  be  able  to  imagine  a  man  working  for  the  love 
of  it|  finm  predilection—— 

 ^If  I  now  see  a  landed  proprietor  diacoasing  the  rights 

of  humanity  and  the  necessity  for  the  devdopment  of  the 
individual, — I  know  from  Ids  first  words  that  he  is  an 
Obl6aiov. 

If  I  meet  an  official  who  complains  of  the  intricacy  and 

laboriousness  of  the  official  routine, — he  is  an  Obl6mov. 

If  I  hear  from  an  officer  tirades  on  the  weariness  of  parades 
and  bold  discussions  of  the  uselessness  of  slow  steps,  etc.,  I 
have  no  doubt  that  he  is  an  Obl6mov. 

When  I  read  in  the  periodicals  liberalising  sallies  against 
malfeasance,  and  expressions  of  joy  that  at  last  that  which 
we  have  been  hoping  and  wishing  for  has  been  done, — I 
think  that  these  must  be  correspondences  from  Obloraovka. 

When  I  am  in  a  circle  of  cultivated  people  who  feel  warmly 
for  the  needs  of  humanity  and  who  for  a  series  of  years  have 
with  undiminished  zeal  been  telling  the  same  anecdotes,  or 
at  times  even  new  ones,  about  bribe-takers,  about  oppres- 
sions, about  illegalities  of  all  kinds, — I  involuntarily  feel 
that  I  am  transferred  to  old  Obl6movka. 

Stop  these  people  in  their  noisy  disputations  and  say  to 
them:  **  You  say  that  so  and  so  is  wrong;  well,  what  is  to 
be  done?"  They  do  not  know.  Propose  the  simplest 
means  to  them,  and  they  will  say:  "  But  pray,  why  so  sud- 
denly?" You  may  be  sure  tliey  will  say  that,  because 


28o         The  Nineteenth  Century 


Obl6iiiov8  cumot  speak  otherwise.  Continue  your  conversa- 
tion with  them  and  ask  them:  "What  do  you  intend  todo?'' 
They  will  give  you  the  same  answer  which  Rddin  gave  to 
Natdlya:  "  What  is  to  be  done  ?  Of  course,  submit  to  fate. 
What  is  to  be  done?    I  know  too  well  bow  bitter,  how 

hard  and  intolerable  it  is,  but  judge  yourself"  and  so 

forth.  You  will  get  nothing  else  out  of  them,  because  upon 
all  of  them  is  the  stamp  of  Obl6movism. 

Who  will,  at  last,  stir  them  from  the  spot  with  the  almighty 
word  "  Forwards!  "  of  which  G6gol  has  <ireamed  so  much 
and  for  which  Russia  has  been  waiting  so  long  and  so  yearn- 
ingly? Sofiur  there  is  no  answer  to  this  question,  ndtlier 
in  society,  nor  in  literatoie.  Gonchai6v,  who  knew  how  to 
grasp  and  represent  to  us  onr  OU6movism,  cocdd  not  hdp 
paying  his  txibnte  totfae  universal  delusion  which  still  holds 
strong  sway  over  our  society;  he  decided  to  bury  Obl6niovism 
and  to  hold  a  funeral  sermon  over  it  "  Farewell,  old  Ob- 
l6movka,  you  have  lived  your  day,"  he  says  with  the  lips  of 
Stolz,  bnt  he  tells  an  untruth.  All  Russia  that  has  read  or 
will  read  Obl6mov  will  not  agree  with  it.  No,  Obl6movka 
is  our  real  country;  its  owners  are  our  educators,  its  three 
hundred  Zdkhars  are  ever  ready  for  our  services.  In  every 
one  of  us  there  is  a  goodly  part  of  Obl6niov,  and  it  is  still 
too  early  to  write  the  inscription  on  our  tomb. 

iTftn  SergTtevich  Turgtaer.  (Z818-Z883.) 

Tnrg^nev  it  the  OMMt  noted  of  the  novelists  who  began  theh  liter- 
■fy  cafc«r  in  the  fbftiet.  He  was  brought  vp  ia  the  cstrte  of  hit 

fiUher,  in  the  Government  of  Or^l.  His  early  impressions  were  ex- 
tremely unpleasant :  his  father  belonged  to  the  brutal  type  of  the  old 
landed  proprietors,  and  his  mother  developed,  after  the  death  of  her 
husband,  similar  repellent  characteristics.  Thus  Tnrg^ev,  who  was 
htoMelf  pewewed  of  a  toll  and  refined  nature,  received  ao  early  Uai 
against  the  whole  institution  of  serfdom.  In  1833  Turg^nev  entered 
the  St.  PetershurK  University,  and  five  years  later  he  went  to  Berlin 
to  finish  his  education.  lie  had  tried  writing  poetry  before,  but  he 
met  with  little  success.  Upon  his  return  to  Russia  he  wrote  Bards /u^, 
a  wxnSL  in  verse,  in  iHiidi  the  Romantie  incident  of  the  atoiy  ia 
tempered  by  a  goodly  admixture  of  realism.  It  at  once  attracted  at- 
tention, and  Tug^ev  waa  fairly  laanchcd  into  Utcfitare.  Bnt  he 


Ivftn  Sergy^cvich  Turgdnev  281 


becaine  a  power  in  literature  only  at  the  end  of  tlie  forties  when  he 
began  to  publish  his  series  of  sketches  from  the  life  of  the  peasants 
under  the  name  of  Memoirs  of  a  Hunter:  their  effect  was  tremend- 
oos:  it  was  the  fint  time  that  the  public  read  sympathetic  stories 
abont  the  serft,  and  thej  did  a  great  deal  to  hasten  the  emaadpation. 
The  government  looked  awiy  at  this  tendency  of  Torg^nev's  novels, 
and  when  he,  in  1852,  wrote  a  eulogistic  essay  on  G6gol,  who  bad  just 
died,  he  was  banished  to  his  estate.  Upon  his  release,  he  went  abroad 
where  he,  with  short  interruptious,  passed  the  rest  of  his  days.  Then 
fUlowed  timt  aeries  <»f  brilliaBt  novds,  DMUH  RMk^  FMUt,  A 
Nesti^dntU/olk,  which  made  him  famous  throngbont  Barope.  la 
1862  appeared  his  Fathers  and  Sons.  In  this  novel  he  attempted  to 
give  a  picture  of  the  new  tendencies  in  Russian  society.  But  he  had 
been  too  long  away  from  Russian  surroundings,  and  so  he  has  been 
Uamed  for  not  having  grasped  the  positive  chaneteristics  of  the 
younger  generation.  His  later  prodiictioiia  are  tinged  by  pcssimiim, 
which  finds  its  most  pronounced  expression  in  his  Poems  in  Prose. 

The  following  translations  of  Turg^nev's  works  have  been  pub- 
lished: After  Death,  iu  Modern  Age,  1883.  Annals  of  a  Sportsman, 
cstfidt  la  Photographs  from  Jlussum  Life,  in  Fraser's  Magsaine, 
and  in  Gtaluun't  li^gwiaei  1954;  Hmstkm  Life  im  ike  Intent, 
London,  1S55;  Annals  of  a  Sportsman,  translated  from  the  French 
by  F.  P.  Abbott  (Leisure  Hour  Series,  No.  164),  New  York,  1885 ; 
Tales  from  the  Note-book  of  a  Sportsman,  translated  by  E.  Richter, 
London,  1895.  AMickar,  in  Galaxy,  1873.  Asya,  under  title 

As^  in  Oalazy,  1877;  AmtumdkkOt  translated  ttom  the  Fl«ncli  by 
F.  P.  Abbott,  Boston,  1884,  Daug^hter  of  Russia,  translated  byG. 
W.  Scott  (Seaside  Library),  New  York,  1882.  Desperate,  in  Cosmo- 
politan, 1888.  Dimitn  Roudine  (Leisure  Hour  Series),  New  York, 
1873  (reprinted  from  Every  Saturday,  1873).  The  Dream,  in  Home> 
Jomrnal,  1878.  Flaihen  and  Sms,  translated  by  B.  Sdrayler,  New 
York,  1867,  London,  1888,  and  (Lcbore  Hour  Series  and  Seaside 
Library)  New  York,  1883 ;  Fathers  and  Children,  New  York,  1883. 
Faust,  in  Galaxy,  1872.  First  Love,  and  Punin  and  Baburin,  trans- 
lated by  S.  Jerrold,  London,  18S4.  Hamlet  and  Don  Quixote,  translated 
by  J.  Kfdl  and  P.  IHudfk,  in  Poet  Lofe,  vol.  The  Idioi,  tondoo, 
1887,  and  in  Temple  Bar,  187a  A  Leaf  of  the  Steppes,  in  London 
Society,  and  in  Living  Age,  1873  ;  Nobleman  of  the  Steppes,  in  Scrib- 
ner's  Monthly,  1R77.  The  Lixnngr  ATummy,  in  Scribner's  Monthly, 
1876.  Liza,  translated  b>'  W.  R.  S.  Ralston,  London,  1869  and  1884, 
■nd  Ifew  Yotk,  1873.  Mmmm^  and  Diary  of  a  Superfimus  Mam, 
trsndoted  by  B.  Oenonl,  New  Yofk,  1884.  Hovels  (oontainiag 
DimUri  Jiomdinef— Fathers  and  Sons,  translated  by  E.  Schuyler, 
Ziitf,  tnnalaled  by  Ralston,  Om  the  Eve,  by  Toroer,  Smoke,  by 


282         The  Nineteenth  Centuiy 


West,  Spring-floods,  by  S.  M.  T?utt55,  A  Leaf  of  the  Steppes,  by  W,  H. 
Browne),  6  vols..  New  York,  1874-5.  On  the  Eve,  translated  by  C. 
E.  Turner,  London,  187 1,  and  New  York,  1873,  JPoetHS  in  ProUt 
Boitoii,  X873 ;  Stmiktt  Btems  m  Jime,  in  MacHiUaii't  Magazine,  toL 
xluK,  1887,  and  Bdectic  MagBdac,  ^  di,  1887 ;  Seuilia,  I\)ems  im 
Prose,  translated  by  S.  J.  Macmullan,  Bristol,  [1890].  The  PrtesVs 
Son,  in  Lippincott's,  1877.  Punin  and  Baburin,  translated  by  G.  W, 
Scott  (Seaside  Library),  New  York,  1882.  The  Ruffian  (?)  (Overland 
Library,  No.  13),  New  Vock,  z88-w  Smoke,  or.  Life  mt  JBMem,  Lon- 
don, 1868;  Smoke^  tnndatad  from  Uie  Fk<aich,  by  W.  P.  West,  New 
York,  1873.  and  London,  1883.  Soi^  qf  THumphant  Love  (Settide 
Library),  New  York,  1883.  The  Sorcerer,  in  Appleton's  1870;  under 
title  How  Russians  meet  Death,  in  Temple  Bar,  and  in  Living 
Age,  1887.  Spring  Floods,  tnuuUted  by  E.  Richter,  London,  1896. 
Sinmge  Admmimt  of  Lin$i,  Yergumof^  to  Golezy,  1877.  ToUsfrom 
a  Stormy  Night,  New  York,  189I.  TTiire  Meetings,  in  Lippincott's, 
1875.  An  Unfortunate  JVoman,  also  Assya,  translated  by  H.  Ger- 
soni  (Standard  Library,  No.  142),  New  York,  1886 ;  The  Unfortunate 
Ontt  truitlmted  by  A.  R.  Thompson,  London,  1888.  Vassilissa,  in 
Romance,  189a.  Virgin  SoU,  trandated  from  the  Frendi  by  T.  S. 
Perry  (Leisure  Hour  Series),  New  York,  1877,  and  London,  1883— 
translated  by  A.  W.  Dilke,  London,  1878  and  1879.  Visions,  in  Gal- 
axy, 1872,  and  in  Comhill,  and  Living  Age,  1880.  The  Watch,  in 
Lippincott's,  1876,  and  in  The  Bridal  March,  from  the  Norwegian  of 
BjSrmoa,  and  The  Wokk^  translated  by  J.  B.  VHlliama,  London, 
1893.  Works  (containing  Dimitri  Roudine,  Fathers  and  Sons,  Lioa» 
Smoke,  and  Virgin  Soil),  5  vols.,  London,  1889.  There  is  also  a 
complete  set  of  his  Works,  translated  from  the  Russian  by  Mis. 
Garnett,  London,  and  New  York,  1894-99. 

FROM  "FATHERS  AND  SONS" 

 ^AxUidi  stepped  towards  bis  tinde,  and  ht  tmat  mast 

fdt  the  touch  of  his  perfttmed  mottsladie  tipoo  his  own 
cheeks.  Pdvei  Petr6vich  iMsted  hunself  at  the  taUe.  He 
was  dressed  in  an  elegant  moming  gown  after  the  Bnglish 
&shioo;  his  head  was  embellished  by  a  small  lies.  This  fez 
and  the  carelessly  tied  neckeidiief  hinted  of  the  freedom  of 
country  life;  but  the  stiff  ccdlar  of  the  shirt,  which  was  not 
white,  but  coloured,  as  is  proper  for  the  moming  toilet, 
stuck  with  customary  inezocability  against  the  clean-shaven 
chin. 


Iv4n  Sergydevich  Turginev  283 


*' Where  !fl  your  new  frfend?"  lie  adced  Atlidi. 

"  He  is  not  at  home.  He  generally  rises  eariy  and  goes 
away.  The  main  thing  is^  not  to  pay  any  attention  to  him: 
he  does  not  like  ceremonies." 

"  Yesi  that  is  evident."  Pdvel  Peti6vich  began  leisurely 
to  spread  some  butter  on  his  bread.  "  Is  he  going  to  stay 
here  long?" 

"  That  depends.  He  has  stopped  here  on  bis  way  to  his 

father's." 

**  Where  does  his  father  live  ?  " 

**  In  our  Government,  some  eighty  versts  from  here.  He 
has  a  small  estate  there.    He  used  to  be  an  army  surgeon." 

"  Well,  well,  well !  That 's  why  I  kept  on  asking  myself: 
'Where  have  you  heard  that  name  Baz&rov'  ?  Nikoldy,  it 
seems  to  me  there  was  a  surgeon  by  the  name  of  Bazirov  in 
papa's  division." 

"  I  think  there  was." 

"That 's  right  So  that  sturgeon  is  his  lather.  Hml " 
PAvelPetrdvich  smoothed  his  moostsches.  "Wdl»andHr. 
B^baiov  himself^  what  is  he?"  asked  he  with  ddiberation. 

"What  Bdzarov  is?"  Arkddi  smiled.  "If  yon  want, 
nnde,  I  '11  tdl  yoo  what  he  really  is." 

'*  Do  me  the  favour,  dear  nephew." 

"  He  is  a  nihilist." 

"  What?  "  asked  Nikol&y  Petr6vich,  and  P4vel  Petr6vich 
raised  up  his  knive  with  a  piece  of  butter  at  the  end  of  the 

blade,  and  remained  immovable. 

"  He  is  a  nihilist,"  repeated  Arkddi. 

"  Nihilist,"  muttered  Nikoldy  Petr6vich.  "  That  is  from 
the  Latin  nihil,  nothing,  so  far  as  I  can  judge;  consequently 
that  word  designates  a  man  who  —  who  acknowledges  no- 
thing?" 

"  Say,  who  respects  nothing,"  Pdvel PetrMch interrupted 
him,  starting  again  to  spread  his  butter. 

"  Wholooksateverythlngfrom  the  critical  point  of  view," 
xemarked  Arkidi. 

"Is  not  that  the  same?"  asked  Pdvel  Petr6vich. 

"  No,  not  the  same.  A  nihilist  is  a  man  who  bows  to  no 


Digitized  by  Google 


284         The  Nineteenth  Centuiy 


authorities,  who  accepts  not  a  single  principle  on  faith,  no 
matter  with  what  respect  that  principle  be  surounded." 

And  do  you  call  that  good?"  Pdvel  Petr6vich  inter- 
rupted. 

"  It  depends,  uncle.  It 's  good  for  some,  and  very  bad 
for  others." 

"  I  declare.  Well,  that,  I  see,  is  beyond  us.  We  are  of 
the  older  generation;  we  assume  that  without  principles 
(PAvel  Petr6vich  pronoanced  this  woid  softly,  in  the  Ftadi 
ladiioii,  Arkidi,  cm  the  oontrary,  pnmocuioed  It  hard,  with 
a  decided  accent  on  the  first  qrUshile),  withont  priadples 
taken,  as  yoa  say,  on  faith,  it  is  impossible  to  take  ft  step, 
or  breathe.  Vims  aveM  dumgi  tomi  eda,  God  grant  yoa 
health  and  the  rank  of  general,*  but  we  shall  only  take 

pleasure  in  looking  at  yon,  gentlemen  ^what  do  you  call 

them?" 

"  Nihilists,"  Arkddi  said  distinctly. 

"Yes.  Formerly  there  used  to  be  Hegelists,  and  now 
there  are  nihilists.  Let  us  see  how  you  are  going  to  exist 
in  the  vacuum,  in  an  airless  space.  But  now,  please  ring 
the  bell,  brother  Nikoldy  Petr^vich;  it  is  time  for  me  to 
drink  my  cocoa. ' ' 

 For  .some  moments  silence  reigned  upon  the  terrace. 

P&vd  Petr6vich  sipped  his  cocoa,  and  then  he  suddenly 
raised  his  head. 

"There  is  the  mhiliat  coming  to  honour  ns  with  his 
presence,**  he  said  half  aloud. 

There  was  really  Baz^bov,  crossing  the  beds  in  the  garden. 
His  linen  ulster  and  trowaeiB  were  smeared  with  mud;  a 
prickly  swamp  plant  surrounded  the  band  of  his  old  round 
hat;  in  his  right  hand  he  held  a  small  bag,  and  in  the  bag 
were  crawling  living  things.  He  rapidly  approached  the 
terrace  and  said,  nodding:  "  Good- morning,  gentlemen! 
Excuse  me  for  being  late  to  tea.  I  shall  be  back  at  once;  I 
just  want  to  find  a  place  for  my  captives. ' ' 

"  What  have  you  there,  leeches  ?  "  asked  Pdvel  Petrdvich. 

*'No,  frogs." 

'  See  page  98,  line  aS. 


Ivin  Sergydevich  Tuiginev  285 


"  Do  you  eat  them  or  raise  them  ?  " 
'*  For  ezperimoiti^**  indifferently  aniviered  Baztonr  and 
went  into  the  house. 

"  You  see,  he  is  going  to  cut  them  up,"  remarked  P&vel 
Petr6vich.   '  *  He  does  not  believe  in  principles,  but  in  frogs. ' ' 

Arkddi  looked  with  pity  at  his  uncle,  and  Nikoldy  Petr6- 
vich  stealthily  shrugged  his  shoulders.  Pdvel  Petibvich  felt 
himself  that  he  had  made  an  infelicitous  remark,  and  began 
to  talk  about  the  estate  and  the  new  manager  who  had  come 
to  him  a  few  days  before  to  complain  of  Fomd's  having  be- 
come useless  on  account  of  his  reckless  ways. 

 Bazirov  returned,  seated  himself  at  the  table,  and  be- 
gan hastily  to  drink  his  tea.  Both  broChen  looked  at  him 
in  silence,  and  Ark^  threw  stealthy  glances,  now  upon  his 
fiither,  now  ttpon  his  uncle. 

"  Did  yon  have  a  long  tnmp?"  finally  adeed  Nikol&y 
Peti6vich* 

"  You  have  a  small  swamp  near  the  aspen  grove.  I  there 
scared  up  amne  five  snipes.  Ariciuli,  you  '11  have  some  shoot- 
ing there." 

"  Are  3roa  not  a  hunter  ?  " 

"  No." 

"  I  understand  your  Specialty  is  physics?  "  asked  FivfSL 
Petr6vich  in  his  turn. 

*'  Yes,  physics;  natural  sciences  in  general." 

*'  They  say  the  Teutons  have  of  late  made  great  progress 
in  this  field." 

"Yes,  the  Germans  are  in  this  our  teachers,"  Bazdrov 
answered  carelessly. 

Fdvel  Petr6vich  had  used  the  wocd  Teutons,  instead  of 
Gennansi  in  irony,  but  no  one  took  notice  of  it. 

"  Have  yon  such  a  high  qprnion  of  the  Germans?"  spoke 
Pdvel  Petr6vich  with  affected  politeness.  '  He  began  to  fed 
a  secret  irritatioa.  Baztfrov's  extreme  plainness  ruffled  his 
aristocratic  nature.  That  son  of  a  surgeon  notonly  was  not 
abashed,  but  he  answered  abruptly  and  as  if  against  his 
will,  and  in  the  sound  of  his  voice  there  was  something 
harab»  nay,  impudent. 


I 


Digiiized  by  Google 


286         The  Nineteenth  Century 


"  Their  learned  men  are  a  fine  lot." 
"  Yes,  yes.    Well,  I  suppose,  you  have  not  the  same  flat- 
tering conception  of  the  Russian  savants.'* 
**  I  guess  you  are  right." 

*'  That  is  a  very  laudable  self-abnegation,"  retorted  Pdvel 
Petr6vich,  straightening  himself,  and  throwing  his  head 
back.  "  But  how  is  it  Arkidi  NikolAevidi  told  a  little 
while  ago  that  you  did  not  admowledge  any  anthorities? 
Do  yon  not  believe  them  ?  " 

"Why  ahoold  I  acknowledge  them?  And  what  diould  I 
bdiere?  If  I  am  told  a  fact,  I  agree  with  it,  that 'a  all.*' 

"  Do  the  Gennana  always  tell  fi^ts  ?  "  spoke  Pdvel  Petx6- 
vich,  and  his  face  assumed  a  disinterested,  distant  cxpgeasion, 
just  as  if  he  had  setired  to  some  cloudy  height. 

"  Not  all,"  answered  Baz&rov  with  a  slight  yawn,  evi- 
dently not  wishing  to  continue  the  discussion. 

Pdvel  Petr6vich  looked  at  ArkMi,  as  if  to  tell  him:  "I 
must  say,  your  friend  is  a  polite  chap." 

*'  As  for  me,"  he  spoke  again  with  some  effort,  "I,  sinful 
man,  am  not  particularly  fond  of  the  Germans.  Not  to  men- 
tion the  Russian  Germans:  we  all  know  what  kind  of  birds 
they  are.  But  I  cannot  stomach  even  the  German  Ger- 
mans. Those  of  the  former  generations  were  not  half  so 
bad;  they  tlMn  liad,  well,  a  Schiller,  or  let  us  aay,  a  Qoethe 

 Brodier  thinks  quite  favonnbly  of  them.    But  now 

there  is  such  a  procession  of  chemists  and  materialists  over 

"  A  decent  diemist  is  twenty  times  more  useful  than  any 
poet,'*  Bazdrov  interrupted  him. 

"Indeed!"  spoke  P&vel  Petr6vich,  barely  raising  his 
eyebrows,  as  if  falling  asleep.  * '  So  you  do  not  adknowledge 

art?" 

"  The  art  to  make  money,  or  no  more  hemorrhoidsl "  ex- 
claimed Bazirov  with  a  contemptuous  smile. 

"Yes,  yes.  How  you  please  yourself  to  jest!  So  yon 
deny  all  that  ?   Very  well.    So  you  believe  only  in  science  ? ' ' 

"  I  have  already  reported  to  you  that  I  believe  in  nothing. 
What  is  science  anyway,  science  in  general  ?   There  are 


ly&a  Sergyeevich  Turg^nev  3S7 


adences,  as  tliere  are  trades  and  pfoleflnoos;  but  adenoe  in 

general  does  not  exist  at  all !  " 

"Very  well,  sir.  Well,  and  do  you  assume  the  same 
negative  attitude  iu  regard  to  all  the  other  institatkms,  gen- 
erally accepted  in  human  existence  ? " 

**  What  is  this,  an  inquest  ?  "  asked  Bazdrov. 

Pdvel  Petr6vich  grew  slightly  pale.  Nikolay  Petr6vich 
thought  it  necessary  to  take  part  in  the  conversation. 

**  We  will  discuss  this  matter  more  thoroughly  some  other 
time,  dear  Evg6ni  Vasflich;  we  shall  then  get  your  view, 
and  we  shall  tell  you  ours.  I,  for  my  part,  am  very  glad  to 
liear  that  you  busy  yowMlf  iviih  the  nfttnnl  adcnoea.  I 
have  heaxd  that  Llebig  has  made  some  remarkable  diaoov- 
eries  in  rogaid  to  the  fertiliflation  of  the  fidda*  Yon  could 
aid  me  in  nqr  agronomic  work  by  giving  me  some  nsefnl 
advice.** 

"  I  am  at  your  service^  Nikoldy  Petr6vidi;  but  what  busi- 
ness have  we  with  Liebig  ?  W^e  must  first  learn  the  ABC, 
and  then  we  may  take  to  books;  we  have  not  yet  put  our 

eyes  on  A." 

"I  should  say  you  are  a  nihilist,"  thought  Nikoldy 
Petr6vich.  "  Still,  let  me  in  case  of  necessity  have  recourse 
to  you,"  he  added  aloud.  "  But  for  the  present,  brother,  I 
think  it  is  time  for  us  to  go  and  have  a  talk  with  the 
steward." 

Pdvel  Petr6vich  rose  from  his  chair. 

"  Yes,"  he  said,  without  looking  at  anyone,  "  it  is  a  mis- 
fortune to  live  five  years  in  the  country,  away  from  great 
minds!  You  will  just  become  a  round  fooL  Yon  are  trying 
not  to  focget  what  you  have  learned,  and,  before  yon  know 
it,  it  turns  out  that  it  is  all  nonsense,  and  yon  are  told  that 
clever  people  no  longer  bnqr  themsdves  with  sodi  trifles^ 
and  that  yon,  sir,  axe  an  old-fashioned  night-cap.  What  is 
to  be  done?  It  seems  the  yonnger  generation  is  really 
more  dever  than  we  are." 

Pdvel  Petr6vich  slowly  turned  upon  his  heels  and  walked 
away  leisurely.   Nikoldy  Petr6vich  went  after  him. 

'*Say,  is  he  always  that  way?"  Bazdrov  coolly  asked 


288 


The  Nineteenth  Centuiy 


Arkddi,  when  the  door  was  dosed  behind  the  two 
brothers. 

*'  Listen,  Evg^ni,  you  have  treated  him  altogether  too 
brusquely,"  remarked  Arkddi.    "  You  have  offended  him." 

**  I  am  not  going  to  pamper  these  county  aristocrats!  It 
is  with  them  nothing  but  egotism,  manners  of  society  lions, 
dandyism !  Well,  he  ought  to  have  oontiiiiMd  lib  activitiet 

in  St  Fetmburg,  if  he  Is  built  that  way   However, 

God  be  with  him!  I  have  foond  a  fiurly  rare  apeeimen  of  a 
water  httfOitt^PysHms  nuvginaiuSt  do  you  know  it?  I  '11 
show  it  to  youl " 

 They  began  to  talk  about  one  of  the  landowners  of 

the  neighbonrhood. 

"  A  scoundrel,  a  snob  of  an  aristocrat/'  calmly  lemarked 
Bazdrov  who  had  met  him  in  St.  Petersburg. 

' '  Permit  me  to  ask  you, ' '  began  Pdvel  Petr6vich,  and  his 
lips  quivered,  *'  according  to  your  conception,  the  words 
'scoundrel'  and  'aristocrat'  mean  one  and  the  same  thing  ?  " 

*' I  said  'snob  of  an  aristocrat,'"  remarked  Baziiov, 
lazily  sipping  his  tea. 

*'Just  so.  But  I  suppose  you  are  of  the  same  opinion 
about  aristocrats,  as  you  are  about  snobs.  I  regard  it  my 
duty  to  inform  you  that  I  do  not  share  that  opinion  of  yours. 
I  dare  say,  I  am  known  as  a  liberal  man  and  one  who  loves 
progress,  and  It  la  for  that  very  reaaon  that  I  leapeet  aristo- 
ornts^  that  la,  real  axistocrati.  Remember,  dear  sir"  (at 
these  words  Bazdnnr  turned  his  eyes  to  PAvd  Petrdvich), 
"remember,  dear  dr,"  he  repeated  with  acrimony,  "the 
English  aristocrats.  They  do  not  yield  an  iota  from  their 
privileges,  and  therefore  tli^  reject  the  rights  of  others. 
They  demand  the  fulfilment  of  obligations  towards  them, 
and  therefore  they  fulfil  their  own  obligations.  The  aristoc- 
racy gave  fingland  ita  freedom,  and  the  aristocracy  supports 
it." 

**  We  have  heard  that  old  song  before,"  rallied  Baz&rov. 
"  But  what  do  you  wish  to  prove  by  it  ?  " 

"I  wish  to  prove  by  that  there  thing,  dear  sir  "  (when  Pdvel 
Petr6vich  got  angry,  he  purposely  said  "  that  there"  and 


Digitized  by  Google 


Iv4n  Sergytevich  Turg6nev  289 


"  this  here,"  although  he  knew  full  well  that  grammar  did 
not  permit  any  such  forms.  In  this  oddity  one  might  per- 
ceive a  reminiscence  of  the  traditions  of  the  days  of  Alexan- 
der I.  The  somebodies  of  those  days  were  in  the  habit  of 
using  "  that  there  "  and  "  that  yer,"  in  the  rare  cases  when 
they  spoke  their  native  language,  as  much  as  to  say:  '*  We 
are  native  Russes,  and  at  the  same  time  dignitaries,  who 
have  a  right  to  disdain  scholastic  rules  "  I  wish  to  prove 
by  that  there  thing  that  without  the  feeling  of  one's  own  dig- 
nity, without  respect  to  oneself,— and  in  an  aristocrat  these 
feelings  are  developed,  ^there  Is  no  secnie  foundation  of  so- 
€^s!by~-Hem  pubUc--^  social  structure.  IndlvidnaUty,  dear 
sir,— that  Is  the  nain  thing:  hunan  individuality  must  he 
as  stpoog  as  a  xock,  for  everything  rests  upon  It.  I  know 
very  well,  that  you  please  yoursdf  to  find  my  habita,  my 
toilet,  in  fine,  my  cleanliness,  ridiculous,  but  it  all  flows 
from  my  feeling  of  self-respect,  from  my  feeling  of  duty,  yes, 
air,  yes,  sir — duty.  I  am  living  in  the  country,  in  the  wilder- 
ness, but  I  do  not  let  myself  fall — I  respect  the  man  in  me." 

"  Pennit  me  to  say,  Pdvel  Petr6vich,'*  spoke  Bazdrov, 
'*  you  claim  to  respect  yourself,  and  yet  yoM  sit  with  folded 
hands;  what  good  is  that  to  the  bini  public?  It  would  be 
better,  if  you  respected  yourself  less,  and  did  more." 

Pdvel  Petr6vich  grew  pale.  "  That  is  an  entirely  different 
question.  It  is  not  my  duty  to  explain  to  you  now,  why  I 
am  sitting  with  folded  hands,  as  you  please  to  express  your- 
self. I  only  want  to  say  that  ^arigtocratisi^is  a  principle, 
and  In  our  days  only  immoral  ioA.  brainless  people  can  live 
without  princli»les.  I  told  Afk4di  so  on  the  next  day  after 
bis,  arrival,  and  I  repeat  it  to  yon.  Am  I  not  right, 
NIkoIdy?" 

Nikoldy  Petr6vidi  nodded  bis  bead. 

"  Aristocratism,  liberalism,  progress,  principles,'*  Bazdrov 
was  saying  in  the  meantime.  ' '  Just  think  how  many  foreign 
and  useless  wofda!  A  good  Ruaaian  would  not  take  them 
gratis." 

"  Then  what  does  he  want,  according  to  you  ?  lyistening 
to  you,  one  might  conclude  that  we  are  living  beyond  the 

VOL.  tti^t^. 


290         The  Nineteenth  Centuiy 


pale  of  humanity,  beyond  iu  laws.  Why,  sir,  the  logic  of 
history  demands  '* 

"  What  do  you  want  to  do  with  that  logic  ?  We  are  get- 
ting  along  without  it." 

•*  How  so  ? " 

"  We  just  do.  I  hope  you  do  not  need  any  logic  in  order 
to  put  a  piece  of  bread  into  your  mouth,  when  you  are 
hungry.   What  good  to  tis  are  all  these  abstractions  ?  " 

Fivd  FetrMdi  waved  his  hands. 

"  After  that  I  do  not  undtntand  you.  Yon  iamilt  the 
Kiissian  nation.  I  can't  nndentand  how  one  can  ftil  to  ac- 
knowledge piindpks  and  rules!  By  dint  of  what  do  yon  act?*' 

"  I  told  yott  before,  node,  that  we  do  not  acknowledge 
any  authorities/'  interposed  Arkddi. 


"  We  act  by  dint  of  what  we  regard  as  nsefiJ,"  spoke 
BaxAmv,  **  At  the  present  time  the  most^ns^i  thing  is 
jiggatifliu-^vs.Qmte. '  * 


"Everything?^ 
"Everything!" 

"What?   Not  only  art,  poetry-: — but  it  is  terrible 

to  say  it  " 

**  Everything,"  repeated  Bazdrov  with  inexpressible  calm. 

Pdvel  Petr6vich  stared  at  him.  He  had  not  expected 
that,  while  Arkddi  even  blushed  with  joy. 

*'  But  permit  me  to  ask  you,"  again  said  Pdvel  Petr6vicb, 
"you  deny  everything,  or,  to  express  myself  more  correctly, 
yon  destroy  evaything— but  is  it  not  neeessaiy  to  build  up 
again?" 

"That  is  not  oar  affiur.  First,  the  place  has  to  be 
deared." 

"  The  contemporary  condition  of  the  people  demands  it," 
Arkldi  added  with  dignity.  "  We  must  execute  these  de- 
mands; we  have  no  right  to  devote  onrselves  to  the  satis- 
faction of  our  personal  egotism." 

This  last  phrase  evidently  displeased  Bazdrov:  it  smacked 
of  philosophy,  that  is,  of  Romanticism,  for  Bazdrov  called 
philosophy  Romanticism ;  but  he  did  not  think  it  neeessaiy 
to  contradict  his  young  disdple. 


Digitized  by  Google 


Ivkn  Sergytevich  Turg^nev  291 


"  No,  no!  '*  ezdaimod  P4v)d  Ptttidvicliiii  Asaddeitpiiiion. 
"  I  do  not  wish  to  believe  that  yon,  gentkmen,  properly 
undentand  the  Russian  nation,  that  you  are  the  repiesentOp 
lives  of  its  needs,  its  aims!  No,  the  RusBiaii  nation  is  not 
as  yon  represent  it  to  yourselves.  It  reveres  tradition,  it  is 
patriarchal,  it  cannot  live  without  faith  " 

"I  will  not  dispute  that,"  interrupted  Bazdrov;  "lam 
even  willing  to  admit  that  you  are  right  in  this.'* 

"And  if  I  am  right  " 

**  And  yet  it  proves  nothing.'* 

"That 's  it,  it  proves  nothing,"  repeated  Arkddi  with  the 
confidence  of  an  experienced  chess  player  who,  foreseeing  the 
apparently  dangerous  move  of  his  antagonist,  does  not  be- 
come in  the  lesst  uneasy. 

"How  does  it  not  prove  anything?"  nrattered  Pdvd 
Ftetidvlch  in  wondennent.  "So  yon  are  going  against  your 
nation?" 

"What  of  it,  if  I  do?  People  imagine  that  wben  it  thnn- 
dm  the  prophet  Bliss  is  riding  in  a  diaidkit  over  the  heavens. 
Well?  Shan  I  agree  with  them ?  Besides^  fh^  are  Rus- 
sians, and  am  I  not  myself  a  Russian  ?  " 

' '  No,  you  are  not  a  Russian,  after  what  you  have  jost  told 
me!    I  cannot  acknowledge  you  as  a  Russian." 

"  My  grandfather  was  a  ploughman,"  replied  Bazdrov 
with  supercilious  pride.  * '  Ask  any  of  your  peasants,  in 
whom  he  will  quicker  recognise  a  countryman  of  his.  in 
you  or  me  ?    You  do  not  even  know  how  to  talk  with  him." 

"  But  you  speak  with  him  and  despise  him  at  the  same 
time." 

"  Why  not,  if  he  deserves  contempt !  You  find  fault  with 
my  tendency,  hat  iriio  told  yon  that  it  is  accidental  in  me? 
tlmt  it  is  not  provoked  by  the  same  national  spirit  that  yon 
are  dianq^ioning  ?  " 

"  Well,  of  what  good  are  the  nihilists  ?  " 

"  It  is  not  for  yon  to  decide  whether  they  sre  sny  good 
ornot.  Don't  yon  regard  youfsdfnseftil?" 

"Gentlemen,  gentlemen,  please  no  personalitiesi "  ex- 
claimed Nikoldy  Petidvicb,  rising  firom  his  chair. 


2g2         The  Nineteenth  Centuiy 


Pivel  Petr6vich  smiled  and,  putting  his  hand  on  his 
brother's  shoulder,  compelled  him  to  sit  down  again. 

*•  Don't  worrj',"  he  said.  '*  I  will  not  forget  mjself,  by 
dint  of  that  ver>'  feeling  of  dignity  that  the  gentleman,  the 
doctor,  makes  so  light  of.  Permit  me,"  he  turned  again 
towards  Bazarov,  "  you  probably  think  that  your  doctrine  is 
something  new.  But  you  imagine  that  in  vain.  The 
materialism  which  you  presdi  has  been  in  TOgtte  more  than 
once,  and  it  baa  always  proved  itself  inaaffident  *' 

"  Again  a  foreign  word! "  interrnpted  Basdrov.  He  be> 
gan  to  feel  annojed  and  bis  fiioe  aawimed  a  coaiae  coppery 
odonr.  "  First  of  all,  we  pieadi  nolbing;  tbat  is  not  our 
custom  ** 

**  Then  what  are  you  doing  ? " 

*'  I  'U  tell  you  what  we  do.  In  former  days,  not  so  long 
ago,  we  used  to  say  tbat  the  offidals  take  bribes,  that  we 
have  no  roads,  no  commeroe,  no  reg^ar  justice." 

"  Yes,  yes,  you  are  accusers,  I  think  that  is  what  you  call 
it.    I  agree  with  many  of  your  accusations,  but  " 

"  Then  we  came  to  the  conclusion  that  to  prate,  nothing 
but  prate,  about  our  sores  is  not  worth  the  trouble,  that  it 
only  leads  to  triteness  and  doctrinarianism;  we  discovered 
that  our  wise  men,  the  so-called  leaders  and  accusers,  were 
good  for  nothing,  that  we  were  busying  ourselves  with 
nonsense,  were  talking  of  art,  unconscious  creative  power, 
parliamentarism,  of  legalism,  and  the  devil  knows  of  what 
not,  when  we  ought  to  have  talked  of  the  daily  bread,  when 
we  were  oppressed  by  most  yulgar  superstition,  when  sU 
our  commercial  companies  burst  only  because  there  was  a 
dearth  of  honest  men,  when  the  very  liberty  with  whldi 
the  Govenunent  is  concerned  would  hardly  do  us  any 
good,  because  our  peasants  would  as  lief  rd>  themsdves, 
if  only  they  could  fill  themselves  with  brandy  in  the 
tavern." 

"Ah,"  Pivel  Petr6vich  interrupted  him,  "  ah!  You  have 
convinced  yourself  of  all  that,  and  so  you  have  decided  not 
to  do  anything  seriously  ?  " 

And  we  decided  not  to  undertake  anything,"  grimly  re- 


Ivin  Sergy^evich  Turginev  293 


peated  Bazirov.  He  snddenly  felt  irritated  for  having 
entered  into  a  dispute  with  that  gentleman. 

"And  only  to  scoff?*' 

"ToacoC" 

"  And  that  is  called  nihilism." 

"  And  that  is  called  nihilism/*  again  repeated  BazAnnr, 
but  this  time  with  special  radeness. 

Pdvel  Petr6vich  slightly  closed  his  eyes. 

"Ah,  that  's  the  way!"  he  said  with  a  strangely  calm 
voice.  "  Nihilism  is  to  help  all  misery,  and  you — you — are 
our  deliverers  aud  heroes.  Yes.  But  why  do  you  hold 
others  in  honour,  say,  those  very  accusers  ?  Or  do  you  not 
prate  like  the  rest  ?  " 

**  You  may  accuse  us  of  anything  else,  but  not  of  that,'* 
said  Bazirov  through  his  teeth. 

"  Well  ?  You  act,  don't  you  ?  You  are  getting  ready  to 
act?" 

Bazdrov  did  not  answer.  P&vel  Petrdvich  ahoddered,  but 
he  immediately  controlled  himself. 

' '  Hm  I — ^Act,  break — * '  he  continued.  "  But  how  are  you 
going  to  break,  not  knowing  for  what  purpose?  " 

**  We  break,  because  we  are  a  focoe,"  remarked  Arkidi. 

Pdvel  Petr6vich  glanced  at  his  nephew  and  smiled. 

"  Yes,  force  does  not  give  any  aooounts  of  itaelf,"  said 
Arkddi  straightening  himself  out. 

"  Miserable  man!"  lamented  Pdvel  Petr6vich.  He  was 
absolutely  unable  to  hold  himself  any  longer.  *'  If  you  only 
thought  what  you  are  supporting  in  Russia  by  your  despica- 
ble phrase  ?  No,  that  would  make  an  angel  lose  his  patience ! 
Force!  A  wild  Calmuck,  a  Mongolian  has  force  too,  but  of 
what  good  is  it  to  us?  We  treasure  civilisation,  yes,  sir, 
yes,  sir,  dear  sir,  we  treasure  its  fruits.  Don't  tell  me  that 
these  fruits  are  worthless.  The  last  latherer,  ufi  barbmiilltur^ 
a  fiddler  who  gets  five  kopeks  for  an  evening,  are  more  use- 
ful than  you,  becatue  they  are  the  lepreaentativea  of  a  civili- 
sation, and  not  of  a  rude  Mongolian  force!  You  regard 
yourselves  as  leaders,  but  you  ought  to  pass  ydnr  days  in  a 
Calmuck  tent!  Force!  Remember,  gentlemen  of  foroe^  that 


294         The  Nineteenth  Century 


there  are  only  four  and  a  lialf  of  you,  and  there  are  millions 
of  othen  who  will  not  permit  you  to  tread  under  £DOt  their 
most  sacred  beliefs  and  who  will  crush  you." 

"  If  they  will  crush  us,  then  that  is  our  destiny,"  spoke 
Bazdrov.  "  Only  you  are  slightly  o£f.  We  are  not  as  few 
as  you  imagine." 

"  What  ?  You  think  in  earnest  you  will  be  able  to  stand 
out  against  a  whole  nation  ?  " 

**  You  know,  it  was  a  kopek  candle  that  caused  the  con- 
flagration of  Moscow,"  replied  Bazarov. 

**  Yes,  yes.  First  it  is  an  almost  satanic  pride,  and  then 
oontemptuous  aoi^iiig.  That  'a  what  the  young  geoerstioii 
Is  carried  away  with,  that 's  what  conquerB  the  inexperi- 
enced hearts  of  boys!  Juat  look  at  them:  one  of  them  Is 
sitting  fay  your  side;  he  ahnoat  worahipa  yon,— kiok  at  Unu 
(Ark4di  turned  away  and  frowned.)  Thia  plague  has  spread 
fiur  and  wide.  I  have  been  told  that  our  artists  won't  visit 
the  Vatican  in  Rome^  that  they  regard  Raphael  almost  as  a 
fool,  because,  don't  you  see,  he  is  an  authority;  but  they 
themselves  are  impotent  and  barren  to  nausea;  their  fancy 
does  not  rise  above  a  Gt'r/  at  the  Fountain,  try  as  they  may! 
And  the  girl  is  horribly  painted  at  that.  In  your  opinion 
they  are  a  fine  lot,  are  they  not  ? " 

"In  my  opinion,"  retorted  Bazdrov,  "Raphael  is  not 
worth  a  copper  penny,  and  they  are  not  better  than  he.** 

"Bravo!  Bravo!  Listen,  Arkddi!  That  's  the  way 
modem  young  men  must  express  themselves!  When  I  come 
to  think  of  it,  why  should  they  not  follow  you!  Formerly 
young  men  had  to  study;  they  did  not  like  to  pass  lor 
ignoramuses^  and  so  they  worked,  even  against  fheir  wiU. 
But  all  they  luive  to  aay  now  is:  *'  Bverything  in  the  world 
Is  boshl"  and  that 'a  all  there  ia  to  it.  The  young  people 
are  hiqipy.  And  really,  formerly  th^  were  nothing  but 
blockheads,  but  now  they  have  suddenly  turned  nihilists.** 

"  There,  your  vaunted  feeling  of  your  personal  dignity 
has  played  you  £alse,"  phlegmatjcally  remarked  BazArov, 
while  ArkMi  flamed  up  and  his  eyes  glistened.  ' '  Our  dis- 
Gussiou  has  gone  too  fiir         It  seems  it  would  be  better  to 


uiyiii^uu  Ly  Google 


Iv4n  Sergyeevich  Turginev  295 


cut  it  short  altogether.  I  will  then  be  reedy  to  agree  witli 
you,"  he  added,  rising,  "  when  yon  will  show  me  one  single 
inatitntioii  in  our  present  existence,  social  or  domeatic,  which 
does  not  call  for  a  complete  and  merciless  negation." 

"  I  will  show  you  millions  of  such  institutions,"  exclaimed 
Pdvel  Petr6vich,  *'  millions!  For  example,  the  village 
commune." 

A  cold  smile  contorted  Bazdrov's  lips. 

**When  it  comes  to  the  commune,"  he  said,  "you  had 
better  have  a  talk  with  your  brother.  He,  it  seems,  has 
discovered  in  practice  what  kind  of  a  thing  the  commune  is, 
and  communal  responsibility,  temperance,  and  similar  fine 
things." 

**  The  funily,  if  you  please,  the  fiunily,  as  it  exists  with 
our  peasBntsI "  cried  Pdvel  Fetr6vich. 

"  It  would  be  better,  I  suppose,  not  to  enter  into  the  de- 
tails of  that  affidr.  Listen,  Pdvd  Petv6vidi,  give  yourself 
two  days^  time;  you  wiU  hiaidly  find  anything  befiwe  that 
time.  Run  over  all  our  conditions  of  life,  consider  them  aU 
wdl,  while,  in  the  meantime.  Arldbli  and  I  will  " 

"  Make  light  of  everything,"  interrupted  Pdvel  Petr6vich. 

*'  No,  cut  up  fimgs.  Come,  ArlUuiii  Good*bye,  gentle- 
men!" 

Both  firiends  went  out. 

FOBMS  IN  PROSE  (SENILIA) 

NATURB 

I  dreamt  that  I  entered  an  enormous  subterranean  hall 
with  high  vaults.  It  was  all  EUed  with  an  even,  subter- 
ranean light. 

In  the  very  centre  of  the  hall  sat  a  migestic  woman  in  a 
flowing  garment  of  a  green  colour.  Bending  her  head  on 
her  hand,  she  seemed  to  be  buried  in  deep  meditation. 

I  saw  at  once  that  that  woman  was  Nature  herself,  and, 
with  a  sudden  diiU,  a  reverential  awe  entered  my  soul. 

I  approached  the  woman  who  was 'sitting  there,  and 
making  a  respectful  bow:  '*  O  our  common  mother!  **  1 


2^6         The  Nineteenth  Centiuy 


exclaimed.  ' '  What  are  you  meditatiag  on  ?  Are  yon,  per- 
chance, pondering  on  the  future  destiny  of  the  human  xioe? 
Or,  how  it  may  reach  the  highest  poeaible  perfectHm  and 

happiness? 

The  woman  slowly  turned  to  me  her  dark,  piercing  eyes. 
Her  lips  moved,  and  there  issued  from  them  a  ringing  voice, 
like  the  clanking  of  iron. 

"  I  am  thinking  how  to  add  greater  strength  to  the  muscles 
of  a  flea's  legs,  that  it  may  more  easily  save  itself  from  its 
enemies.  The  equilibrium  between  attack  and  defence  has 
been  impaired         It  must  be  re-established." 

"  What  ?"  I  lisped  an  answer.  **  Is  that  what  you  are 
thinking  about?  But  are  we  not,  men,  your  favourite 
children?" 

The  woman  barely  frowned:  "AU  creatures  are  my  diild-  • 
ren,*'  ahe  spoke^  "  and  I  take  equal  care  of  them,  and 
equally  exterminate  them." 

"  But  goodnesa— reason— justice  "  I  muttered  again. 

"  Those  are  human  words,"  was  heard  the  woman's  voice. 
**  I  know  neither  good  nor  evil— —  Reason  is  not  my  law, 
and  what  is  justice  ?    I  have  given  you  life,  and  I  will  take 

it  from  you  and  will  give  it  to  others,  worms  or  men  it 

makes  no  difference  to  me          You  defend  yourself  in  the 

meantime,  and  do  not  bother  me!  " 

I  wanted  to  retort — but  the  earth  around  me  gave  a  dull 
groan  and  trembled,  and  I  awoke. 

Dmitri  Vasilevich  Grigor6vicb.  (1822-1900.) 

Grigor6vicli  was  the  son  of  a  landed  proprietor,  and  was  bom  in  a 
village  on  the  V61ga,  in  the  Government  of  Simbirsk.  His  early 
childhood  he  passed  at  home ;  at  ten  years  of  age  be  entered  a  board- 
ing sdiool  in  Hoaoow,  and  later  the  Sdiool  of  Bngineen,  where  he 
studied  at  the  same  time  as  bis  friend  Dostoevski.  Having  become 
infatuated  with  art,  he  transferred  himself  to  the  Academy  of  Arts 
and  there  studied  drawing  for  two  years.  He  bcpan  writing  in  1S44, 
and  attracted  the  attention  of  the  public  and  of  the  critic  Byelinski 
hy  hit  sketehct  from  the  life  of  the  serft,  77ke  Vilktge  and  Ami6n  ike 
MisenMe,  These  were  foDowed  by  a  large  numt)er  of  diortcr  stories 
and  two  novtlt,  The  fiskermen  and  Tike  Emigrwis;  they  mainly 


uiyiii<-uu  Ly  Google 


Dmitri  Vasilevich  Grigor6vich  297 


ezod  tot  fbdr  artiitic  landscape  painting,  in  which  they  abound. 

His  warm  advocacy  of  emancipation  and  his  sympathetic  descriptions 
of  peasant  life  have  earned  for  him  the  name  of  the  Russian  Beecher- 
Stowe. 

Two  of  hit  atoriea  have  been  tranalaled  into  Bnglish :  Cruel  dfyt 
after  the  Rmrian,  with  a  tketch  of  the  author,  by  B.  de  Pierson  (Sun- 
ahine  Series,  No.  84),  London  and  New  York,  1891  ;  New  year's  Eve 
(Railway  and  General  Automatic  I^itouy),  London,  [189a]. 

FROM  "THE  FISHERMEN" 

A  gloomy,  grey  day.  The  vault  of  heaven  looks  as 
though  lowered,  as  though  pensively  reposing  over  the 
silent  earth.  If  it  were  not  for  the  warmth  of  the  air,  the 
nascent  odour  of  budding  Terdnre,  one  might  have  thought 
spring  had  suddenly  been  dumged  Into  autumn.  There  axe 
many  audi  dasrs  In  the  beginning  of  spring.  They  le- 
aemble  the  fidr,  pensive  face  of  a  young  girL  All  Nature 
suddenly  grows  still,  like  a  lively  child  In  the  open,  who, 
having  abandoned  himself  to  nol^y,  boisterous  merriment, 
and  not  trusting  his  strength,  suddenly  throws  himself  tired 
on  the  grass  and  sleeps  a  sweet  sleep. 

In  such  days  you  will  not  hear  a  sound.  Bverything  liv- 
ing seems  to  hold  its  breath,  to  get  ready  for  something,  to 
collect  its  strength  for  a  noisy  celebration  of  the  summer. 
The  flocks  are  silent,  as  if  intoxicated  by  the  strong  aroma 
of  the  unfolding  plants,  which,  lacking  the  sunrays,  is 
spreading  over  the  ground;  the  animals  are  reclining  on  the 
succulent  grass,  and  hang  their  heads,  or  lazily  wander 
about.  The  birds  dreamily  slumber  on  the  branches  that 
are  permeated  by  their  fresh,  young  sap;  the  insects  are  hid 
under  the  tree-bark,  or  have  crept  into  the  narrow  seams  of 
the  moss  that,  in  an  Infinitely  diminished  form,  resembles 
impassable  fir  forests;  not  a  fly  buzzes  In  the  air;  the  air 
itself  seems  to  be  afraid  to  break  the  solemn  quiet,  and 
touches  not  a  Uade,  nor  even  raises  the  light  down  that  Is 
left  in  the  meadows  by  the  young,  newly  hatched  goslings. 

Nothing  can  be  more  poetical  than  such  days !  A  delicate, 
happily  tuned  ear  can  distinguish,  midst  this  dead  ailenoe,  a 


29^         The  Nineteenth  Centuiy 


measured,  harmonious  singing.  Your  soul  is  filled  with  an 
inexpressibly  pleasant  sensation.  But  not  ecstatic  agitation 
nor  pensive  sorrow  (in  which  there  is  a  charm  of  their  own) 
takes  possession  of  your  soul :  no !  your  blood  and  brain  are 
in  perfect  composure;  you  simply  feel  happy;  your  whole 
being  involuntarily  recognises  the  possibility  of  quiet, 
peaceful  enjoyments,  of  a  modest,  intimate  life  with  your- 
self,-—a  life  which  you  have  been,  perchanoe,  long  aeeking 
in  vtdn;  the  capitally  with  tlwir  din,  splendqor,  and  entioe- 
menta,  do  not  exist  for  yon:  they  appear  ao  small  that  yon 
do  not  even  notice  them.  In  anch  momenta  your  heart  is 
light  and  free,  aa  in  the  first  yean  of  happy  youth;  not  one 
evil  thought  will  enter  your  head.  You  are  satisfied  with 
yourself,  satisfied  with  your  feelings,  satisfied  with  your 
loneliness,  and  you  bless  Providence  for  having  given  jrou 
a  dianoe  to  live,  breathe,  and  feel. 

It  was  just  such  a  day  when  Vanyiisha,  early  in  the  morn- 
ing, bade  his  family  farewell.  The  landscape,  it  seemed, 
had  assumed  the  most  gloomy  and  grey  appearance  in  order 
to  rouse  in  the  heart  of  the  lad  as  little  regret  as  possible  in 
parting  with  familiar  places.  The  fisherman's  family  was 
standing  in  the  yard:  it  was  not  numerous  now,  for  Peter, 
Vasili,  and  their  wives  and  children  had  left  the  day  before. 
There  were  there  in  all:  Glyeb,  his  old  wife,  his  son,  the 
adopted  child,  and  Grandfother  Kondriti,  who  had  come  to 
see  Vanyiisha  off. 

We  find  them  during  the  most  iatefiil  and  oppcessive 
minute.  The  gate  that  leads  out  to  the  small  square  is 
already  open;  grandfather  KoodrAti  has  already  taken  hade 
to  the  cabin  the  oUl  ikon  with  which  the  parents  have  hlifwd 
their  son.  It  is  only  left  to  say:  "Come !  but  old  dyeb  is 
still  hesitating.  Grfshka  has  meanwhile  told  the  companion 
of  his  youth  good-bye;  he  is  standing  some  distance  away; 
his  head  is  bent,  his  brows  are  knit,  but  his  dark  eyes,  which 
are  stealthily  directed  now  to  one  side  of  the  yard,  now  to 
another,  clearly  indicate  that  his  sorrowful  look  is  assumed 
only  by  necessity,  to  fit  the  occasion,  and  that  he  does  not 
share  the  family's  grief. 


Dmitri  Vasilevich  Grigor6vich  399 


None  of  those  presetit  this  minute  think  of  the  adopted 
child.  Annt  Anna  tightly  clasps  the  neck  of  her  beloved 
diild  with  both  her  hands;  the  face  of  the  old  woman  is  still 
more  tightly  pccaaed  againat  hia  fareaat;  in  a  weak,  dying 
voice  she  pronounces  a  disconnected  parting  prayer.  Before 
them  Glyeb  is  standing;  his  eyes  are  dry;  he  utters  no  com- 
plaints, no  accusations,  no  bitter  words  of  blame,  but  his 
hands  folded  ov^er  his  breast,  the  drooping  head,  the  furrows, 
which  one  cannot  count  upon  his  high  brow,  suflBciently  in- 
dicate that  the  soul  of  the  old  fisherman  is  passing  through 
a  heavy  trial.  In  vain  Grandfather  Kondrdti,  whom  Glyeb 
always  respected  and  obeyed,  tries  to  console  him.  calling  to 
his  aid  soal-saving  words:  the  words  of  the  old  man  are 
powerieas  now;  they  act  upon  Glyeb  aa  upon  a  half-witted 
person:  he  hears  every  word  of  the  grandfather,  distinguishes 
every  sound  of  his  voice,  but  does  not  retain  them  In  his 
memosy.  Glyd>  Is  still  unable  to  collect  his  thoughts:  in 
the  last  three  days  the  old  man  had  passed  through  so  much 
sorrow  I  The  acts  of  his  children  have  effaced  from  hia 
memory  the  whole  afacty  years  of  a  quiet,  undisturbed,  one 
may  even  say,  happy  life.  Bat  however  much  one  may 
think,  or  feel  grieved,  nothing  is  gained  by  it,  and  time 
passes.    "  Come!  "  says  Glyeb. 

Grandfather  Koudrdti  warily  unclasps  the  hands  of  the 
old  woman  who  thoughtlessly  and  speechlessly  is  hanging 
about  the  neck  of  her  son;  Aunt  Anna  has  wept  her  last 
strength  away  with  her  last  tears.  Vdnya  transfers  her  from 
his  hands  to  the  hands  of  Kondrdti,  hastily  throws  a  bundle 
with  his  possession  over  his  shoulder,  makes  the  sign  of  the 
cross  and,  without  raising  his  tearful  eyes,  hurries  after  hia 
&ther  who  meanwhile  haa  bent  around  tiie  corner  of  the 
cabin.  A  de^Mdrlng,  heartrending  cry,  uttered  behind 
him,  chains  the  young  lad  to  the  spot 

"Vlmya!— Vdnya!" 

"  Oeaae,  mother  do  not  grieve  so  God  Is  merciful!*' 

says  he,  embracing  the  old  woomn  who  is  grasping  him  in 
her  hands  like  an  insensate  pemn. 

But  the  consolations  are  in  vain!  Grand&ther  KondrAti 


300         The  Nineteenth  Century 


and  V&nya  continue  their  path,  while  supporting  Anna. 

Now,  they  have  already  passed  the  garden,  and  now,  they 
have  crossed  the  brook.  This  brook,  witness  of  youthful 
years,  serves  as  the  last  threshold  of  the  paternal  house. 
Now,  they  have  already  reached  the  footpath,  and  they  be- 
gin to  ascend  the  hill.  Memories  are  crowding  in  the  soul 
of  the  young  lad;  with  every  advancing  step  there  is  a  new 
parting. 

However  much  the  young  fishennan  strengthened  hlnuelf 
with  the  thought  that  hy  his  action  he  had  aaved  his  old 
fiither  from  injustice  and  had  freed  him  ftam  a  heavy  sin, 
however  strong  his  fidth  in  Providence  was,  yet  he  could 
not  restrain  his  tears  that  of  their  own  accord  coursed  down 
his  youthful  cheeks.  It  is»  indeed,  hard  for  the  fint  time  to 
part  from  your  paternal  home,  and  yon  cannot  control  your 
heart:  it  will  not  listen  to  reason,  and  is  not  deceived  by 
fancies  and  hopes. 

It  is  even  more  difficult  for  a  common  man  to  leave  his 
native  roof,  than  for  any  other  person.  No  matter  how 
wretched  the  cabin  of  the  poor  man  may  be,  he  is  attached 
to  it  with  all  his  feelings,  with  all  his  soul.  The  attachment 
of  the  educated  man  for  material  objects  to  which  he  has  be- 
come accustomed,  his  attachment  for  his  house  and  his  soil, 
is  quite  insignificant  in  comparison  with  the  attachment  of 
the  common  man  for  the  same  objects  with  which  he  is  fa- 
miliar. This  is  easily  explained:  the  mental  and  spiritual 
life  which  more  or  kas  absolves  man  from  a  coarse  material- 
ism is  very  limited  in  the  oommon  man.  Irving  almost  ez- 
dusively  a  material,  carnal  life,  he,  so  to  say,  grows  one 
with  every  olject  which  surrounds  him,  with  every  log  of 
his  cabin;  he  was  bom  there,  he  has  passed  his  life  there 
without  intermption;  not  one  thought  has  drawn  him  away 
beyond  the  confines  of  his  native  hut:  on  the  contrary,  all 
his  thoughts  have  been  directed  to  the  one  object  of  never 
leaving  his  home.  The  Russian  peasant  is  pre-eminently  a 
lover  of  his  family,  and  domestic  in  his  habits. 

I  had  once  occasion  to  see  a  ploughman's  family  who 
were  of  their  own  free  will  emigrating  to  the  fertile  southern 


uiyiii^uLi  Uy  Google 


Dmitri  Vasiievich  Grigor6vich  soi 


Gormnients,  bidding  farewell  to  their  field, — miserable  two 
desyatfnas  of  clayey,  almost  worthless,  soil.  I  have  in  all 
my  life  not  seen  such  a  terrible  parting,  such  terrible  tears! 
A  mother,  who  parts  from  her  beloved  children,  does  not 
embrace  them  so  passionately  and  does  not  kiss  them  so 
warmly,  as  these  peasants  kissed  the  earth  that  had  sup- 
ported them  so  many  years.  It  seemed  as  though  they  left 
themselves  in  these  two  plots.  Pieces  of  earth  were  even 
sewed  into  the  amulets  of  the  suckling  babes! 

The  common  man  bows  to  liabit:  when  he  parts  from  his 
house,  he  parts  from  everything  that  bhids  him  to  the  soil. 
He  has  lived  In  his  ezdtisive^  limited  sphem;  there  are  no 
interests  fior  him  outside  of  his  home;  he  looks  with  sMpidoa 
at  the  world  whidi  transcends  the  limits  of  his  customary, 
narrow  conceptions.  When  he  leaves  his  home^  he  does  not 
strengthen  himself,  as  we  do,  with  dreams  and  hopes:  he 
positively  knows  only  this, — that  he  is  leaving  his  home,  tiiat 
he  is  leaving  everything  which  binds  him  to  life,  and  there- 
fore he  abandons  himself  with  all  his  feelings,  with  all  his 
soul  togriet 

Having  reached  the  summit  of  the  high  ridge  of  the  river 
bank,  from  which  the  deceased  Uncle  Akim  had  once  timidly 
descended  with  Grishka  to  the  cabin  of  the  old  fisherman, 
Glyeb  stopped.  It  was  not  the  rapid  ascent  that  had  tired 
him:  he  would  rather  have  walked  more  rapidly,  and  would 
have  gone  higher  up.  A  strange  weight  rested  upon  the 
old  man's  heart;  he  wished  to  walk  a  hundred  versts  with- 
out stopping,  if  the  exhaustion  would  only  allay  the  per- 
sistent pining  that  was  gnawing  at  his  heart.  When  Vdnya 
and  Grand&ther  Kondrdti,  who  were  still  supporting  Anna, 
had  ascended  the  hill,  Glyeb  went  up  to  them: 

"Why  did  you  bring  her  here?*'  said  he  impatiently: 
"  it  will  not  make  things  easier.  Well,  old  woman,  that 
will  do— say  fiurewell,  and  the  Lord  be  with  youl  Too  mudi 
parting,-^too  much  weeping  I  Well,  good-bye! " 

"  Good-bye^  mother! "  muttered  the  son,  and  for  the  first 
time  be  could  not  control  himself,  and  for  the  first  time 
burst  out  into  tears:  he  wept  bitterly,  like  a  small  boy. 


302         The  Nineteenth  Century 


The  old  woman  shuddered  at  this  sight:  her  oblivion  dis- 
appeared, her  strength  was  resurrected.  Drawing  aside  with 
her  lean  hands  the  kerchief  which  covered  her  head,  she  cast 
a  senseless  glance  on  all  present,  as  if  not  yet  quite  conscious 
of  what  was  happening,  and  then  she  suddenly,  with  the 
zapdity  of  lightning,  threw  herself  on  her  son,  and  placed 
her  hands  over  his  head.  The  cry  that  aooompanied  that 
motion  cut  as  with  a  knife  the  hciurts  of  the  two  old  men. 
People  of  Qiandfsther  KoadrAti*s  sge  do  not  weep:  all  the 
teexs  have  been  wept»  and  Ihdr  sonioe  itself  has  long  ago 
dried  up.  But  Olyeb  had  yet  seen  little  grief;  and  so  his 
strength  left  him.  However  much  Glyeb  fortified  himself, 
however  much  he  turned  his  head  aside,  and  knit  his  brows^ 
large  teardrops  of  their  own  will  burst  from  his  eyes  and 
silvered  still  more  his  grey  beard.  He  waved  his  hand  and 
walked  ahead  more  rapidly.  Vdnya  tore  himself  away  from 
the  embrace  of  his  mother  and  ran  after  him,  all  the  time 
making  the  sign  of  the  cross. 

*' Vanya!  V^nya!" 

The  old  woman  started  after  her  son;  but  her  legs  gave 
way.  She  fell  upon  her  knees  and  extended  her  hands  be- 
fore her. 

Vdnya  meanwhile  continued  to  follow  his  father.  Only 
once  did  he  turn  back:  the  cabins,  the  small  squares^  the 
brook,  the  boats*  the  nets»— all  had  disq)pearedl  At  the 
edge  of  the  hill,  which  hid  the  indentation  of  the  dune  that 
served  him  for  his  native  plsoe,  he  saw  only  Kondrdtl*s  white 
head  leaning  over  something  prostrate  in  the  road.  Beyond 
them,  in  the  limitless  depth,  he  saw  the  distant  mesdows. 
"Prom  this  height  Grandfather  Kondrdti's  little  lake  appeared 
as  in  the  palm  of  the  hand:  a  white  moving  dot  glinted 
through  the  verdure  that  surrounded  the  lake  in  a  dark 
strip.  Vdnya  almost  stopped,  but  immediately  turned  his 
head  aside,  made  the  sig^n  of  the  cross,  and  walked  on  more 
rapidly.  When  he  found  himself  within  a  few  steps  from 
his  father,  he  did  not  hold  out,  and  turned  back  once  more; 
but  this  time  the  eyes  of  the  young  lad  no  longer  met  familiar 
places:  everything  had  disappeared  behind  the  hill,  the  dark 


Digitized  by  Google 


Yikov  Petr6vich  Poldnski  303 


ridge  of  which  rested  against  the  gloomy,  grey,  cheerless  sky. 

Farewell,  mother !  Farewell  home,  childhood,  memonefl» 
— iiAreweU  everything! 

Y4kov  Petr6yicb  Pol6nski.  (1820-1898). 

Poldnski  was  bom  in  the  city  of  Ryazan,  where  he  graduated  from 
the  Gymoasium.  After  that  he  studied  law  at  the  Moscow  Univers- 
ity, and  in  1844  he  published  his  fixst  collection  of  poems,  under  the 
tUdtcfGammis.  Then  began  ibr  him  yean  oficitlcMwaiidMlagi  to 
Rmiia  and  abroad,  in  bis  attempt  to  earn  Ida  dally  bread.  Upon  his 
ret-nra  to  St.  Petersburg,  in  1859,  he  became  an  editor  of  a  periodical, 
and  soon  after  he  was  made  a  member  in  the  Board  of  Foreign  Cen- 
sorship. His  genius  has  been  characterised  by  Tnxgdnev  as  follows  : 
"ffii  talent  tepcetenta  a  ipeeia],  quite  individual  niztnre  of  tiniple> 
hearted  grace,  a  free  pictnresqnencia  of  langnagap  upon  which  still 
rests  a  reflection  of  Pdshkin's  elegance,  and  a  certain  amiable,  though 
frequently  awkward,  honesty  and  truthfulness  of  impressions.  At 
times  he,  almost  unconsciously  to  himself,  surprises  one  with  the 
■baspoeM  of  hia  poetic  vision."  Many  of  hia  lyrica  belong  to  the 
meat  popnlar  of  looga  In  Surfa,  and  have  been  set  to  music.  Of  hia 
longer  poems,  the  fantaitie  talc  MuHeiam  Gfosslupper  enjcya  the 
greatest  popularity. 

But  little  of  Pol6nski  has  been  translated.  In  C.  T.  Wilson's 
Russkm  Lyna  are  given  TV  Bitds,  Night  in  tke  Cr^MM,  THe  Am 
tmd  Oie  Maom,  71kg  GmnHam  Ai^et ;  in  JChn  Bollcn'a  i?Aym«s Jhm 
the  Russian, — On  Skobelev  (reprinted  in  the  Library  of  the  World's 
Best  Literature);  in  The  Anglo-Russian  Literary  Society,  No.  21,  by 
H.  Havelock,  Love  scared  thee  not,  and  To  the  /ond  heart  that  pas- 
sionately lovetk;  in  Free  Russia,  vol.  xii,  Na  11,  by  Charlotte 
Sidgirick,  A  Viskm, 

THE  BIRDS 

The  smell  of  fields  pervades  the  air, 

And  in  the  peaeelbl  dey 
Are  heard  the  lays  of  tnneftil  bixda, 

Resounding  &r  and  high. 

Each  has  its  mate,  with  whom  it  qpends 

The  hoois  of  day  and  night; 
In  unmown  fields,  and  growing  grast, 

Their  homes  are  their  delight 


3<H         The  Nineteenth  Century 


Up  in  the  skies  they  pour  their  iiote8» 

Fired  with  enraptured  song; 

But,  still,  to  earth,  though  not  for  bread. 

The  free  birds  all  belong. 

• 

While  thus  I  listen  to  their  yokit, 

Vexation  stirs  ray  mind; 
Their  happy  lot  with  envy  fills 

The  hearts  of  all  mankind. 

— From  C.  T.  Wilson's  Russian  Lyrics. 

NIGHT  IN  THE  CRIMEA 

Bear'st  thou  in  mind  the  moon's  glimmering  light, 

On  rocks  the  waves  dashing  with  sullen  roar, 
The  rustling  trees  with  sleepy  leaves  adight. 
The  chirruping  crickets  in  the  fields  anight, 
Close  by  the  garden,  on  the  aea-giit  shore  ? 

In  twilight  sofl,  beneath  the  garden's  shade, 

We  wandered;  scent  of  laurel  filled  the  air; 
We  saw  a  grotto  in  the  vineyard  made, 
And  water  falling,  as  we  careless  strayed, 
Which  sounded  sweetly  in  the  basin  there. 

Dost  thou  recall  the  freshness  of  the  hour, 

The  smell  of  roses,  and  the  murmuring  brooks? 
All  Nature  seemed  entranced  with  magic  power. 
And  at  each  other,  in  the  perfumed  bower 

Sitting,  gazed  we  with  absorbing  looks. 

The  music  flowing  from  all  Nature's  smiles, 

The  melod}'  working  in  the  awakened  soul, 
This  have  I  heard  mid  all  the  cozening  wiles 
Of  life, — in  direst  storms, — and  it  beguiles 

My  aching  heart,  and  fills  my  spirit  whole. 


Y&kov  Petr6vich  Pol6nski  305 


I  lent  onto  thte  duvds  attentive  ear, 

While  my  mind  mamkd  to  the  beauteons  aoond. 
Which  touched  my  immu  with  tfiumphant  cbeer; 

I  listened  till  it  drew  me  ever  near, 
And  all  my  soul  with  joyous  rapture  bound. 

^Fxom  C.  T.  Wilson's  Hussion  Lyria. 


Idon^  acarad  thee  not,  fac  early  thy  heart  ripened; 
His  was  thy  trust,  and  now  then  moom'st  alone. 
O  haplesik  hopdesa  prey  of  liea  and  paadoii. 
Burst  thou  their  net,  and  fear  not  any  blame  t 

The  bUune  of  men,  their  feigned  reprobation. 

Heed  not,  nor  weep,  but  clear  thy  clouded  eyes. 
Not  I  thy  judge,  thy  headsman,  though  I  know  it 
That  with  a  laugh  malice  thy  doom  has  signed. 

Has  not  each  one  of  us  been  passion's  plaything  ? 
Will  nought  but  death  assuage  thine  enemies'  scorn  ? 
Will  e'en  thy  friends  not  cease  thy  soul  to  torture  ? 
Feed  not  the  fire,  and  malice  self  must  die. 

And  all  that  in  thee  was  of  pure,  of  holy, 
Of  dear,  shall  sacred  be  to  those  that  love  thee. 
And  ridh  aa  ever  ahall  thy  genenma  heart  be, 
And  thoa  ahalt  love  aaeiat  and,  loving,  amile. 

— Tnuifll.  by  H.  Havdodc,  in  The  Anglo-Ruaiian 
Utenoy  Society,  Now  ai. 

FROM  "MUSICIAN  GRASSHOPPER" 

Not  the  blustering  cricket  diirping  at  the  atove  I  aing: 
my  hero  is  a  amall  graadiopper.  He  was  of  small  size,  but 
oblong  in  shape,  and  wore  over  his  back  a  greenish  frock; 
he  waa  thin-legged,  lank,  and  broad  of  brow,  and  he  was  a 
real  genius,  had  a  special  gift:  he  was  £uned  as  a  musician 

VOL.  II.— 90. 


3o6         The  Nineteenth  Century 


among  all  the  insects,  and  he  often  invited  his  friends  to  hear 
his  concerts.  He  lived  under  the  luxuriant  grass  in  the 
open  field,  and  drowned  the  air  with  the  eternal  piping  of 
his  orchestra.  The  frivolous  tribe  of  hoppers  has  forgotten 
that  at  that  time  be  was  the  representative  of  good  taste  and 
mtisic. 

Everything  which  the  rustic  dweller  nowadays  hears  oat* 
Mt  tbm  window,  as  he  lies  upon  his  bed,  or  as  he  walks  otit 
on  the  balcony  in  his  moniing  gown,-*this  crackling  piping, 
this  diKotdant  din  that  Is  over  emything,— so  dry  and  yet 
ao  tender,—^  In  this  glooiny  concert  there  Is  at  all  any  Row- 
ing Tolaptiioiisneai  and  rapture, — believe  me, — those  are  the 
bygone,  eternal  creations,  or  indtations,  of  my  hero. 

Poor  little  grasshopper,  your  genius  is  fofgotten!  But 
ymi  have  passed  your  life  not  without  adventures.  I  know 
you  did  not  in  vain  pass  for  an  idealist:  you  tised  to  sit  down 
in  the  silvery  light  of  the  moon,  under  the  canopy  of  night, 
upon  a  grassblade  broken  by  the  wind.  Though  the  bend- 
ing ears  are  not  lightly  broken,  yet  the  naughty  wind 
crushes  many  of  them  in  the  wavy  meadow.  You  used  to 
sit  down,  and  with  all  your  might  you  scraped  upon  your 
fiddle,  in  order  to  glorify  night.  And  the  emptj'-headed 
squeakers,  the  villainous  mosquitoes,  the  trumpeters  of  the 
steppe,  teased  you,  and  ladybirds  fell  in  love  with  you,  and 
envy  roiled  many  a  little  head  with  the  same  musical  IncUnar 
tion  and  witili  Ihe  same  eagerness,  bat  not  with  the  same 
ability.  And  the  gnat  threatened  to  kill,  by  means  of  science^ 
the  sounds  which  yon  produced,  and  the  weighty  Jnne-bng 
repeatedly  aasored  all  that  It  was  pleasant  to  moisten  the 
ears  at  yoor  concert,  for  otherwise  tiie  ears  would  diy  np, 
like  the  grass,  from  the  terrible  drouth. 

In  yoot  private  life  you  have  frequently  been  put  in  an 
awk^imd  position  by  the  good  little  ladybirds,  flies,  and 
little  bugs:  you  listened  to  their  confessions,  and  timidly 
avoided  secret  meetings  with  them.  Nothing,  however,  dis- 
turbed your  calm;  no  sting  appeared  injurious  to  your 
talent  :  you  were  unconquerable  in  the  musical  world. 

Little  linden  trees, — that  was  something  in  the  nature  of  a 


Diyiiized  by  Google 


Y4kov  Petr6vich  Poldnski  307 


park ;  in  the  centre — a  pond,  and  at  the  entrance — a  bower 
of  branches,  unquestionably  a  marvel  of  perfection;  it  was 
so  spacious  that — ^just  think  of  it  —  two  hundred  insects 
could  enter  it  in  a  row.  Hang  me  if  I  am  telling  an  un- 
truth! The  architect  of  it  —  I  will  not  conceal  it  —  was 
Nature  herself;  only  I  do  not  know  who  paid  her  for  the 
work;  however,  we  are  not  concerned  here  about  Nature. 
Lest  the  journalists  should  peck  us  to  death,  I  will  confess 
that  it  was  hardly  possible  to  describe  the  staircase  under 
the  ydlow  carpet  of  moss,  which  was  worn  through  in  spots; 
nor  the  gloomy  antechamber,  where  the  lackeys  could  re- 
main torn  eariy  moniing  without  their  boots,  bitt  not  with* 
ont  their  liveries;  nor  the  parioor,  where  some  mould,  like 
stalactites^  stuck  to  the  cornices  and  was  wound  about  with 
verdure.  An  acquaintance  of  mine,  a  Russian  architect, 
saw  in  this  parlour  a  bit  of  Etruscan  art,  and  —  I  remember 
it  well — he  boasted,  without  blushing,  that  the  idea  had 
Struck  him  in  that  parlour  tastefully  to  adorn  lordly  rooms 
by  covering  the  wall-paper  with  white  mould. 

However,  the  house  of  the  sylphid,  to  be  sternly  critical 
about  the  style,  resembled  somewhat  a  hole  in  a  tree.  The 
grasshopper  was  so  charmed,  or  his  heart  was  so  electrified, 
that  he  trembled  and  wasted  away  as  he  silently  waited  for 
the  sylphid,  while  standing  at  the  window  and  looking  at 
the  sights.  The  sylphid  was  flitting  about  with  someone 
in  the  garden,  and  having  a  chat  with  pleasant  guests. 
These  guests  were  worms  of  various  appellathns,  and  they 
lay  in  the  grass  in  the  form  of  hooks.  A  bladk-skinned 
little  bedbug,  doubtless  the  porter's  son,  or  the  nurse's 
grand-child — a  godchild  of  the  gentlefolk — announced  to 
the  sylphid  that  a  certain  lank  gentleman  was  waiting  for 
her  in  the  drawing-room. 

My  hero  was  called  in.  His  bow  was  returned  with  a 
smile,  and  he  heard  the  muttering:  "Very,  very  happy!" 
The  ladies  examined  his  whole  figure,  and  hardly  could 
withhold  their  laughter:  they  only  looked  askance  at  the 
gentlemen.  But  the  worms  did  not  stir,  for  someone  had 
so  dreadfully  narrowed  down  their  brains  that  they  need  only 


3o8         The  Nineteenth  Century 


look  at  the  decoration  on  the  ribbon  or  around  the  neck,  in 
order  not  to  pay  any  attention  to  the^rest,  and  remain  in 
haughty  calm. 

The  artist's  calling  familiarises  the  soul  with  all  kinds  of 
meetings;  but  my  hero  was  not  accustomed  to  the  manners 
of  the  chanuiug  insects  of  the  higher  order.  Living  at  a 
distance  from  the  garden,  poor,  sickly,  and  pale,  he  wore 
from  the  crown  of  his  head  to  the  sole  of  his  feet  tbit  imprint 
of  the  field  upon  him.  There  douds  alone  raise  their  voice, 
and  the  harvest  waves  its  ears,  and  the  grain  waits  for  the 
scythe. 

I  know,  O  grasshopper,  how  well  yon  were  received  by  the 

butterfly.  You  acted  proudly,  as  if  you  had  spent  all  your 
life  in  higher  society,  though  from  early  diildhood  you  had 
never  travelled  except  in  your  own  carriage.  But  tell  me, 
what  became  of  you  on  that  evening,  and  what  inexpressible 
feeling  compressed  your  soul,  and  what  thoughts  ardently 
possessed  your  genial  brow,  as  you  departed  from  the  park 
and  took  your  fieldward  way  over  the  tufts  ?  Will  you  say, 
or — shall  we  put  down  periods  ? 

Departing  day  wept  behind  the  mountain,  and,  shedding 
tears,  cast  a  warm  glow  upon  the  edge  of  the  meadow,  from 
behind  the  dark  grove.  Night  came  in  the  track  of  day, 
and  mingling  lights  were  reflected  and,  quivering,  wandered 
om  her  cheeks.  Softly  came  oat  the  lights,  the  honlds  of 
the  mooo,  lighti ng  the  tapers  before  fhe  throne  of  God. 
and  wide  the  sea  of  fhe  tremnloas  harvest  grew  dark;  the 
mdancholy  birdi  embtaoed  the  linden  tree;  the  grove  grew 
silent;  only  the  oak  whi^iered,  and  the  woodpecker  aome- 
where  tapped  his  strong  beak,  and  somewhere  a  rivulet  lifted 
sadly,— only  fateful  passions  were  not  asleep,  and  only  the 
irrepressible  world  of  insects  vociferated  without  cessation  in 
the  sleepless  silence.  The  flies  hummed,  the  mosquitoes 
tnunpeted;  those  whom  the  grasshopper  led  in  the  chorus 
merrily  scraped  their  fiddles,  evidently  knou-ing  their  music 
even  without  candles.  lu  front  of  the  orchestra,  he  scraped 
his  fiddle  loudest  of  all,  in  honour  of  his  queen.  It  was  the 
marriage  of  the  butterfly's  cousin,  and  the  bridegroom  was 


Diyiiized  by  Google 


Y&kov  Petr6vich  Pol6nski  309 


a  fine  fellow  wifb  a  long  mouthpiece;  of  conne,  lie  was  not 
mentally  qukk,  but  he  came  ficom  a  &mily  of  adect  WOfUIS. 
Accoiding  to  the  bride's  words*  he  was  intoleiable  only  be- 
canae  he  indiscriminately  oompaied  the  odour  of  old  pJnes 
with  the  vernal  fragrance  of  violets,  and  because  he  lespected 
the  brier  and  was  afraid  of  jackdaws. 

But  what  do  we  care  for  this  nonsense  ?  Tiie  ball  was 
magnificent.  The  choirs  bubbled  over  with  sounds.  Dosens 
of  Spanish  flies  in  golden  liveries  burnt  incense  in  murky 
avenues.  Glowworms,  flaming  up  like  fire-pots  and  rockets, 
gleamed  up  and  down  all  the  paths.  The  guests  swarmed 
everywhere.  The  butterflies  flitted  in  the  moonshine  in 
their  ball  dresses;  darning-needles  flashed  through  the  air, 
holding  on  to  darning-needles;  the  variegated  whirl  of  the 
waltz  spun  around  with  a  rustling  sound;  bugs  circled 
around  the  serving  table;  small  beetles  crawled  about,  and 
the  weighty  persons  of  fiuhionaUe  society,  the  ladybugs, 
were  gathered  together  to  show  their  newest  dresses.  Two 
beetles  with  big  bellies  on  short  legs  silently  approadied  two 
greenflies.  An  ant,  laced  in  a  waistcoat  of  the  latest  fashion, 
solemnly  and  carelesdy  bent  his  knees^  while  dancing  with 
a  yellow  ladybixd.  The  lively  ^Iphid  flapped  her  little 
wings:  her  eyes,  her  nose,  her  little  feet,  the  pattern  of  her 
dite,— everything  in  her  involuntarily  attracted  attention. 

My  artistic  grasshopper's  soul  was  aflame ;  he  did  not  turn 
his  eyes  away  from  her  and  be  played  like  a  demon.  At 
her  own  request  he,  his  heart  being  unchangeable,  compvosed 
this  inspired  dance,  by  whose  music  hop  even  to-day  the 
myriads  of  insects  on  any  flower-bed  of  your  garden,  if,  O 
reader,  the  Creator  has  at  all  given  you  a  garden,  or,  at 
least,  a  garden  plot. 

However,  the  ball  of  the  insects  did  not  pass  without  a 
scandal :  they  say,  there  was  an  evil  spider  in  the  park  who, 
having  drawn  his  threads  from  twig  to  twig,  maide  such  a 
devilishly  clever  and  artistic,  invisible  net,  that,  maybe,  he 
had  a  nice  little  snack  in  seciet  They  say  also  that  a  lady- 
bird frll  down  and  that  from  fright  her  cofset  gave  way. 
The  artist  himsdf  noticed  a  little  spider^he  looked  so 


Digitized  by  Google 


3IO         The  Nineteenth  Century 


iiiiiobieiit--flirowiag  aomctliing  like  a  liook  of«r  flie  lylpliad's 
'vdDg,  and  trying  to  dxaw  lier  to  him,  in  oider  to  find  flome- 
where  in  the  dhanning  garden  a  place  where  he  could  pas 
with  her  at  least  ten  minutes  in  the  cool  shade,  in  silence,  in 
comfort,  away  from  the  bustle.  But  the  jealous  artist  under- 
stood his  canning,  so  he  leaped  up  and  tore  the  faXtM 
threads. 

The  spider  swelled  with  anger;  and  a  mosquito  buzzed  to 
the  artist:  *'  See,  how  you  have  soiled  yourself,  as  if  you 
had  been  in  an  improper  place.'* 

The  grasshopper  blushed,  seeing  the  cobweb  sticking  to 
his  sleeve.  "  What  a  beast!  "  he  grumbled,  and  he  wiped  it 
off.  The  butterfly  said  not  a  word,  and  only  chose  another 
partner  for  the  danoe:  the  winged  gentlenuui  washer  ne(gh- 
txmr's  silly  brother. 

"Is  it  true,"  headced, "  tfaenisamnioarittthenieadow, 
that  yon  are  desd  in  love  with  the  maestro  ?  They  say  that 
the  gnashopper  wants  to  many  yon,  and  that  he  is  suing 
for  your  hand?" 

'*  Don't  say  that! "  said  the  iqrlphid.  "  My  hosband-« 
grasshopper!  What  an  insult!  Who  has  spread  this  gossip? 
Or  have  the  flies  concocted  this  stupid  tiling?  " 

"  No,  not  the  flies  at  all!  Someone  from  the  orchestra 
said  that  he  heard  it  from  the  maestro." 

The  fay  controlled  herself  and  did  not  show  her  anger 
and,  flapping  her  wings,  cast  a  cold  glance  upon  the  musician, 
and  when  all,  to  honour  his  talents,  cried:  "  Bravo!  Fora, 
fora! "  she  screwed  up  her  face  or  smiled,  with  downcast 
eyes. 

Alelcsyfy  PeofilAktOTfch  PIsemskL  (i8ao-x88i.) 

Putemski  was  the  son  of  poor  gentlefolk  in  the  Goverament  of 
KoitiKMni,  nbere  hit  fiiUicr  was  an  army  officer.  At  fiwiteeu  yeais 

of  age  he  entered  the  Gymnasium,  and  there  developed  a  taste  for 
the  theatre  and  for  writing  ;  after  graduation  he  studied  mathematics 
at  the  Moscow  University,  but  he  devoted  much  of  his  time  to  acting 
in  amateur  theatricals  and  to  public  readings,  becoming  famous  as  a 
reader  of  G^gol.  He  began  his  literaiy  career  in  1847  prodoced 
a  large  aomber  of  novels  and  dmnaas.  In  all  tbcae  he  evolved  a  Cfn- 


Digitized  by  Google 


Aleksyey  Feofil&ktovich  Pfsemski    31 1 


Icil  peMimistn  of  the  eztremest  kind,  and  unmerdfiiUj  and  without 
reserve  laid  bare  the  moral  dirt  and  corruption  that  surrounded  him. 
His  pictures  from  the  life  of  the  common  people,  as  found  in  Tlie 
Fetersburgian^  The  Faun,  Bitter  Fate,  and  A  Thotuand  Souls,  are 
remarkabty  xcaliatic,  tiiongh  hanovring  in  their  nakdbieti.  Baving 
incnrred  the  enmity  of  the  liberal  writers  of  the  slztfei^  who  sus- 
pected him  of  retrograde  tendencies,  he,  in  1863,  wrote  his  novel, 
Troubled  Heaters,  which  roused  a  storm  of  indignation  in  the  liberal 
camp.  By  depicting  only  the  underside,  with  all  its  nastiness,  of  the 
nwveaent  of  the  diEtics,  he  did  great  ham  to  progress  in  Bnssia. 
Alter  that  gwsatesl  of  his  works,  his  genius  began  to  decline,  and  be 
died,  amidst  much  mental  and  moral  snfiering,  nc||)oeted  and  de> 
spised  bj  the  lUeraty  coteries. 

THE  OLD  PROPRIETRESS 

The  cabin  which  I  entered  was  large  and  neat,  the  wood- 
work wu  plaiied,  the  fltove  white,  the  pardtioo  nude  ol 
boards,  the  bench  and  shelves  washed  dean.  In  the  front 
corner,  wider  the  ikons,  stood  a  table,  behind  which  sat  an 
old  man  with  a  shaven  beard,  with  two  gr^  tnfts  of  hair  on 
his  temples^  with  a  clever  ezpcesrion  on  his  face  and,  evi- 
dently, blind.  He  was  dreaaed  in  a  blue  doth  coat  of  andent 
cat,  underneath  which  could  be  seen  a  laced  shirt  front  and 
a  striped  cashmere  vest,  no  doubt  an  andent  feushion,  too. 
All  that  old  costume  of  his  was  clean  and,  it  seemed,  pre- 
served in  spite  of  time.  By  his  side  sat  a  neat  and  trim- 
looking  old  woman,  in  a  threadbare  old  hood  and  a  chintz 
capote.  At  first  glance  I  thought  they  were  poor  gentlefolk. 
Up>on  my  entering,  the  old  woman  immediately  rose  and  said 
something  to  the  old  man :  he  raised  himself,  and  both  bowed 
to  me. 

*'  Please,  be  seated,  I  shall  find  a  place,"  said  I. 
*'  Never  mind,  sir,"  said  the  old  woman  with  an  affected 
voice,  brushing  aside  her  scanty  possessJons  in  a  amsll  bag. 
*' Be  seated,  please,"  I  repealed. 

The  old  man  heeded  my  words  and,  feding  the  beudi 
with  the  cantiocianess  of  a  blind  peraon,  seated  himsdf,  and, 
bending  over  his  sta£F,  fixed  his  dim  qres  upon  me.  The 
old  woman  did  not  sit  down  bat  continued  standing  in  a  re- 
spectful attitude.  I  guessed  th^  were  not  gentlefolk. 


The  Nineteenth  Century 


"  Whither  are  you  travelling,  friends?  "  aaked  I. 
"  To  the  capital  of  the  Govomment,  dear  idr,"  aasivmd 
the  old  man  in  a  aad  voice. 

"  The  grandparents  are  seeing  this  lad  ofif, — ^they  are  his 
grandparents,  * '  hastened  to  add  the  hosteaa^  who  was  placing 
a  aamovdr  ou  the  table. 

"  The  grandparents  of  this  fellow  ? "  said  I. 

"  Yes,  sir,"  answered  the  old  man  with  a  deep  sigh,  and 
hung  his  grey  head. 

What  rank  are  you  ?  '* 

"  Burghers,  your  honour." 

"Burghers  by  birth?" 

*'  By  no  means,  sir;  we  were  fonnerly  manorial  servants.'* 
"  Not  in  this  place  ought  a  gnuidson  of  Y4kov  Iv&oovidi 
be,"  interrapted  the  hostess:  "  I  will  say  it  in  the  pcesenoe 
of  this  old  man,"  she  oootinned,  "  he  was  in  hisday  ft  gicat 
gentleman,  and  full  of  mettle.  Whenever  he  stopped  off 
here,  I  had  to  bestir  myself:  it  would  not  have  done  to  offer 
him  stale  food  or  a  dirty  samovdr." 
The  old  man  smiled  a  bitter  smile. 

*'  We  did  not  think,  madam,  that  a  child  of  our  own  could 
ever  act  thus,"  said  the  old  woman  in  her  afiected and  some- 
what lackadaisical  voice. 

"  What 's  to  be  done,  mother?  What 's  to  be  done?" 
xeplied  the  hostess,  also  in  a  whining  voice. 

"He  was  left  after  my  daughter,"  proceeded  the  old 
woman.  "  He  was  our  precious  diamond;  we  thought  he 
would  be  the  consolation  and  joy  in  our  loneliness  and  old 
age.  We  had  him  educated  like  a  child  of  gentlefolk:  we 
placed  him  in  Moscow  with  what  we  thought  to  be  nice 
merchant  people." 

"  What 's  to  be  done,  what 's  to  be  done,  motherl "  again 
fell  in  the  ^mrteffSi 

'  *  WeU,  did  he  dissipate  ?  "  asked  I. 

**  God  knows,  sir,  whether  it  was  the  merchant  people  did 
not  treat  him  right,  or  he  did  not  watch  himself,"  answered 
the  old  woman. 

The  old  man  smiled  bitterly  and  interrupted  his  wife: 


uiyi-.^uu  Ly  Google 


Aleksy^y  Feofil^tovich  Pisemski  313 


"  He  had  not  taken  caie  of  himself  sinoe  his  childhood,  for 
he  was  bom  and  hrooght  np  a  spoilt  child.  Other  clerks  in 
his  business  send  money  home  white  th^r  axe  still  hoys,  but 
our  lad  kept  on  writing  home  for  some:  we  sent  him  money, 

until  we  were  mined.  Meanwhile  we  heard  that  he  was 
getting  into  things  that  might  bring  him  into  jail.  We 
wrote  him  to  come  home,  and  he  turned  up  only  after  two 
years:  he  was  barefoot  and  naked.  We  clothed  him,  hoping 
that  he  would  mend  under  our  eyes,  but,  instead,  he  began 
the  very  first  week  to  take  everything  from  the  house  to 
the  inn."  With  every  new  word  there  was  heard  more 
severity  in  his  voice,  and  tears  stood  in  the  eyes  of  the  old 
woman. 

"Who  were  yomr  masters?"  asked  I,  In  order  to  interrupt 
the  oonversation,  which  evidently  gave  them  pain. 

"  Onr  mistress  was  Madam  Cotirt-intendant  Pasmdrov," 
reverently  spoke  the  old  man. 

"  Madam  Conrt-intendant  Fasmdrov,"  repeated  I,  femem- 
beiing  that  my  mother  used  to  tell  abont  a  Madam  Court- 
intendant  Pasmdrov,  as  in  her  day  a  great  lady. 

"  Your  mistress  was  quite  a  prominent  and  well-known 
woman  in  these  parts  ?  "  said  I. 

At  this  question  the  face  of  the  old  man  became  quite 
serene. 

"  Our  lady,"  he  began,  speaking  slowly  and  with  empha- 
sis, **  was  probably  the  first  person  in  Russia.  She  was  a 
woman  by  sex,  but  not  one  man  could  have  stood  out  against 
her.  As  she  said,  so  it  was  done.  She  was  a  woman  of  im- 
mense brains." 

*'  They  say  she  lived  well,  in  a  lordly  manner,"  said  I. 

"  Royally,  or  as  would  become  the  ^rife  a  fidd-raardml. 
She  did  not  visit  her  fidlow  landed  proprietofs  the  year 
round.  There  were  forty  rooms  in  the  msnor,  and  yet  they 
were  crowded  on  holidays.  They  would  come  down  like 
the  locnsts  with  their  nurses  and  their  children,  everybody 
was  welcome,"  concluded  the  old  man  in  a  boastful  tone. 

I  saw  that  I  had  before  me  one  of  those  old  servants  of 
former  lords»  who  had  grown  up  and  become  old,  on  the  one 


3^4         The  Nineteenth  Century 


hAnd,  in  what  was  then  regarded  as  modem  faahkma,  and 
on  the  other,  under  the  cane. 

**  You,  no  doubt,  were  a  steward  ?  "  asked  I. 

**  I  was,  sir,"  answered  he,  compressing  his  eyes,  as  if  to 
collect  his  thoughts,  ' '  I  was,  as  we  used  to  call  it  in  those 
days,  chief  ser\'ant  of  the  manor:  for  one  thing,  I  had  some 
twenty  men  and  the  musicians  under  my  command,  but 
especially  the  serving  at  the  table.  Our  lady  of  blessed 
memory  did  not  like  things  to  be  done  half  way:  every  day 
there  was  to  be  a  parade!  Another  thing:  her  eyesight  was 
weak,  ao  I  had  to  write  Itettm  al  her  dictation,  and  I  had  to 
attend  oonits  in  her  behalf;  I  was  well  instmcied  and,  though 
I  did  not  know  the  law  as  I  ought  to,  I  knew  how  to  get 
along  with  the  offidaK  Up  to  the  fiftieth  year  of  my  life, 
sir,  I  never  wore  anything  bat  sUk  stoddngs  and  full  dress 
offineBngUshdotiL  God  grant  her  the  kingdom  of  heaven, 
—I  enjoyed  the  fevonr  of  my  lady.*' 

"  Nowadays  there  are  no  sndi  masters,"  said  I. 

"  By  no  means,  sir,  and  there  cannot  be, — I  have  not  the 
honour  of  knowing  who  you  may  be,  for,  being  blind,  I  can- 
not see.  There  are  no  such  masters  now,"  answered  the  old 
man,  as  if  restraining  himself  from  being  open  to  me. 

*'  I  am  a  landed  proprietor  in  this  neighbourhood,  and  I 
should  like  to  ask  you  about  those  masters  of  olden  times." 

The  old  man  sighed. 

*'  I  am  seeing  niy  ninety-seventh  year  in  this  world,  sir, 
and  I  see  a  great  change  in  ever>'thing:  those  old  masters, 
I  most  say  so,  are  in  comparison  with  those  of  to-day  like 
eagles  befoce  sparrows,"  spoke  he,  significantly  shaking  his 
head. 

*' How 80?"  asked  1. 

The  old  man  moved  his  hands  in  tiioughts. 

**  The  first  thing,"  he  began, "  th^  have  aomdiow  sqnan- 
dered  their  properties,  and  they  have  not  the  same  spirit 
Gentlemen  nowadays  behave  di£Eerently,  bat  then  all  was 
simple;  there  was  plenty  of  everjrthing:  grain,  cattle,  their 
own  winepress, — they  prepared  liqueurs  by  the  barrel,  and 
snch  meads  and  sweet  drinksl  They  made  merxy  and  en- 


Digitized  by  Google 


Aleksy^y  Feofil&ktovich  Pfsemski  315 


joyed  tfaemaelves;  fior  nramplr,  they  would  bring  together  a 
lot  of  male  and  female  jeaten  on  aome  holiday,  and  th^ 
woold  tuge  them  on  agidnat  eadi  other:  and  they  fimght 
and  amnaed  the  gentlefolk;  bat  nowadays  they  keep  little 
company  with  each  other,  and  find  more  pleaanie  hi  booka." 

Here  the  old  man  atopped,  bat  he  soon  began  anew  with 
animation: 

*•  There  are  not  many  gentlemen  who  now  stay  on  their 
estates,  unless  they  be  old  or  sick,  but  all  serve  in  some  ca- 
pacity ;  there  are  no  longer  great  personages.  Let  us  take, 
for  instance,  our  lady,  the  Court-intendant,"  he  continued, 
almost  with  emotion,  '*  how  she  was  honoured  in  the  Govern- 
ment !  A  new  lieutenant,  or,  as  you  call  him  now,  a  new 
governor,  is  appointed:  he  is  still  in  St,  Petersburg,  but  she 
is  already  writing  to  her  friends,  the  ministers  and  senators, 
that,  inasmuch  as  a  new  governor  la  coming  to  us,  '  you  tell 
him  to  know  me,  and  I  will  know  him.'  And  the  moment 
she  receives  the  news  that  he  has  arrived,  she  immediately 
aends  tor  me.  I  make  my  appearance,  and  bow.  '  I«iaten,' 
aays  ahe^ '  Y&kov  Iv&nov !  '—she  always  qrake  a  little  through 
her  nose:  '  Listen!  A  new  governor  has  arrived,  so  take 
the  beat  tr6yka,*  drive  to  Koetromd,  go  to  snch  and  snch  a 
jeweller  and  pnrchase  a  silver  basin;  search  out  wherever 
yon  pleaae  the  very  best  of  sterlets,  or,  still  better,  a  live 
sturgeon:  go  In  my  name  to  the  governor,  have  yoandf 
annotuiced,  and  say  this  and  that  about  your  mistress,  the 
Court-intendant,  and  that,  on  account  of  ill-health,  she  can- 
not come  herself,  so  she  congratulates  him  by  proxy  upon 
his  arrival  and,  as  a  resident,  sends  him,  as  a  greeting  and 
instead  of  the  bread  and  salt,  fish  in  the  basin.  He  receives 
it,  I  am  given  a  fine  treat,  and  he  sends  a  letter  to  our 
mistress." 

"  So  the  amity  began,"  remarked  I,  in  imitation  of  the  old 
man's  voice. 

"That's  it,  amity,  your  word  is  oorreetl"  he  fen  hi: 
"  becaose^  when  now  hia  BzoeUency,  the  Chief  d  the  Gov- 
emment,  ddgned  to  travel  on  inspeclions^  he  would  visit  tu^ 

*  Tbiee-bone  carriage. 


3i6         The  Nineteenth  Century 


and  those  were  magnificent  assemblies.  From  what  I  have 
seen  and  heard,  governors  nowadays  travel  with  great  pomp, 
and  demand  great  receptions  and  respect,  and  there  is  a  great 
fear,  at  least  upon  the  small  oflBcials,  but  from  what  I  know 
of  the  past,  the  governors  of  to-day  are  nothing  in  compari- 
son with  them." 

"  How  was  it  then  ?  "  asked  I. 

*'  Fonneily,  sir,  the  governor  travelled  over  the  Govem- 
nent  like  a  king  of  the  earth:  what  a  lot  of  ofiicials  sur- 
xoundfid  his  peiaoii,  and  what  a  lot  of  goitlefiolk  joined  him 
everywhere  on  his  jotirneyl  There  was  one,— I  date  not 
mention  his  name, — ^who  was  in  the  habit  of  tntvelling  over 
the  Government  with  his  wife,  and  shei— pardon  me  tot  say- 
ing so^— on  accoont  of  her  feminine  weakness,  had  a  great 
love  for  dogs.  There  was  a  spedal  carriage  for  these  dogs, 
and  a  special  officer  had  charge  of  them.  He  by  acxndent 
lost  one  little  dog;  her  Excellency  the  governor's  wife,  in 
spite  of  her  «*xalte^  position,  boxed  his  ears  in  sight  of  all 
people,  and  he  was  discharged, — ^that 's  the  kind  of  times 
that  were  then! " 

**  Those  were  good,  simple  times,"  remarked  I. 

**  It  was  simple,  sir,"  concluded  Ydkov  Ivdnov;  then, 
having  thought  a  moment,  he  continued:  "  It  would  hap- 
pen, sir,  that  all  that  company  stayed  with  us  for  three  or 
four  days,  or  a  whole  week,  and  if  the  governor  chanced  to 
1^  praise  some  thing  iu  our  house,  say  a  clock,  a  picture,  a 
olver  platter,  I  had  a  standing  order  to  take  that  thing  in 
the  evening  to  his  aleeping-room  and  to  report  that  my  lady 
was  veiy  happy  that  snch  and  such  a  thing  had  pleased  him, 
and  that  she  begged  him  to  accept  it" 

"  Didtheold  Uidy  do  it  aU  from  mere  bravado?"  asked  L 

"Bravado  there  was,"  answered  Ydkov  Ivdnov.  "Of 
oooiae^  she  had  great  vanity,  bat  more  than'that,  she  drew 
great  advantages  from  it.  For  instance,  an  estate  was  for 
sale  by  order  of  the  chancery, — and  my  lady,  relying  on  her 
amicable  relations  to  the  chiefs  of  the  Government,  had  only 
to  cast  her  eyes  upon  it,  and  it  was  ours.  If  I,  the  pleni- 
potentiary of  Mrs.  Fasmiirov,  appeared  at  the  sales  in  the 


Digitized  by  Google 


Aleksy^y  Feofil^ktovich  Pisemski  317 


chancery,  not  a  purchaser  turned  up:  they  knew  full  well 
that  the  Chief  of  the  Government  did  not  desire  it.  I 
thanked  wheie  thanks  were  needed,  and  in  a  befitting  man- 
ner, and  it  was  all  right  whatever  was  paid  for  the  estate. 

The  estate  of  Byelogrivy,  sir,  came  in  those  days  into  our 
hands  for  one  hundred  and  twenty  roubles,  and  when  I  went 
down  to  take  possession  of  it,  I  collected  two  hundred  roubles 
of  delinquent  dues  from  the  peasants,  so  you  may  figure  out 
what  the  estate  cost  us." 

Saying  this,  the  peasant  evidently  did  not  consider  that 
he  had  said  too  much,  and  wheu  I  cried  out  almost  involun- 
tarily: 

"Old  manl  tmt  that  ia  a  ain,  that  ia  atealing:,"  he  waa 
taken  ba^  and  anaweied  in  an  hnmUed  Toloe  and  ifith  a 
mgh: 

'*  A  ain,  air;  in  my  wretchednesa  and  blindneaa  I  aee  and 
feditall;  in  the  rwmmandmenta  of  the  Lord  it  ia  aaid:  thon 
ahalt  not  covet  thy  ndghbour's  house,  nor  his  village,  nor 
hia  manservant, — ^but  our  old  lady  had  a  desire  for  it  all, 
though  it  must  be  said  that  all  people  are  not  without  weak- 
nesses."   He  strongly  accentuated  the  last  word. 

"  I  should  say,  he  and  his  mistress  knew  their  advantage !  " 
suddenly  fell  in  Grdchikha,  who  was  busy  at  the  stove:  **  you 
are  telling  of  the  estate,  but  you  had  better  tell  how  you  de- 
livered a  gentleman  into  the  army  as  a  recruit  from  your 
estate,"  continued  she,  stepping  out  behind  the  partition 
and  standing  near  the  ovenbed,  while  she  leaned  with  one 
arm  on  a  beam  and  with  the  other  against  her  fat  aide. 

Ydkov  Iv&nov  frowned  a  little. 

"  How  a  gentleman  ?  "  adced  L 

'*  They  did,"  answered  Gi^ikha.  <*  Their miatroa*  the 
General's  wife,  did  not  like  to  get  her  peasants  tinder  the  red 
hat,  because  dtt  needed  them  all;  so  there  happened  to  turn 
upapoorgentteman:  he  was  not  a  nice  fidlow  to  behold;  he 
must  have  been  maimed  when  he  was  young, —his  head  waa 
ao  large  and  flat,  and  there  was  little  sense  in  it,  for  he  knew 
neither  count,  nor  days,  nor  anything  else,  and  yet  he  knew 
enough  to  live  aococding  to  hia  estate.  So  these  our  falcons 


Diyiiized  by  Google 


3i8         The  Nineteenth  Century 


came  to  him  and  began  to  persuade  him:  '  You,'  they  said, 
*  are  a  gentleman,  and  yet  you  live  as  a  labourer  among  the 
peasants.    You  had  better  serve  in  the  army;  but  as  you 
know  neither  how  to  read,  nor  write,  you  will  not  be  ranked 
is  a  gentleman,  ao  yon  had  better  serve  fiiat  fiw  onr  estate^ 
and  later,  when  you  will  dedare  youndf  a  genUeman,  you 
will  he  properly  advanced.'  Having  no  kin  with  whom  to 
take  coonael,  he  fodiahly  dnmk  their  wine  and  ate  their 
catea^  and  unthinkingly  consented.  The  yoong  gentleman 
was  hfonght  to  the  recruiting  office,  and  waa  declared  a  com- 
mon peasant.   They  called  ont:  '  Shave  him! '  dressed  him 
in  soldier's  clothes,  and '  March! '  with  the  feat  of  the  le- 
cruita.   Three  or  four  years  later  he  announced  to  his  sa* 
perior:  '  I,'  says  he,  *  am  a  gentleman! '    '  What  kind  of  a 
gentleman  are  you? '  says  he,  and  he  chaffed  him  a  little, 
but  he  kept  on  repeating:  '  I  am  a  gentleman,  that  's  all,' 
and  he  went  to  the  higher  authorities,  and  told  them  the 
same.    They  looked  into  the  documents,  and  saw  that  he 
was  a  peasant,  so  they  reported  that  way.    So  our  gentleman 
had  to  give  it  up,  and  he  ser\'ed  thirty-five  years  for  their 
estate.   They  knew  how  to  fix  documents !   It  may  be  that 
for  their  trickery  they  are  now  paying  with  their  own  blood," 
said  GrAehikha  half-loud,  pointing  with  her  eyes  to  Yikov 
IvAnoyich,  who,  in  his  turn,  had  listened  to  her  zedtal  with 
bent  head,  and  without  saying  a  woid. 
I  tried  to  change  the  subject,  ao  I  asked  the  dd  man: 
"In  whose  hands  la  the  estate  of  your  mistreai  now?  I 
saw  it:  It  is  dilapidated  and  neglected,  and  the  house  Is  in 
ruins. 

*'  Our  estate  is  now  held  in  trust,'*  answered  he,  evidently 
satisfied  with  the  change.  "  Well,  the  guardians  are  stran- 
gers, and  they  either  do  not  care  to  look  after  things,  or  they 
steal  into  their  own  pockets.  Not  only  do  they  neglect  the 
estate,  but  they  do  not  keep  the  peasants  in  order.  Drunk- 
ards and  wasters  are  living  without  fear,  and  those  who  are 
better  off"  now  are  frequently  squeezed:  '  We  will  put  your 
SOD,'  they  say,  '  into  the  army,  or  we  will  take  him  to  our 
own  estate.'  ** 


Digitized  by  Google 


Afaniisi  Afaniisevich  Shenshin  319 


**  And  now,  peuant,  pay  your  ransom.  In  former  days 
y<m  used  to  make  a  great  deal  of  money, ' '  fell  in  Grdcbikha. 

Ydkov  Ivknov  paid  no  attention  to  her  words,  and  con- 
tinued : 

'  *  And  then  the  estate  has  no  protection  against  the  officials. 
In  former  days,  when  my  mistress  was  alive,  our  manorial 

V  servants  were,  to  tell  the  truth,  a  riotous  lot.  Not  a  church 
holiday  passed  without  their  riots,  when  they  would  smash 
whole  fairs,  but  the  authorities,  considering  who  they  were 
and  to  what  lady  they  belonged,  begged  them  with  words  to 
stop;  but  nowadays^  oar  mnl  captain  of  police,  an  inaigmfi* 
cant  man,  commanda  and  ptinidies  in  onr  villages,  just  ont 
of  interest  to  that  accused  one  himself,  in  whose  favour  he 
is  so  biassed  that  he  regards  that  day  lost  in  which  he  has 
not  had  some  advantage  from  his  office,  I  once  met  him  in 
town,  and  says  I  to  him:  *  Why  and  for  what  cause  do  yon, 
sir,  so  abuse  the  estate  of  my  mistress  ? '  '  Ah,'  says  he, 
worthy  old  man,  where  are  we,  the  mial  police,  to  have  onr 
sway,  if  not  in  the  estates  that  are  in  trust?  These  are 
severe  times,  we  are  not  permitted  to  take  bribes,  but  what 

Ir  we  can  pocket  in  any  other  way  is  all  right  1 '  and  he  laughed, 
sirl" 

AUmM  Alaii&sevicb  Shenaliin  (Fet).  (1820*1892.) 

SlWDsbin  is  one  of  the  iBOtt  melodious  of  the  minor  poets.  He  was 
bora  in  the  Gomonieiit  «f  Orfl,  mad  fecelved  Us  esily  edncstioa  «t 

home.  Upon  entering  the  Moscow  University  he  was  confronted 
with  certain  difficnlties  wjiich  compelled  him  to  assume  the  name  of 
Fet,  after  bis  mother  by  her  first  marriage,  which  he  retained  through 
life  as  his  nom  de  plume.  He  then  served  in  the  army  up  to 
after  wUdi  he  retired  to  hit  Orfl  estate.  Be  began  wiitiiiig  hi  1840^ 
and  at  fint  distingnishcd  Mmself  as  a  translator  fiom  Goethe  and 
Horace.  His  original  poems,  of  which  there  is  a  large  number,  are 
all  short  and  tanable  lyrical  ontbnxsta,  with  rarely  a  title  to  know 
them  by. 

Two  dwrt  poema,  A  Xusdam  Seme  and  Tryst^  are  given  in  John 
Pellen*8  W^imeefirom  Uie  Jlussiam,  leprhited  hi  the  libmy  of  the 

World's  Best  Literature ;  and  the  four  nameless  ones,  given  below, 
by  I.  H.  Hairisoo  in  The  Anglo-Rnaaiaa  latexaty  Society,  No.  19. 


320         The  Nineteenth  Century 


When  deeply  musing  in  the  silence  of  the  night, 

I  see  her,  gentle  Queen,  above  me  shining  clearly; 
When  all  the  constellations  pour  out  their  rays  of  light, 

And  Argo  seems  to  dream,  while  twinkling,  then  I  dearly 
Long  for  the  coming  hour,  when  I  again  shall  see 

Thee  near  me,  with  a  pain  dull,  dtunb,  and  ever  growing, 
As.  frightened  by  each  sound,  I  trembling  wait  for  fhee. 

Impatience  gnaws  my  bteaat  Thoa  oomeat,  dowly ,  show- 
ing 

By  stealthy  pace  thy  love^  baahfol,  with  timid  glance 
Axoond  thee,  and  I  rush  to  flee  those  dear  eyes  tell 

Their  secret,  and  I  read  love*s  answer  in  their  dance, 
And  hear  thee  aoltly  whisger,  smiling,  "  I  love  thee  welll  *' 

I  strive  in  vain  to  utter  the  w<»da  which  fill  my  heart; 
All  speech,  by  passion  broken,  ends  but  in  sound  nnmean* 

ing, 

And  as  I  panting  kiss  thy  hair,  and  feel  a  part 

Of  thy  breath  mine  becoming,  I  listen,  o'er  thee  leaning. 

For  what  thou  'It  say,  but  no,  I  listen  long  in  vain, — 
Without  a  word  thy  kisses  freely  respond  to  mine — 

O  sweet  one,  may  the  happiness  I  feel  be  always  thine. 
And  mine  lie  in  sure  hope  that  we  two  meet  again ! 


Every  feeling  at  night  to  me  becomes  dearer  and  deeper. 
Shapes  that  are  bom  of  our  fears  terrible  grow  in  the  dark- 
Sounds  I  at  once  understand,  e'en  when  o'er  my  book  I  sit 
musing, 

MotloQleM,  lost  in  my  thoughts,  stung  to  the  point  of  bdief 
In  impossible  things,  while  that  which  seems  strangest  seems 
easy— 

In  tlirough  the  windows  the  moon  shines,  and  the  lamp  bums 
on 

Dimly  beside  the  conch,  and  far  in  the  distance  a  tolling 
Breaks  through  the  silence  at  times»  filling  the  room  with  its 
swell ; 

Gladly  I  yield  to  the  charm  which  ever  hath  set  my  heart 
beating, 


Digitized  by  Google 


Afan&si  Aian^evich  Shenshin  321 


Mbiateniiig  mine  eytB  with  night's  dew,  tears  of  its  infinite 

joy- 
Always  I  hear  night's  song,  but  often  the  melody  changes: 
Now 't  is  the  clang  of  brass,  then 't  is  of  silver  the  ring. 
Strange 't  is  that  ears  hear  well  when  the  mind  is  still  work> 

ing  or  vacant ; 

Thought  presses  fast  upon  thought, — wave  after  wave  in  the 

Night  with  a  mystical  strength  embraces,  and  into  one  fuses, 
Feelings  and  objects  around,  all  that  we  see,  think,  and  hear; 
Thus  on  the  two-headed  poppies  midnight  sheddetfa  its 
moisture, 

Giving  them  power  of  deq>— 4ione  can  that  mystery  tdll 


Stay  here  ttwldle,^'t  is  good  I— Amid  the  sluidows  looming 

Widely,  with  jagged  edge,  by  moonlight  from  the  pines — 
Silence  is  over  all !  The  sounds  on  hilltops  booming 
Have  here  no  leave  to  bring  of  heart's  unrest  the  signs. 

I  will  not  go  there  where  the  stones,  my  faith  deceiving, 
Fall  from  beneath  my  heel,  as  the  cliflPs  edge  I  tread, 

Sheer  to  the  beach  below;  where  the  great  waves  are  leaving, 
And  rushing  on,  the  shore— the  play  of  waters  dread. 

Thou,  Silence,  art  alone  before  me,  'neath  the  quiet 

Of  the  deep  stars,  thou  empress  of  feeling  and  of  thought — 
Bnt  ikere  the  rough  wave  comes,  and  brings  its  splashing 
riot— 

I  win  not  go  there  where  all  is  with  tumult  fraught. 


Night,  thou  srt  so  blest  with  odours  sweet  and  fltroog, 

Thou  rousest  idlest  fancies  In  the  mind! 
AU  listen  unto  thee,  and  I  cannot  but  long 
To  speak  of  what  I  in  thy  stillness  find. 


VOL.  U, 


Digitized  by  Google 


322  The  Nineteenth  Century 


Thine  azure  vault  spreads  wide  before  my  wondering  tyeB, 
And  all  thy  golden  lights  are  burning  bright; 

It  is  as  if  thy  stars  were  one  great  sun  that  tries 
To  cast  its  rays  upon  my  garden's  site. 

Even  the  moon,  no  longer  swimming  o'er  tnft-ciowned  trees 
With  placid  gaze,  seems  like  thyself  to  bum, 

Though  all  the  while  the  brook  glistens  in  plashing  ease 
Beneath  the  boughs  which  hide  its  every  torn. 

The  feeblest  noise  fesoonds  throaghont  thee  like  a  blow; 

Air  whlqiers,  like  the  strings  of  a  gnitar, 
So  tenderly  to  thee  that  all  who  hear  him  know 

The  call  to  love  from  lands  both  near  and  fer. 

All  Nature  seems  aroused,  in  concert  to  cry  out 

In  speech  that  will  not  let  our  fancies  die; 
We  push  the  casement  open  to  look  on  night  without, 
And  trembling  try  to  read  the  silvery  sky. 

— Thinsl.  by  I.  H.  Harrison,  in  The  Ang^ 
Russian  Literary  Society,  No.  19. 

TRYST 

A  whisper,  a  gentle  sigh, 
Trills  of  the  nightingsle; 

The  sOver  flash  of  the  brook, 
Asleep  in  the  deepy  vale 

The  shadows  and  shine  of  night- 
Shadows  in  endless  race; 

The  sweet  of  a  magical  change 
Over  a  sweet  yonng  face. 

The  blush  of  a  rose  in  a  mist, 
An  amber  gleam  on  the  lawn; 

A  rush  of  kisses  and  tears — 

And  oh,  "  the  Dawn!  the  Dawn!  *• 
— From  John  Pollen's  Rhymes  from  the  Russian, 

FMor  Mlkhftylovicb  Dostoevski  (zft»-z88i.) 

Dorto^vaki  was  the  wcond  of  seven  children  of  a  poor  army  mip> 
seoo*  He  was  bionght  up  at  hone,  wbicb  constated  of  bm  two 


uiyiii^uu  Ly  Google 


F£dor  MikMylovich  Dostoevski  323 


living  rooms,  by  h\s  father.  At  thirteen  years  of  age  he  was  sent  to 
a  boarding  school,  and  later  to  the  School  of  Engineering  in  St 
Petersburg  from  which  he  graduated  in  1843.  He  received  a  good 
•ppoltitmciit,  but  looii  Kdgoed  from  it  ia  order  to  devote  Umself  to 
Uteratore.  His  first  oovel,  J\>or  BeepU^  appeared  in  1846^  and  wet 
proclaimed  as  the  work  of  a  "  new  G6gol."  In  1849  he  was  arrested 
for  a  supposed  participation  in  a  conspiracy  and  was  sentenced  for 
four  years  to  Siberian  prisons,  after  which  he  was  to  serve  as  a  soldier 
la  •  aiberUm  vegiment.  Hie  nam,  wliich  Ind  never  been  strong, 
were  completely  shattered  In  his  Imprieoonient,  end  he  at  tfance  bed 
fits  of  epilepsy.  He  was  permitted  to  return  to  European  Russia  in 
1859.  Two  years  later  he  published  with  his  brother  a  periodical, 
TTie  Tim^t  in  which  appeared  simultaneously  two  of  his  great  novels, 
TkeHmmiUeitdmidtkt  Qfftgmded,  end  The  Memoirs  from  the  Dead 
Omt.  Hie  beet  novel.  Crime  and  Fkmishment,  cane  oat  a  few 
years  later.  Only  towards  the  end  of  hie  life  did  his  works  and  his 
literary  labours  furnish  him  with  a  competency.  Dostoevski's  writinj^s 
lack  the  artistic  perfection  of  his  great  contemporaries,  and  almost 
entirelj  neglect  the  description  of  Nature ;  but  they  are  unsurpassed 
ibr  the  peychologlGel  enetyeie  of  hunen  duuracter,  cqtedelljof  the 
diseased  mind.  It  has  been  pointed  out  by  a  medical  anthori^  that 
in  his  analysis  of  pethologicel  cesee  he  has  mtiftipetwi  letff  tctftiitlfif 
discoveries. 

The  following  works  have  been  translated  into  Bnglish:  Buried 
AUve;  or,  Tm  Yean  xfJVmal  ServHude  iu  Siberia^  transleted  by 
Merle  von  Fhik^  Ixmdon  and  New  York,  1881 ;  Msom  Life 

Siberia^  translated  by  H.  S.  Edwairds,  London,  1887 ;  Crime  and 
Punishment,  London,  1885,  New  York,  1886  and  1889  (4th  ed.  Lon- 
don, 1893} ;  Injury  and  Insult,  translated  by  F.  Whishaw,  London, 
1886;  fMeU^e  Dreem,  and  The  Ptrmmumt  Husband,  London,  1888- 
9;  Priemd  0/  ffke  FttmUy,  and  7%e  Gambler,  I^doo,  188^;  Jhor 
Folk  (Franklin  Square  Library,  No.  594^  New  York,  1887,  translated 
by  L.  Milman,  Boston,  and  London,  1894  ;  T/ie  Idiot,  London,  1887- 
8 ;  extracts  from  fbor  People,  and  Crime  and  Punishtnent,  translated 
by  I.  Hapgood,  in  the  Library  of  the  World's  Best  Literature. 

FROM  "CRIME  AND  PUXISHMBNT" 

RASKOLNIKOV'S  CONFESSION 

Ra8k6liiikov  again  covered  his  fioe  with  his  hands  and 
dropped  his  head.  He  suddenly  grew  pale^  xose  from  his 
chair,  looked  at  S6nya,  and,  without  uttering  a  wofd  or  being 
conscious  of  the  act,  seated  himself  on  her  bed. 


324         The  Nineteenth  Century 


To  his  sensations,  that  moment  bore  a  dreadful  resem- 
blance to  the  one  when  he  was  standing  back  of  the  old 
woman  and,  having  loosened  the  axe  from  the  noose,  was 
feeling  that  not  another  minute  was  to  be  lost. 

**  What  is  the  matter  with  you  ?  "  asked  Sony  a,  terrified. 

He  could  not  speak  a  word.  It  was  not  at  all  that  way 
that  he  had  intended  to  announce  it  to  her,  and  he  did  not 
himaelf  midentaiid  wliat  ma  going  on  within  bim.  She 
softly  went  up  to  him,  set  down  on  the  bed  near  him,  and 
waited,  without  taking  her  eyes  away  £n»i  him.  Her  heart 
alfeematdy  beat  strongly  or  stopped  beating.  It  became  un- 
bearable. He  turned  his  deathly  pale  fiue  to  her;  his  1^ 
twitdied  impotently  in  a  vain  effort  to  say  something. 
Terror  passed  through  S6nya's  heart. 

"  What  is  the  matter  with  you  ?  "  she  repeated,  moving  a 
little  away  from  him. 

"  Nothing,  S6nya.  Don't  get  frightened.  Nonsense' 
Really,  when  you  come  to  think  of  it,  it  is  nonsense,"  he 
muttered  like  a  delirious  person  who  is  not  conscious  of  him- 
self. **  But  why  have  I  chosen  3'ou  of  all  persons  to  tor- 
ment ?  "  he  added  suddenly,  looking  at  her.  "  Really,  why  ? 
I  am  continually  asking  myself  this  question,  S6nya.'* 

It  may  be  he  had  asked  himself  that  question  fifteen 
minutes  before,  but  just  then  he  had  lost  control  of  himself 
and  hardly  knew  what  he  was  about,  feeling  only  an  tm- 
interrupted  chill  over  his  whole  body. 

"  Oh,  how  you  suffsr!"  she  spoke  witb  a  painful  ezpies- 
sion,  looking  fixedly  at  him. 

"  It 's  all  boshi         Say,  S6nya "  (he,  for  some  reasoo, 

suddenly  for  a  second  or  two  smiled  a  pale  and  impotent 
smile),  "  do  you  remember  wliat  I  had  intended  to  teU  you 
yesteiday?" 

S6nya  was  waiting  restlesly. 

"  I  told  you,  as  I  left  yem,  that  it  was  probably  the  last 
time  I  was  bidding  you  good-bye,  but  that  if  I  came  back  to- 
day, I  would  tell  you— who  killed  Lizav6ta." 

A  tremor  suddenly  passed  over  her  whole  body. 

*'  So,  you  see,  I  have  come  to  tell  you." 


Digitized  by  Google 


F^dor  Mikh^ylovich  Dostoevski  325 


*'So  you  really  did  yesterday  "  she  whimpered  with 

difficulty.  "But  how  do  you  know?"  she  immediately 
asked,  as  if  coming  to. 

S6nya  began  to  breathe  with  difficulty.  Her  face  grew 
paler  aud  paler. 

"I  do  know." 

She  xemaiiied  idlent  for  a  miniite. 
Did  they  find  him  ?*' she  adced  him  timJd^. 
No.  they  did  n't.»' 

"  How,  thea,  do  you  know  aboat  it  ?  "  she  again  askod 
him  baidy  audibly,  after  a  minnta'a  ailenoe. 

He  tuned  around  to  her  and  fixed  hia  gaae  at  her. 
"  Guefls!  '*  he  muttered  with  the  eame  comyulaive  and  im- 
potent smile  as  before. 

Her  whole  body  waa  ahivering  aa  if  with  cramps.  "  You 
— why  do  you^o  you  frighten  me?"  ahe  qpoke  and 
amiled  like  a  child. 

"  It  must  be,  then,  I  am  a  great  friend  of  his,  since  I 
know,"  proceeded  Haskdlnikov,  continuing  uninterruptedly 
to  look  at  her  face,  as  though  it  was  beyond  him  to  take  his 
eyes  away  from  her.  "  He  did  not  mean  to — kill — that 
Lizav^ta —  He — killed  her  by  accident —  He  wanted  to 
kill  the  old  woman — when  she  was  alone — and  he  came — 
And  then  Lizav^ta  entered —  He — then  killed  her  too." 

Another  terrible  minute  passed.  They  looked  at  each 
other. 

"So  you  can't  guess?"  he  suddenly  asked  her,  with  a 
aensation  as  if  he  were  falling  down  a  belltower. 
"  N — no! "  S6nya  lisped  almost  inaudibly. 
"  Take  a  good  look." 

When  he  said  that,  the  former,  familiar  aenaadon  and- 
denly  iced  hia  souL  He  glanced  at  her,  and  immediately  it 
appeared  to  him,  he  reoogniaed  I4zav^ta  in  her  fiioe.  He 
idvidly  remembered  the  expreasioo  of  I4zavte'a  faot  aa  he 
approached  her  with  the  aze  and  abe  kept  receding  to  the 
wall,  with  ontsbetdied  hand,  and  perfectly  childiflii  exprea- 
fllon  of  fear  in  her  face,  precisely  as  little  children  do 
who^  when  tfa^  anddenly  become  frightened  at  Mmething, 


Digitized  by  Google 


3^6         The  Nineteenth  Century 


imtnovably  and  lesUeflsly  look  at  the  object  of  tlieir  fear,  step 
back  and  begin  to  cry,  while  stretching  oat  their  little  hands. 
Almost  the  same  took  place  with  Sdnya.  She  looked  at  him 
for  a  while,  just  as  powerless,  with  just  the  same 
of  terror;  then,  suddenly,  she  stretched  out  her  left  hand, 
baidy  touched  his  breast  with  her  fingen,  and  began  to  rise 
slowly  from  the  bed,  all  the  time  removing  farther  away 
from  him  and  ever  more  immovably  fixing  her  eyes  t^on 
him. 

Her  terror  was  soon  communicated  to  him,  and  he  began 
to  look  at  her,  almost  with  the  same  childish  smile. 

*'  Have  you  guessed  ?  "  he  whispered  at  last. 

* '  Lord !  "  A  terrible  moan  issued  from  her  breast.  She  fell 
powerless  on  the  bed,  with  her  face  on  the  pillows.  But  in 
a  moment  she  was  again  on  her  feet,  rapidly  walked  up  to 
him,  seized  his  two  hands,  and,  pressing  them  hard  with  her 
thin  fingers,  as  in  a  vise,  again  became  motionless  as  if  glued 
to  the  place,  and  stared  at  him.  With  this  last,  despairing 
glance  she  wanted  to  read  some  last  hope  in  his  face.  But 
there  was  no  hope;  there  was  no  suspicion  left;  it  was  all 
so!  Even  later,  when  she  recalled  that  moment*  she  felt  in- 
expressibly strange:  how  was  it  that  she  Uien  saw  at  once 
that  there  was  no  doubt  whatsoever  left  ?  For  certainly  she 
could  not  say  that  she  had  had  a  presentiment  of  that  kind. 
But  just  then,  when  he  had  barely  told  her  about  it,  it  sod* 
denly  flashed  upon  her  that  she  really  had  had  some  such* 
presentiment. 

"  Stop,  S6nya,  stop!  Do  not  torment  me  I"  he  begged 
her  i^tifolly.  He  had  had  the  intention  of  telling  her  about 
it  in  an  entirely  different  manner,  but  it  had  turned  out  just 
that  way. 

She  jumped  up,  as'  if  beside  herself,  and,  wringing  her 
hands,  stepped  to  the  centre  of  the  room;  but  she  imme- 
diately returned  and  seated  herself  bj-  his  side,  touching  his 
shoulder  with  her  own.  Then  she  suddenly  quivered,  as  if 
pierced  by  an  arrow,  cried  out  aloud,  and,  without  knowing 
herself  why,  kneeled  down  before  him. 

*'  Oh,  what  have  you  done  with  yourself  ?  "  she  cried  in 


Digitized  by  Google 


F£dor  Mikh^ylovich  Dostodvski  3^7 


deqpair  and,  riaitig  to  her  feet,  embraced  his  neck  and 
pceMed  it  with  all  her  might 
Raflk61iiiko¥  reded  bade  and  looked  at  her  with  a  aad 

smile. 

"  You  are  a  strange  girl,  S6nya!  You  embrace  and  kiss 
me,  though  I  told  you  all  about  it.  You  are  beside  your* 

self." 

"  No,  there  is  not  a  more  unfortunate  man  in  the  whole 
world  than  you  are!  "  she  called  out.  as  if  in  a  stupor,  with- 
out hearing  his  remark,  and  suddenly  bursting  into  tears, 
as  if  in  hysterics. 

A  long  unfamiliar  feeling  flooded  his  soul  and  at  once 
softened  it.  He  did  not  struggle  against  it:  two  tears 
xoUed  oat  of  his  cyea  and  Irang  upon  his  ladies. 

"So  you  win  not  leave  me,  S6nya?"  he  spoke^  looking 
almost  hopefully  st  her. 

"  No,  nol  Never  and  nowhere!  *'  S6nyB  cded  out  *'  I 
will  go  with  you,  anywhere  you  want  me  to!  O  I#oidl  O 
miserable  girl  that  I  am.  Oh,  why,  why  did  I  not  know 
you  before?  Why  did  yoci  not  oome  to  see  me  before?  O 
Lord!" 

"  You  see,  I  have  come  nowl  " 

*'  Now!  Oh,  what  can  now  be  done  ?  Both  of  us,  both 
of  us ! "  she  cried  out  as  if  oblivious  and  again  embraced  him. 
"  I  »11  go  to  Siberia  with  you !  " 

Something  touched  him  to  the  quick,  and  his  former  hate- 
ful and  almost  supercilious  smile  stood  upon  his  lips. 

"  S6nya,  as  far  as  that  is  concerned,  I  may  not  yet  be 
ready  to  go  to  Siberia,"  he  said. 

S6nya  cast  a  swift  glance  at  him. 

After  her  first  impasdooed  and  vesstkms  sympathy  with 
the  unfortunate  man,  the  terrible  idea  of  the  murder  struck 
her  again  focdUy .  She  heard  the  murderer  in  his  chsnged 
tone  of  voice.  She  looked  in  wonderment  at  him.  She 
knew  nothing  as  yet,  neither  why,  nor  how,  nor  for  what 
purpose.  Now  all  these  questions  burst  at  once  upon  her 
consdousness.  And  again  she  could  not  bdieve:  "  Ho»  he 
a  murderer  I  But  is  that  posdble  ? " 


328         The  Nineteenth  Century 


"But  what  is  that?  Wheie  am  I?"  she  exclaimed  in 
great  perplexity  as  if  still  in  a  trance.  But  how  coald 
jon,  you,  take  that  step  ?   How  was  it  poeaiUe  ?  " 

"  Why,  to  rob.  Stop,  S6nyal"  3ie  answered,  as  if  ex- 
hausted and  even  as  if  annoyed. 

S6nya  stood  for  a  moment,  aa  if  struck  domb^  then  she 
suddenly  cried  out : 

"  You  had  been  hungry  1  You — to  help  your  mother? 
Yes?" 

*'  No,  S6nya,  no,"  he  muttered  and  turned  away  his 
drooping  head,  '*  I  was  not  so  hungry,  I  really  wanted  to 
help  my  mother,  but — that  is  not  quite  correct  either — do 
not  tor  men  t  me,  S6nya!  ** 

S6nya  wrung  her  hands. 

"  But  can  all  this  be  really  tm?  Lord,  isittme?  Who 

would  believe  it  ?         How  can  it  be,  you  give  away  your 

last,  and  then  yon  kill,  in  order  to  rob  1  Ahl"  she  suddenly 
cried  oat  "  Tlie  money,  the  money  that  you  had  given 
Katerfna  Iv^movna— that  num^y— Lord,  can  it  be  that 
money,  too?" 

'**No^  S6aya,"  he  speedily  intem^ted  her,  **  not  that 
money,  calm  yourself!  That  money  mother  sent  me  by  a 
merchant,  and  I  received  it  when  I  was  sick,  and  that  veiy 
day  I  gave  it  away.  No^  that  was  my  mmuy,  my  own 
money.'* 

S6nya  listened  to  him  perplexed  and  was  invoking  all  her 
reasoning  power  in  order  to  form  a  concept. 

**  That  money — I  really  do  not  even  know  whether 
there  was  any  money  there,"  he  added  softly  and  as  if  lost 
in  meditation.  * '  I  did  take  oflF  a  purse,  a  full  chamois  purse, 
from  her  neck,  but  I  did  not  open  it  to  look  into  it;  I  sup- 
pose I  did  not  have  the  time  for  it          There  were  some 

other  things,  studs,  chains,  and  I  know  not  what,  —  I 
buried  all  that  and  the  purse  next  morning  under  a  rock 

in  somebody's  yard,  in  the  V.  Prospect          It 's  all  there 

yet  " 

86nya  waa  straining  herself  to  hear. 

*'  Then  why  did  yon  do  it?  You  said  yonnelf,  yon  did 


Digitized  by  Google 


Fidor  Mikh&ylovich  Dostoevski  329 

it  to  vob,  and  tben  yon  did  mot  take  anything  ? "  she  quickly 
adced  liim,  trying  to  catch  at  a  straw. 

I  do  not  know— I  have  not  yet  made  up  my  mind 
whether  to  take  that  money,  or  not,"  he  spoke,  as  if  again 
lost  in  meditation,  but  suddenly  regaining  oonsdonsness,  his 
face  was  lit  np  by  a  swift,  soft  smile.  "  Oh,  what  a  lot  of 
bosh  I  have  been  jnst  saying,  di  ?  " 

A  thought  flashed  through  S6nya's  mind':  ' '  Maybe  he  is 
insane!  *'  bat  she  immediately  arrested  her  thought:  "  No^ 
there  is  aomethiug  else  there."  She  did  not  understand  a 
thing,  not  a  thing ! 

"  Do  you  know,  Sdnya,"  he  suddenly  said  with  a  kind  of 
inspiration,  "  do  you  know  what  I  will  tell  you  ?  If  I  had 
murdered  them  because  I  was  hungry,"  he  continued,  ac- 
centnating  every  word,  and  enigmatically,  though  sincerely, 
looking  at  her,  "  I  would  now  be  happy!  You  had  better 
know  that !  What  do  you  care,  what  do  you  care,"  he  cried 
out  after  a  moment  in  a  voice  akin  to  despair,  "  what  do 
you  care  for  my  confession,  if  I  were  to  make  it,  that  I  have 
done  wrong?  What  good  could  such  a  foolish  victory  of 
yours  over  me  do  you  ?  O  S6nya,  did  I  now  come  to  you 
for  that?" 

S6nya  again  wanted  to  say  something,  but  she  kept  silent. 

"  That 's  why  I  wanted  you  last  night  to  be  with  me,  be- 
cause you  are  the  only  one  left  to  me." 

"  Where  did  you  want  me  to  go  to  ?  "  S6nya  asked  timidly. 

"  Not  to  steal,  nor  murder,  don't  worry— not  fbr  that,"  he 
smiled  sarcastically.  "  I  only  now  begin  to  understand 
what  I  called  you  for  last  night!  Yesterday,  I  did  not 
undefstand  what  I  called  yon  Ibr.  I  called  you  for  the  same 
puipose  for  which  I  have  come  to  see  you  now:  not  to  leave 
me^  You  will  not  leave  me,  Sdnya?  " 

She  pressed  his  hand. 

"  Now,  why  did  I  tell  her,  why  did  I  confess  to  her,"  he 
cried  out  a  minute  later  in  despair,  looking  in  endless  tor- 
ment at  her.  "You  are  waiting  for  an  explanation  from 
me,  S6nya;  you  are  sitting  there  and  waiting,  I  see  it;  but 
what  am  I  to  tell  you  ?  You  won't  understand  a  word  of  it; 


Digitized  by  Google 


350         The  Nineteenth  Century 


you  will  only  sufiEer  torment — for  me!  There,  there yoa  are 
weeping  and  again  embracing  me.  Why  are  you  embracing 
me  ?  Is  it  because  I  did  not  bear  it  all  myself,  but  came  to 
put  it  on  other  shoulders,  that  by  your  suffering  I  may  feel 
relieved  ?    And  you  can  love  such  a  villain  ?  " 

"Are  n't  you  suffering  yourself  ?  "  S6nya  exclaimed. 

The  same  feeling  again  flooded  his  aoul,  and  again  for  a 
moment  softened  it. 

*'S6nya,  my  heart  is  bad.  Take  a  note  of  that,  for  you 
will  be  able  to  explain  much  by  it.  I  came  because  I  am 
bad.  There  are  some  who  would  not  have  come.  But  I  am 
a  coward,  a  villain!    Well,  let  it  be!    But  that  is  not  it! 

I  ought  to  talk  now,  and  I  do  not  know  how  to  be* 
gin  " 

He  stopped  and  £eU  to  musing. 

"  Bah,  we  don't  bdong  togefherl   he  flgdn 
"  We  are  not  a  match  for  each  other.  Why,  why  did  I 
come  ?  I  shall  mewt  forgive  mysdf ! " 

*'  No,  no!  It  is  good  that  you  have  oomel "  exdahned 
86nya,  "  it  is  better  that  I  shoold  know,  muchbetterl" 

He  loolBed  in  oain  at  her. 

"After  all,  why  not?"  he  said,  as  if  pondering  over  it 
"Itoertainly  happened  that  way!  Listen:  I  wanted  to  bea 
Napoleon,  that 's  why  I  murdered   Well,  do  yon  under- 
stand now?" 

"  N — no!  "  S6nya  muttered  naively  and  timidly,  "  but  just 
gooni  I 'U  understand  yon,  I'll  make  it  out  1"  she  begas^ 
him. 

"  You  will  understand  ?   Very  well,  we  shall  see! " 
He  grew  silent  and  pondered  for  a  long  while. 

"  It  is  like  this:  I  once  asked  myself  what  would  have 
happened  if  Napoleon  had  been  in  my  place,  and  had  had 
nothing  with  which  to  he^in  his  career,  neither  Toulon, 
nor  Egypt,  nor  crossing  Mout- Blanc;  if  instead  of  all  these 
beautiful  and  monumental  things  there  would  be  nothing 
but  a  funny  old  woman,  a  registrar's  widow,  whom,  in 
addition,  it  would  be  necessary  to  kill  in  order  to  get  the 
money  out  of  her  trunk  (for  the  sake  of  a  career,  you  under- 


Digitized  by  Google 


Fidor  Mikh&ylovich  Dostoevski  331 


•tasdOt'-'weU,  wsM  hit  have  made  np  liia  mind  to  do  so»  if 
tlteie  had  been  no  other  way  ?  Would  he  have  had  acntplea 
because  it  is  £ur  £rom  being  monnmental,  and— «nd  becanae 
itiaainfol?  WeU,  I  tdl  yon,  this  *  question '  tonnented  me 
for  a  dxeadfuUy  long  time,  so  that  I  ^t  veiy  much  ashamed 
ivhen  at  last  I  guessed  (it  came  all  d  a  sudden  to  me),  that 
he  not  only  vroold  not  have  had  any  scruplea*  but  that  it 
would  not  even  have  occurred  to  him  that  it  was  not  monu- 
mental—and that  he  would  have  been  at  a  loss  to  see  what 
he  was  to  have  any  scruples  about  ?  And  if  no  other  road 
had  been  open  to  him,  he  would  have  choked  her  to  death, 
without  giving  her  a  chance  to  cr>'  out,  and  he  would  not 
even  have  brooded  over  it.  Well,  I — stopped  brooding 
over  it — killed  her — following  the  example  of  my  author- 
ity  It  was  precisely  that  way!    You  think  it  is 

funny  ?  Yes,  S6nya,  the  funniest  thing  about  all  this  is  that 
it  really  happened  that  way  ** 

S6nya  did  not  think  it  at  all  funny. 

*'  You  had  better  tell  me  straight,  without  examples,"  she 
begged  him  more  timidly  and  in  a  hardly  audible  voice. 

He  tcumed  towaxds  her,  sadly  looked  at  her,  and  took  her 

"  Yoit  axe  again  right,  S6nya.  That  is  indeed  nonsense, 
nothing  bnt  empty  prattle!  Yon  see:  you  know  that  my 
mother  haidly  has  a  thing.  My  sister  has  somehow  man- 
aged to  gtt  an  education,  and  she  is  destined  to  wear  her  life 
away  as  a  governess.  All  their  hopes  were  centred  in  me. 
I  studied,  bnt  was  vnable  to  support  myself  in  the  univendty, 
and  was  compelled  to  leave  it  for  a  time.  Even  aa  it  waa,  I 
still  might  have  hoped,  if  dieumstanoes  became  favourable^ 
in  ten  ortwdve  years  to  be  a  teacher  or  official,  with  a  thou- 
sand roubles  yearly  salary."  He  spOke  as  if  he  had  learned 
it  by  heart.  "  In  the  meanwhile  my  mother  would  dry  up 
from  cares  and  grief,  and  I  should  not  after  all  succeed  in 
making  her  lot  easier,  while  my  sister — well,  something 

worse  could  happen  to  her!   What  pleasure  is  there 

in  passing  all  your  life  by  things  and  avoiding  them,  in  for- 
getting your  mother,  or,  say,  respectfully  bearing  the  insult 


Digitized  by  Google 


33^         The  Nineteenth  Century 


offered  to  your  sister  ?  What  for  ?  To  bury  them»  to  get  a 
fiunily  of  your  own,  wile  and  children,  and  then  to  leave 
these  too  without  a  penny  ?  Well— well,  so  I  decided  to  get 
hold  of  the  old  woman's  money,  to  tiae  it  for  the  first  few 
years,  by  providing  for  myself  in  the  ontversity,  without 
putting  my  mother  to  any  trouble,  and  to  use  it  also  for  the 
first  steps  after  my  university  career.  I  had  decided  to  do  it 
all  in  a  broad,  radical  manner,  so  as  to  provide  abundantly 
for  my  new  career,  and  to  start  on  a  new  and  independent 

road          Of  course,  it  is  wrong  for  me  to  have  killed  that 

old  woman — well,  enough  of  it!  '* 

He  dragged  out  the  story  in  complete  exhaustion,  and  his 
head  fell  down  on  his  breast. 

"Oh,  it  is  not  that,  not  that,"  S6nya  exclaimed  dejectedly, 
"  how  could  one — no,  not  that  way,  not  that  way ! " 

"  You  see  yourself  that  it  is  not  so!  Still  I  have  told  you 
the  whole  truth!  '* 

"What  truth  is  that!  Ol^rd!" 

"  X  have  only  killed  a  louse,  S6nya,  a  useless,  nasty,  harm- 
ful louse.*' 

"  You  call  a  person  a  loose! " 

**  I  know  mysdf  that  she  is  not  a  loose,"  he  answered, 
looking  at  her  in  a  strange  manner.  "  However,  Sdoya,  I  am 

l7U>gt---I  have  been  lying  for  a  long  time        No^  it  is  not 

that;  you  are  right    No*  there  are  altogether  dififerent 

reasons!         I  have  not  talked  to  anybody  for  a  longtime, 

S6nya         My  head  hurts  me  dreadAilly." 

His  eytn  burnt  with  a  feverish  fire.  He  was  almost  grow- 
ing deliriotis;  a  restless  smile  hovered  on  his  lips.  A  terrible 
impotence  could  be  seen  through  the  excited  condition  of  his 
soul.  S6nya  understood  how  he  was  suffering.  Her  own 
head  began  to  whirl.  And  he  spoke  so  strangely,  and  yet 
as  if  one  might  understand,  but— "  How  is  it  possible? 
How  is  it  possible,  O  Lord  ?  "  and  she  wrung  her  hands  in 
despair. 

**  No,  S6nya,  it  is  not  that!  "  he  began  again,  raising  his 
head,  as  if  a  sudden  new  turn  in  his  thoughts  had  struck 
him  and  roused  him.   "  It  is  not  that  1   But  rather,  suppose 


Digitized  by  Google 


F6dor  Mikhitylovich  Dostoevski  333 


(yea,  that  is  betterl),  fluppoae  that  I  am  selfish,  envious,  ma- 
licious, villainous,  revengeful,  well — ^if  yoa  wish  it,  inclined 
to  insanity.  (Let  us  grant  all,  while  we  are  about  it!  We 
spoke  before  of  insanity,  it  seems !)  I  told  you  long  ago  that 
I  could  not  keep  myself  at  the  university.  But  do  you  know, 
I  may  have  been  able  to  after  all !  Mother  would  have  sent 
the  amount  for  the  fees,  and  very  likely  I  could  have  earned 
enough  for  shoes,  clothes,  and  bread !  There  was  some  tutor- 
ing to  do,  and  they  offered  fifty  kopeks  an  hour.  Take 
Razumi'khin,  he  is  working!  But  I  just  got  mad,  and  did  n't 
want  to.  That 's  it,  mad, — that  is  a  good  word !  I  then 
kept  to  my  corner  like  a  spider.    You  have  l>eea  in  my  den, 

you  have  seen  it          Do  you  know,  S6nya,  low  ceilings  and 

small  rooms  oppress  soul  and  mind!  Oh,  how  I  did  hate 
that  den!  And  yet,  I  did  not  wish  to  leave  it!  I  did  not 
lesve  it  te  days  «t  a  time,  and  I  did  not  want  to  work,  or 
even  eat,  but  lay  there  all  the  time.  If  Nast^sya  brought 
me  anytiiing,  I  would  eat  it;  if  not,— a  day  might  pass  with- 
oiiteating.  I  was  ao  mad,  I  did  not  aak  on  purpose.  During 
the  evenings  I  had  no  candles,  but  lay  in  darkness.  I  did 
not  tiy  to  earn  enough  fbr  candles.  I  ought  to  have  studied, 
but  I  had  sold  my  books;  on  my  notes  and  copybooks  that 
are  lying  on  the  table  there  is  even  now  an  inch  of  doat.  I 

preferred  to  lie  and  think.  And  I  did  nothing  but  think  

I  had  such  strange  visions,  sudi  peculiar  dreams,  just  horri- 
ble! It  was  then  that  I  began  to  im^ne  that— no,  that 
is  n't  correct!  I  am  again  telling  wrong!  You  see,  I  kept 
on  asking  myself:  why  am  I  so  stupid  and  do  not  try  to  he 
wiser,  when  others  are  stupid  and  I  am  positive  that  they  are 
stupid  ?   Then  I  discovered,  S6nya,  that  it  would  take  a  long 

time  to  wait  for  others  to  g^et  wiser          Then  I  found  out 

that  it  would  never  happen,  that  people  would  not  change, 
that  nobody  could  change  them,  and  that  it  was  not  worth 
the  while  anyway!   Yes,  that  's  the  way!   That  's  their 

law,  their  law,  S6nya!    That 's  so!          I  know  even  now, 

S6nya,  that  he  who  is  strong  and  mighty  in  soul  and  mind 
is  their  master!  He  who  dares  is  right  in  their  eyes.  He 
who  looks  with  contempt  at  most  things  is  their  lawgiver. 


334         The  Nineteenth  Century 


and  he  who  dares  most  of  all  is  most  right !   So  it  has  always 
been,  and  so  it  will  always  be!   Only  a  blind  man  will  re- 
fuse to  see  that! " 
Saying  this,  Raak61nikov  looked  at  S6aya,  but  he 

was  no  longer  ooocemed  about  her  tindentanding  him. 
He  was  in  a  kind  of  aombie  laptnze.  He  bad  leaUy  not 
exchanged  any  woids  with  anyone  for  a  long  time.  Sdnya 
understood  that  that  gloomy  catechisn  was  bis  futh  and 
law. 

"  I  then  came  to  the  oondoaioo,  S6nya,"  he  proceeded  in 
an  ecstatic  mood,  '*  that  power  is  given  only  to  him  who 
dam  to  bend  in  order  to  take  it  up.  That  is  the  only  thing, 
— one  must  dare!  Then  I  worked  out  a  tliought,  for  the 
first  time  in  my  life,  which  no  one  had  ever  worked  out  be- 
fore! Nobody!  It  all  of  a  sudden  became  clear  to  me  as 
the  sun  that  it  was  very  strange  that,  passing  by  all  that 
nonsense,  no  one  bad  ever  dared  or  would  dare  to  take  the 
whole  business  by  the  tail  and  send  it  flying  to  the  devil!  I 
— T  wanted  to  dare,  and  I  killed— -I  only  wanted  to  dare^ 
Sony  a,  there  is  the  whole  reason !  " 

"Oh,  hush,  hush!"  cried  S6nya,  and  wrung  her  hands. 
"You  have  departed  from  God,  and  God  has  struck  you 
down,  and  has  given  you  over  to  the  devil!  " 

"  By  the  way,  S6nya,  when  I  was  lying  in  the  dark  aud 
all  kinds  of  thoughts  came  to  me,  was  it  the  devil  that  was 
tempting  me,  eh  ?  " 

"  Hush!  Don't  laugh,  blasphemer  I  You  do  not  under- 
stand anything,  not  a  thing !  OI#ofdI  He  will  not  under- 
stand anything  1*' 

"  Hush,  Sdnya,  I  am  not  at  all  latighing,  I  know  myself 
that  the  devil  was  dragging  me  all  the  time.  Hush,  S^ya, 
hush!  '*  he  repeated  gloomily  and  with  emphasis.  "  I  know 
all.  I  thought  it  all  over  and  whispered  it  to  m3raelf  as  I 
was  lying  there  in  the  dark — I  have  discussed  it  all  with 
myself,  down  to  the  finest  point,  and  I  know  all,  I  know  all! 
And  I  got  then  so  tired  of  all  that  prattle !  I  wanted  to  for- 
get and  begin  anew,  S6nya,  and  stop  all  that  nonsense !  Do 
you  really  think  I  went  headlong,  like  a  fool  ?  I  ivent  like 


F6dor  Mikh4ylovich  Dostoevski  335 


a  shrewd  fellow,  and  it  is  this  that  has  been  my  aadoiiigl 
Or  do  you  really  think  that  I  did  not  know,  for  example, 
that  the  very  fact  that  I  kept  on  asking  myself  and  discussing 
with  myself  whether  I  had  a  right  to  have  power,  was  in 
itself  a  proof  that  I  had  no  such  right  ?  Or,  that  when  I  put 
the  question  to  myself :  *  Is  man  a  louse  ? '  man  is  no  longer 
a  louse,  as  far  as  I  am  concerned,  but  that  he  is  only  a  louse 
for  him  who  has  no  doubts  about  it,  and  proceeds  without 
any  questions  ?  The  very  fact  that  I  was  vexed  for  several 
days  by  the  question,  whether  Napoleon  would  have  gone 
or  not,  showed  that  I  clearly  felt  that  I  was  no  Napoleon— — 
I  suffered  all  fbe  torment  of  that  nonsense,  S6nya,  and  I 
wmted  to  get  fid  of  it.  I  wanted  to  kill  withoot  casuistry, 
Sdnya,  to  kill  for  my  own  aakei  only  for  me !  I  did  nol  want 
to  tte  in  this  matter,  not  even  to  mysdf  f  I  did  not  kill  In 
order  to  hdp  mother,— tkat  'a  boahl  I  did  not  kUl  in  order 
to  get  the  means  and  the  power  wiUi  whidt  to  do  good  to 
hnmanklnd.  Bosh!  I  simply  kiUed,  killed  tqsjmsjom 
sak^^jigy^fe  me.  -  No  donht,  it  was  all  the  same  to  me  at 
that  moment  whether  I  was  ever  to  become  anybody's  bene- 
factor, or  whether  I  was  going,  like  a  spider,  to  catch  them 

all  in  my  cobweb  in  order  to  suck  their  vital  sap !   Nor 

was  money  the  main  thing  that  I  wanted  when  I  killed  her, 

S6nya;  not  so  much  the  money  as  something  else   Now 

I  know  it  all          Understand  me :  if  I  were  to  go  on  that 

road  again,  I  should  never  repeat  that  murder.  I  had  to  find 
out  something  else, — something  else  drew  me  on.  What  I 
had  to  find  out  then, — and  find  out  at  once, — was  whether 
I  was  a  louse  or  a  man !  Whether  I  should  be  able  to  trans- 
gress or  not!  Whether  I  should  be  able  to  bend  and  take 
up  or  not !  Whether  I  am  a  trembling  creature,  or  whether 
I  have  the  right—" 

"Tokill?  Whether  yon  have  the  right  to  kill?"  S6nya 
wrung  her  hands. 

"Ah,S6nya!  he  exdaimed  excitedly ;  he  wanted  to  xetort 
something,  but  oontemptnoody  kept  silent  "  Do  not  inter- 
ropt  me,  86n3ra!  I  wanted  to  prove  but  one  thing  to  yon: 
that  the  devil  was  then  drawing  me  on,  and  that  only  later 


Digitized  by  Google 


336         The  Nineteenth  Centiuy 


he  explained  to  me  that  I  had  no  right  to  go  there,  because 
I  am  just  the  same  kind  of  a  louse  as  anybody  else.  He  has 
had  his  laugh  at  me,  and  so  I  have  come  to  you  how!  Here 
is  a  guest  for  you !  If  I  were  not  a  louse,  would  I  have  come 
to  you  ?  Listen !  When  I  was  then  going  to  the  old  woman, 
I  only  went  to  tr>' — I  am  telling  you !  " 

"  And  you  killed  her!    You  killed  her!  " 

"  How  killed  her  ?  Is  that  the  way  to  kill  ?  Do  people 
go  to  kill  the  way  I  went  ?  I  '11  tell  you  sometime  how  I 
went  then !— —  Did  I  kill  the  old  woman  ?  I  killed  myself, 
and  not  the  old  woman !   I  then  crushed  myself  for  eternity ! 

  The  devil  killed  the  old  woman,  and  not  I  

Enough,  S6nya,  enough!  Leave  me  alone,"  lie  anddenly 
cried  out  in  convulaiye  despair,  *'  leave  me  alone! " 

He  bent  over  Ills  knees  and  presaed  Us  head  with  his 
hands,  as  if  in  a  vise. 

"  Oh,  what  torment! "  S6nya  moaned  pitifally. 

"  Wdl,  what  is  to  be  done  now,  speak! "  he  a^ked,  sud- 
denly raising  his  head  and  looking  at  her  witk  a  face  that 
was  horribly  distorted  by  despair. 

"  What  is  to  be  done! "  she  exclaimed,  jumping  up  from 
her  seat,  and  her  eyta  that  had  been  full  of  tears  suddenly 
began  to  sparkle. 

"  Rise  I "  She  grabbed  him  by  his  shoulder;  he  raised 
himself  and  looked  almost  perplexed  at  her.  "  Go  at  onoe, 
this  very  minute,  stand  at  the  cross-road,  make  your 
obeisance,  first  kiss  the  earth  that  you  have  polluted,  then 
bow  to  the  whole  world,  on  all  four  sides,  and  crj'  out  aloud 
to  all,  so  that  all  may  hear  it:  *  I  have  murdered! '  Then 
God  will  send  you  life  again.  Will  you  go?  Will  you?'*, 
she  asked  him,  trembling  as  if  in  a  fit.  She  seized  both  his 
hands,  pressed  them  tightly  with  her  own,  and  looked  at 
him  with  a  fier>'  glance. 

He  was  perplexed  and  was  even  surprised  at  her  sudden 
ecstasy. 

"  You  are  talking  about  Siberia,  S6nya,  are  n't  you  ?  If 
I  tinderstand  you  right,  I  am  to  accuse  myself,"  he  said 
gloomily. 


Fidor  Mikhciylovich  Dostodvski  337 


"  What  is  necessary  Is  to  accept  the  suffering  and  redeem 
yoniself  through  suffering." 

'*  No,  Sdnya,  I  won't  go  to  them." 

' '  But  how  are  you  going  to  live  ? — ^how  are  you  ?  What  are 
yon  going  to  live  by  ?"  86nya  exclaimed.  "  Will  that  be 
possible  now  ?  How  are  you  going  to  talk  to  your  mother  ? 
Oh,  what  will  become  of  them,  what  will  become  of  them 
now  ?  But  what  am  I  saying  ?  You  have  already  aban- 
doned mother  and  sister.  You  have  abandoned  them,  you 
have.  O  Lord!  "  she  exclaimed,  *'  he  knows  all  that  him- 
self! How,  pray,  how  can  one  live  without  people  ?  What 
will  become  of  you  ?  '* 

•'Be  no  child,  S6nya,"  he  softly  said.  "What  am  I 
guilty  of  in  their  presence  ?    Why  should  I  go  ?    What  shall 

I  tell  them  ?    That  is  all  visionar>'          They  themselves 

get  away  with  people  by  the  million,  and  regard  it  a  virtue. 

They  are  rascals  and  villains,  Sonya!          I  won't  go. 

What  should  I  tell  them  ? — that  I  have  killed  somebody, 
and  that  I  did  uot  dare  take  the  money,  but  hid  it  under  a 
rock  ?  "  he  added  with  a  sarcastic  smile.  *'  Why,  they  will 
themselves  laugh  at  me,  and  will  say:  *  He  was  a  fool  not  to 
take  the  money.  A  coward  and  a  fool  I '  They  will  under- 
stand  nothing,  absolntdy  nothing,  S6ny  a ,  and  they  do  not  de- 
serve to  understand.  Why  should  I  go?  Benodind,S6nya." 

*'  You  will  worry  your  life  away,  you  win  worry  your  life 
aw^,"  she  r^eated,  stretching  out  her  hands  to  him,  and 
Imploring  him  with  a  despsiring  look. 

*'  Maybe  I  have  incriminated  mysdf  beyond  necenity," 
he  remarked  gloomily,  as  if  lost  in  meditation,  "maybe  I  am 
still  a  man,  and  not  a  louse,  and  have  been  too  hssty  in  ac- 
cusing myself         I  will  struggle  on  for  a  while." 

A  haughty  smile  lay  on  his  closed  lips. 
To  bear  such  a  torment  1  And  it  is  for  a  lifetime,  for  a 
lifetime!" 

I  '11  get  used  to  it,"  he  said  morosely  and  pensively. 
"  Listen,"  he  began  a  minute  later,  "  it 's  time  to  stop  weep- 
ing, and  think  of  business.  I  came  to  tell  you  that  they  are 
looking  for  me  now,  and  trying  to  catch  me  " 


33^         The  Nineteenth  Century 


"  Ah! "  erclftimeil  S6nya  in  fright 

*'  Why  have  yoa  cried  ontl  You  yourself  wanted  me  to 
be  aent  to  the  mines,  and  now  you  aie  frightened.  Bat  let 
me  tell  you:  I  am  not  going  to  give  myself  up  to  them.  I 
will  struggle  on»  and  they  wUl  do  nothing.  They  have  no 
real  clue.  Yesterday  I  was  in  great  danger,  and  I  thought 
that  I  was  undone;  but  to-day  things  have  improved.  All 
their  proofs  have  two  ends  to  them,  that  is,  I  can  turn  their 
accusations  to  my  advantage,  do  you  understand  ?  And  I 
will  do  so,  for  I  have  learned  a  thing  or  two.  But  they  will- 
certainly  put  me  in  jail.  If  it  had  not  been  for  just  one  in- 
cident, they  would  have  put  me  in  jail  to-day,  and  maybe 

they  still  will          But  that  is  nothing,  S6nya.    I  shall  stay 

there  a  while,  and  then  they  will  let  me  out,  for  they  have 
not  a  single  proper  proof,  and  there  will  be  none, — I  give 
you  my  word  for  it.    With  what  they  know,  they  cannot 

hold  a  man.    Well,  that 's  enough          I  just  wanted  you 

to  know          I  shall  try  to  fix  matters  with  my  mother  and 

sister,  so  as  to  allay  their  suspicions  and  fears.  Besides,  my 
sister  seems  to  be  provided  for  at  present,  oooseqnently 
mother  toa  Well,  that 's  all.  However,  yoa  want  to  be 
cantioas.  Will  jrou  come  to  see  me  in  jail,  when  I  am  taken 
there?*' 

"07e8,IwiU,  IwiU!" 

They  were  sitting  side  by  side,  sorrowful  and  crushed,  as 
it  cast  by  a  stonn  on  a  desolate  shore.  He  looked  at  S6oya 
and  he  fdt  how  much  her  love  was  upon  him,  and,  straage 
to  say,  he  suddenly  had  a  heavy  and  painful  feeling  because 
he  was  loved.  Yes,  that  was  a  strange  and  terrible  sensa- 
tion 1  As  he  was  on  his  way  to  S6nya,  he  felt  that  all  his 
hope  was  in  her.  He  had  hoped  to  put  away  part  of  his 
sufferings,  and  now  that  all  her  heart  had  turned  to  him,  he 
suddenly  felt  and  knew  that  he  was  infinitely  more  unhappy 
than  he  had  been  before. 

"  S6nya,"  he  said,  "  you  had  better  not  come  to  see  me  in 
jail." 

S6nya  did  not  answer,  she  was  weeping. 
*'  You  won't,  will  you? " 


Digitized  by  Google 


Apoll6n  Nikol&evich  M&ykov  339 


"  Here^  take  Una  cypfeflscnm  I  liave  another,  of  copper, 
tliat  uaed  to  bdoog  to  Lizav^ta.  Lizavte  and  I  have  ex- 
changed creases:  she  gave  me  her  cross,  and  I  gave  her  my 
image.  I  ahall  now  wear  Lizav^ta'a,  and  you  keep  this  one. 
Take  it— it  ia  mine !  It  ia  mine ! "  she  begged  him.  **  We 
will  suffer  together,  let  us  together  bear  the  cross ! '  * 

' '  Give  it  to  me ! "  said  Rask61nikov.  He  did  not  wiah  to 
offend  her.  But  he  immediately  drew  back  the  hand  that 
he  had  stretched  out  to  receive  the  cross. 

"  Not  now,  S6nya.  Better  some  other  time,"  he  added, 
in  order  to  calm  her. 

*'  Yes,  yes,  better  later,"  she  said  in  rapture,  "  when  you 
begin  j'our  punishment,  then  you  will  put  it  on.  You  will 
come  to  me,  and  I  shall  put  it  on  you;  then  we  will  pray 
and  we  shall  start.*' 

ApoI16n  Nikol&evich  M&ykov.  (1821-1898.) 

A.  N.  Mdykov  was  the  grandson  of  V.  I.  Mdykov,  the  author  of  the 
Elisiy  (see  vol.  i.,  p.  263),  and  the  son  of  a  well>known  artist  He 
psHcd  hit  early  diildhood  Is  the  coontiy,  near  Moscow,  until  his 
ftmUy,  In  1834,  emigzated  to  St  Fetenbnig.  Here  he  eady  came  In 
contact  with  the  literaiy  circles,  and  was  prepared  for  the  nnivexrity 
by  Gonchar6v  (see  p.  259),  who  was  his  tntor  in  Russian  literature. 
At  first  he  devoted  himself  entirely  to  painting,  and  attached  little 
importance  to  his  poetical  talents ;  but  his  growing  nearsightedness 
Inteifeted  with  his  ertlatle  activity,  and  the  flattering  reception  of  Us 
veiaeB  by  B^eUnaki  led  him  to  torn  hia  attention  to  poetry.  In  1842 
he  went  abroad,  staying  more  than  a  year  in  Italy,  attending  the 
College  de  France  and  the  Sorbonne,  and  plunging  into  the  Pan- 
slavic  propaganda  at  Prague.  Upon  his  return  he  wrote  a  large  num- 
ber of  poema^  dealing  with  hia  Boropean  impressions,  and  alao  aone 
fion  Rwaaian  hialacy.  He  exedled  in  the  description  of  ciaaale  an- 
tiquity, which  culminated  in  his  great  work,  The  Two  Worlds^  with 
TTiree  Deaths  as  a  kind  of  prologue  to  it ;  his  classic  knowledge  ap- 
pears to  great  advantage  in  his  Anthological  Poems.  Of  his  medieval 
poems  may  be  mentioned  Saiwtarola  and  The  Council  of  ClermonL 
He  kept  entirely  aloof  from  the  qneatioaa  of  the  day,  and  Rmaian 
contemporary  history  and  life  occupied  but  a  small  apace  in  his  pro- 
ductions :  he  either  betook  himself  to  depicting  scenery,  as  in  The 
Catching  of  the  Fish^  or  to  the  idealisation  of  the  past.  Of  his  many 
translations,  mainly  from  the  Slavic  languages,  must  be  especially 


340         The  Nineteenth  Century 


meailooed  his  adminiWe  nodemintioB  of  Tkg  Ward  ^  ^goi^t 

Armament. 

In  Macmillan's  Magazine,  vol.  xxxiii.  (1877),  is  given  To  th^  Em- 
press of  India  ;  in  C.  T.  Wilson's  /Russian  Lyrics,  London,  1887,  are 
given :  The  Cornfields,  Hay-making,  Tht  MoimMm  S/fiiHf,  The 
Idiot  Girit  A  Picture;  in  Jobn  F«>llen'a  Rhymes Jrom  the  JRmsmm, 
London,  1891 :  A  Midsummer  Nights  Dream,  Who  Was  Hef,  The 
Easter  Kiss,  On  Lomondsov,  Propriety,  The  Singer,  A  Little  Picture, 
The  Alpine  Glacier,  The  Mother,  The  Kiss  Re/used,  The  Snorvdrop, 
A  Smite  and  a  Tear.  In  The  Anglo-Russian  Literary  Society :  by  F. 
P.  Kaichant,  The  MaeUe  Flamm,  in  Now  19^  On  Re^eteding  Pmikkm^ 
in  Na  33.  7:^  Thought^  Hesied,  The  Mmse,  TheFnis,  TheHermU^ 
Happy  realm  of  youth  eternal.  When  overwhelmed  by  grief,  From  the 
Gnostics,  in  No.  33  ;  by  J.  Pollen,  reprint  of  his  A  Little  Picture,  in 
No.  33.  In  Free  Russia  are  given  :  by  EHzabeth  Gibson,  The  Coun- 
cil ef  Qmstamoe,  in  voL  zi.,  Nos.  &-10,  and  parts  of  the  Three  Deaths, 
In  ToL  sit,  No.  4.  In  the  Ubraiy  of  tiie  Wofld't  Bert  Litentue  ate 
fcprinted  J.  Fdlen's  The  Stater  Kks,  TheA^  Giaeier,  TlieJCist 
Refitted, 

THE  PERIS 

Her  81118  atoned  by  tears  of  aonow» 
Those  penitential  teais  acixoe  dry, 

The  soul,  by  her  Creator  pardoned, 
Plies  on  swift  wiogs  to  realms  on  high. 

Through  starry  spsoe,  the  soul  embradng, 
White  peris  take  their  flight  atong, 

While  dioirs  of  infant  chembs  thronging 
Greet  her  with  burBts  of  joyous  song. 

Oh,  with  ecstatic  cries  of  rapture 
She  wotild  fill  all  the  heavenly  plains, 

Would  render  thanks,  and  in  rejoicing 
Poiget  all  former  eartlUy  pains! 

But,  drding  round  with  curious  glances 

And  coaxing  wiles,  the  peris  all 
Entreat  her,  with  most  tender  pleading, 

To  tell  the  story  of  her  fall. 


Digitized  by  Google 


Apoll6n  Nikol&evich  M&ykov  341 


Is  it  their  joy  a  aoiil  to  comfort, 

Vxcm  earthly  trials  goait  up  on  high? 
Or  do  they  know  by  strange  traditions 
This  world  of  sb  beyond  the  sky  ? 

— TransL  by  P.  P.  Marehant,  in  The  Anglo- 
Rnasian  Literary  Society,  Na  33. 

WHO  WAS  HE? 

▲  STORY  OF  PBT8R  TBB  GSBAY 

Upon  the  mighty  Neva's  bank, 

Along  the  winding  woodland  way, 
A  Horseman  rode,  in  forest  wilds 

Of  elms,  of  pine,  of  mosses  grey. 

Before  him  rose  a  Fisher's  hut; 

Beneath  a  pine,  by  the  blue  stream, 
An  aged,  bearded  Fisherman 

Was  mending  his  boat's  broken  beam. 

The  Horseman  said,  "  Grandsire!    Good-day  I 
God  help  thee,  friend !  how  livest  thou  ? 

Doet  thou  catch  much  ?  and  tell  me,  pray, 
Where  dost  thou  sdl  thy  takings  now? ' 

The  old  man  answered  sullenly, 

**  Are  fishes  in  the  river  few? 
And  other  market  have  I  none 

Bseept  the  town,  there,  dose  to  yon. 

"  And  how  am  I  to  fiih  to-day  ? 
What  kind  of  turmoil 's  here,  you  seel 

You  fight;  and,  in  the  fight,  a  shell 
Has  smashed  my  fishing-boat  for  mel " 

The  Horseman  bounded  from  his  horse, 
Without  a  word  the  tools  he  grasped ; 


Digitized  by  Google 


542         The  Nineteenth  Century 


And  in  a  twinkling  planked  the  boat, 
The  rodder  in  the  stem  set  £ut 

"  See,  now,  old  friend,  thy  boat  'a  all  tight! 

Oat  on  the  water  boldly  set; 
And,  in  the  name  of  Peter's  luck, 

Caat  forth  into  the  deep  thy  net" 

He  vanished.    Mused  the  stern  old  man: 

"  I  wonder  who  the  de'il  was  he! 
In  ever>'  inch  he  looked  a  king, 

But  plied  the  hatchet  splendidly." 
— From  J.  Pollen's  Rhymes  from  the  Russian, 

THK  MARBLE  FAUN 

Through  a  deserted  garden- walk  I  wandered  in  the  shade. 
The  rosy  twilight  faded,  and  of  leaves  the  trees  all  bare 
In  dark  clusters  stood  around  me,  while  the  autumn  evening 

made 

The  atmosphere  quite  chilly.   Then  among  the  thickets 
tfaefe 

I  chanced  to  find  a  atatne  of  a  &an  onoe  white  and  dean, 
With  mbUah,  dust,  and  moaa  encntated,  dingy,  mfldewed, 
green. 

He  glanced  fimn  oat  the  bfanchea  with  a  pleasant  smiley  and 


Set  in  motion  gently  by  the  wind,  his  strong  visage  swept. 
While  hidden  firom  my  downward  glance  the  maible  fonn 
they  kept 

I  saw  the  aged  lindens  shake,  and  lo,  among  the  trees 
Were  other  forms  of  marble  that  within  their  foliage  slept 
Bat  what  of  all  most  strode  my  view  wrapped  in  the  shraba^ 

embrace 

Was  that  one  marble  image -liead  and  mocking,  smiling  fine. 
I  admired  the  ancient  idol,  long  neglected,  for  a  while, 
And  the  face  amid  the  thicket  threw  at  me  a  cunning  smile* 
I  felt  a  kind  of  pity.   '  *  Thou  wert  held  of  old  divine. 


Digitized  by  Google 


Apoli6n  Nikol&evich  M&ykov  343 


Image  qmical  and  smiling !  To  the  flute's  mdodioos  aouiid 
Men  prepared  to  thee  the  sacrifice,  for  thee  the  flames  did 
shine, 

They  uttered  prayers,  the  lamb  expired,  and  thou  wert 

sprinkled  round 
With  the  fresh  blood  of  the  victim.   Now,  I  pray  thee,  let 

me  know, 

Art  thou  sighing  for  the  days  gone  by, — thy  vanished  power 

and  crown  ? 

Then  upon  those  youthful  races  did  a  happier  lot  pour  down  ? 
Or  have  sages  merely  fabled  of  the  days  of  long  ago  ? 
Was  that  tale  a  vain  invention,  of  their  lives  of  peace  and  joy, 
Or  did  ceaseless  labour  in  the  field  their  energies  employ  ? 
Thou  dost  smile  upon  me,  dost  thou  ? — Then  when  dawned 
a  later  date 

Thou  didst  gaze,  a  mute  spectator,  on  a  splendid  court  and 
state; 

Thou  wert  looked  on  as  a  marvel  when  among  the  mina 
foiitid, 

Then  the  garden  was  laid  oat  for  thee,  and  thou  wert  com- ' 
passed  round 

With  the  tritoos  and  the  naiads,  with  Athenians  old  and 

wise, 

And  with  Rome's  Imperial  Csesars  and  Greek  Sovereigns  of 

the  skies; 

Thou  didst  look  on  it  with  laughter,  and  thy  pleasant  visage 

glowed 

On  the  ball-scene's  glitter  gazing.   Then  the  garden  over- 
flowed 

With  the  ringing  strains  of  music.   In  that  alley's  gloomy 

shade 

A  pair  of  youthful  lovers  from  the  guests  their  shelter  made. 
Thou  didst  note  their  stolen  interviews  among  the  bushes 

dark, 

Thou  didst  hear  the  kiss  resounding,  and  their  fond  caresses 
mark. 

Tdl  me  further:  were  those  lovers'  ardent  pledges  kept  for 
long 


Digitized  by  Google 


344        The  Nineteenth  Century 

UorepenUnt  and  unbroken  ?  Was  their  hearts'  love  always 

strong, 

Shining  brightly,  burning  ever,  not  expiring  like  a  spark  ? 
Were  their  names  and  plighted  promise, — on  thy  pfdwttal 

here  traced 

By  precise  and  earnest  fingers, — by  the  raindrops  soon 

effaced  ? 

Or,  maybe,  they  wandered  here  again,  beneath  thy  lindens' 

shade, 

Where  to  meet  with  other  paramours  they  new  appoint- 
ments made  ? 

Through  the  thick  boughs  overhanging  did  thy  sly  and 
sneering  smile 

From  their  amorous  professions  tear  the  treaeherons  mask 
away? 

Did  llieir  fisoes,  fltished  with  crimson,  their  deceitM  hearts 
betrmy?" 


Thus  I  gazed  in  mute  inquiry  on  the  statue  for  a  while, 
And  the  marble  cynic  answered  with  his  calm,  sarcastic  smile. 

— Transl.  by  F.  P.  Marchaut,  in  The  Anglo- 
Russian  Literary  Society,  No.  19. 

FROM  THE  I<YRIC  DRAMA  "  THRBB  DEATHS" 

THB  DBATH  OF  SSNSCA  AND  OF  I.UCIU3 

{Having  embraced  Seneca  and  Lucius,  Lucan  exit,  in  company 

of  the  liciors.) 

Seneca  {waa^  iofoUom  kim,  M  Heps  as  kis  Ust^Us  rusk 
up  ioAim  /  sinkb^  kis  brow,  he  speaks  s^lfy  and  soUmnly). 
I  had  but  one  aim  in  life,  and  I  have  walked  to  it  oiver  a 
rugged  path.  My  life  has  ever  been  a  mond  school:  and 
death  is  but  a  new  lesson,  a  new  letter,  amidst  the  eternal 
and  wond  rous  alphabet,  a  pledge  of  a  hi^^ier,  endless  science ! 
The  Creator  has  given  me  a  stem  mind  with  which  to  scan 


Digitized  by  Google 


ApoU6n  Nikoliievich  M&ykov  345 


the  imivezie,  that  what  I  have  learned  in  me  and  it  I  may 
transmit  to  future  generations.  He  sent  against  me  malice, 
monstrous  and  vile  debauch,  that,  like  an  oak  npon  the 
height  midst  stonns»  I  might  grow  strong  through  artful 
battling,  that  among  a  mass  of  deeds  and  acts  I  might  im- 
press my  image          I  have  accomplished  all.    My  form  is 

cast.  Yet  one  more  chisel's  sweep, — and  proudly  shall  it 
stand  through  ages.  The  chisel  shall  not  quiver.  Terror 
shall  not  bind  my  hands.  My  journey  is  finished  here, — but 
my  spirit,  made  in  this  terrestrial  life  more  perfect  and  more 
wise,  will  enter  eternity.  Open  is  the  door  before  me,  and  I 
see  the  dawn  of  another  life  

{The  philosopher's  friends^  sobbings  emhrau  his  knees, 
ZtOoking  at  them,  he  proceeds  .*) 

Life  is  good  when  in  the  world  we  axe  a  neocaaaiy  link, 
and  one  with  aU  the  living;  when  at  the  banqnet  I  am  not 
saperflnoos;  when  going  with  the  people  to  the  &ne,  I  wor- 
ship the  same  gods  with  them.  Bat  when  the  crowd,  apart 
from  yon,  has  raised  np  a  divinity  and  with  cniel  malice 
watches  the  movements  ol  your  heart;  when,  seeing  yon 
afiur,  tfa^  point  their  fingers  (oh,  believe  me,  friends^  it  is 
not  easy  to  live  an  outcast  wanderer!)  at  the  remnants  of 
better  generations,  with  their  ancient  virtue  in  their  breast : — 
we  pass  like  corpses,  like  shadows,  like  jesters  in  the  forum  1 
And  nnobserved  a  mighty  wind  will  drown  ns  midst  the 
rippling  wavea^  like  worthless  chips  of  once  victorious 
ships  

Our  age  is  past.  Our  time  is  up,  O  brothers!  Others 
have  now  come  into  the  world;  other  feelings  and  concep- 
tions they  have  brought  with  them   Perchance,  believ- 
ing stubbornly  in  the  traditions  of  our  youth,  we,  like  an 
ominous  blast,  congeal  the  renovated  lives  of  men.  Per- 
haps the  truth  is  not  with  us  !    Our  mind  no  longer 

grasps  it,  and  looks  up  with  w^eakened  eyes,  yet  not  ahead, 
nor  sees  the  light  of  truth,  and  wails:  "  No,  there  is  no 
salvation!'*  And,  perchance,  another  man  will  come,  and 
he  win  say:  "Heie  is  the  light)"  Nol  Onr  time  is 
vpl—  Cat  open  now  my  arteries  1  O  greatest  of  all  gifts, 


34^         The  Nineteenth  Century 


O  death,  you  are  now  in  my  hands!   O  Socratesl   O  teacherl 

Dearest  friend!   To  5'ou  I  go! 

{Exit,  accompanied  by  his  disciples.') 

Lucius.  Well  finished,  Seneca !    Thou  borest  it  gloriously ! 

And  now,  one  hero  less!          Looking  at  the  man,  I  feel 

aggrieved !  What  matters  it  that  thou  art  dead  ?  That  to 
the  end  thy  courage  did  not  flag?  For  gossips  and  Ibr 
calttmny  thoa  hast  fin*  two  days  given  lood  to  Rome!  In 
this  alone  thy  exploit  lies! 

{Looks  thnmgh  the  window  at  the  sky  emd  at  tke  distam/ 

How  all  is  quiet  therel  The  mountains— clear   Even 

thus  the  gods  look  reckkas  from  the  heavens  at  the  hmnaa 
race!   And  what  is  there  to  see ? 

{Scans  the  room.) 

*T  is  terrible  here  to  live,  and  let  alone—to  diel  But  little 
time  is  left  for  life.  What  use  is  there  to  grant  one  needless 
hour  to  cruel  Nemesis  ?   For  great  exploits  one  needs  a  rest, 

a  joyful  mood,  and — a  good  supper          Glory  after  death 

avails  us  not !  What  happiness  is  this  that  in  the  future  a 
bearded  rhetorician  will  expound  you  as  a  model  for  his 
schoolboys?  With  future  mysteries  I  have  no  dealings! 
Or  whether  here  my  life  vA\l  come  to  an  end,  or  bodiless  my 
soul  may  live, — in  any  case  I  '11  be  no  longer  man!  But 
now,  while  still  I  live,  I  may  with  honour  dismiss  my  body, 
my  old  servant         O  slave! 

(Enter  siave,  LMdusamtinuing.) 

In  my  villa  hy  the  sea  prepare  a  splendid  sapper;  in  the 
amphitheatre,  bdow  the  mountains,  strew  flowers  on  my 

conch;  oaU  a hallet of  Baodiantes»  achorusof  Fauns  and 

l3rres  and  timbfels,— not  the  kind  of  chorus  ss  last  time, 
when  the  basso  was  a  squeaker!  Open  in  the  garden  all  the 
fountains^  Here  is  the  key:  in  the  inner  storeroom  are  some 
cups  of  Grecian  wockmanship,— get  them.  And  send  at 
once  the  slaves  to  call  my  friends.  Let  all  come  who  are 
alive.  Thyself  go  to  Marcellus.  Ask  him  humbly,  he  has 
long  had  in  keeping  some  Horatian  wine.  Tell  him  that 
thy  master  begs  him  not  to  reftiae  him  anything,  and  that 


Digitized  by  Google 


NikoUy  Aleksy^evich  Nekriisov  347 


to-day  lie  deigns  to  die!  Well,  fhink  of  everything— tfaoa 
liaflt  been  a  fidthM  dave,  and  thou  art  not  fofgotlen  in  my 

testament. 

(  The  slave  fails  down  to  his  feet.) 

Haggle  not,  nor  be  niggardly, — let  the  sapper  teem  with 

fabulous  dainties!  Yes,  I  have  forgot  the  main  thing:  go, 
knock  at  the  door  of  careless  Pyrrha!  Take  basketfuls 
of  flowers  to  her  and  let  her,  laughing  heedlessly,  oome, 
brighter  than  springtime,  to  grace  my  supper. 

{Exit  slave. ) 

And  on  the  knees  of  the  dear  maid  I  will  with  tensest 
power  of  life  intoxicate  my  soul  with  the  fragrance  of  the 
herbs,  and  with  the  sleeping  sea,  and  with  the  sun  im< 
merging  in  the  waves,  and  Pyrrha' s  lucent  beauty!  And 
when  my  aenaea  weary  feastiug,  she  win,  with  gentle  amiles, 
give  to  me,  not  knowing  it  herself,  the  deadly  draught  in 
wine,  and  I  will  jesting  die,  scarce  audible^  a  true,  wise  Syb- 
arite who^  haying  anrfdted  hia  dainty  appetite  at  the  Inznri* 
oua  taUe^  aleepa  peaceably,  aorrounded  by  aromaa. 

Nikoliy  Aleksytevlch  N^krftsov.  (1831-X877.) 

Nekr&sov  was  the  son  of  aa  impoverished  landed  proprietor  who 
wrved  on  the  military  8ta£^  and  of  a  PoUah  mother,  who  was  his  firtt 
teadier.  In  xfllja  he  was  tent  to  the  Tsrodiv  Oymnaatam.  Bete  he 
made  little  progress  in  the  ancient  laognages  and  in  matbematkl, 

and,  having  reached  the  fifth  form,  was  obliged  to  leave  on  account 
of  some  satires  he  had  written  against  the  school  authorities.  He 
went  to  SL  Petersburg  and  entered  the  university  as  a  special  student, 
hot  hit  extreme  poverty  made  any  regular  progress  impotaiUe  sad 
mktennined  his  health.  He  occasionally  wrote  prose  stories  for  a 
variety  of  periodicals,  and  in  1840  he  published  his  first  volume  of 
poems  which,  having  been  unfavourably  received,  he  later  bought  up 
and  destroyed.  Then  he  published  a  number  of  volumes  of  miscellane- 
oat  eoOections,  and  in  1847  became  the  editor  ol  Tko  Omtemporary^ 
Unmerlj  PAtli1da*t  mtgidlne.  The  most  setive  period  of  NekHltoT't 
life  began  in  1856,  since  when  he  produced  all  the  poems  by  which 
he  lives.  It  is  diflBcult  to  characterise  Nekrdsov's  poetry,  as  it 
represents  so  many  different  aspects :  there  are  in  it  elegies  and 
lyrics  in  Piishkin's  best  style,  satires  which  have  earned  for  him  the 
nsme  ot  the  Rattlsn  Jvvend,  sad  popular  verses  detliag  with  the 


34^         The  Nineteenth  Century 


life  of  all  classes  of  society,  especially  with  the  peasant.  The  great 
wealth  of  uative  scenery  which  he  depicts,  the  idiomatic,  inimitable 
language  of  bis  poenu,  the  objectivity  of  bis  themes,  united  with  a 
gnceAil  lyricum,  make  bim  fbe  most  notaUe  of  RtMrian  poets. 
Among  bis  best  productions  are  Red-Noud  F¥osi^  Who  Lives  m 
JHussia  Happily  f  The  Peddlers^  and  a  large  number  of  shorter  poems. 

English  translations  :  A  Moral  Man,  by  Alexander  Koumaniu,  in 
Comhill  Magazine,  1863;  The  Forgotten  Village ^  Village  News, 
Bfundyt  Thg  Unreaped  JW,  Om  ike  Read,  and  parts  of  The  RaU» 
read^  /« the  ViUage,  and  Hed^Nosed  Frost,  hy  W.  R.  S.  Ralaton,  in 
the  Contemporary  Review,  vol.  xx\*ii.  (1876);  Red-Nosed  Frost,  trans- 
lated in  the  original  metres  [by  J.  Sumner  Smith],  Boston,  1886,  second 
edition  emended,  1887  ;  The  Forgotten  Village^  The  Field  Unreaped^ 
Mary,  The  Hospital,  The  Sang  0/  the  Canvids,  A  Mother* s  Tears, 
in  C.  T.  Wllww't  Rutdam  Lyries,  I<oodoa,  1887;  7!r  Demm^  The  • 
Prophet,  Offer  my  Muse  a  friendly  hand,  Dream,  A  Sick  Man's 
yiealousy,  The  Landlord  of  Old  Times,  The  Russian  Soldier,  m^ohn 
ToWen's  A'/iytnes  /rotH  the  Russian,  London,  1891  {The  Prophet 
The  Russian  Soldier  reprinted  in  Library  of  the  World's  Best  Litera- 
ture) ;  in  Sree  Rmsia,  by  Cbulotte  Sidgwick,  lorn  weemk,  I  am  old, 
andemotker,  fai  vol.  x.,  Nos.  S-io^  and  The  Song  ^  ihe  Btor  Waa^ 
derer,  in  vol.  x.,  No.  12,  and  by  Mary  Grace  Walker,  War,  in  vol.  x.. 
No.  II  ;  in  The  Anglo-Russian  Literary  Society,  by  A.  C.  Coolidge, 
The  Unmown  Strip  and  IVhcn  froyn  thine  error,  in  No.  14  (from  the 
Harvard  Monthly  Magazine,  1S95) ;  by  P.  P.  Marchant,  FareweUtaA 
I gtu^d  upm  iky  Umb,  fai  Mo.  16;  by  J.  PoUen,  *Ti$  Me^  in  ike 
meadows,  in  No.  19  ;  by  Leo  Wiener  and  A.  C.  Coolidge,  Who  Lives 
Happily  in  Russia  f  (reprinted  from  Harvard  Monthly  Magazine,  1898), 
in  No.  25 ;  by  Mrs.  Rosa  Newmarcb,  some  extracts,  in  No.  30 ;  by 
Leo  Wiener,  The  Railroad,  in  No.  33 ;  by  L.  A.  Magnus,  The  Poet  to 
kis  Lope,  in  No.  34. 

PROM  "RBD-NOSBD  PROST" 

Three  grievous  allotments  had  Fortune  decreed: — 
Allotment  the  first, — with  a  slave  man  to  marry; 
The  second, — the  mother  to  be  of  his  seed; 

The  third, — until  death  his  hard  yoke  e'er  to  cany. 
And  all  these  allotments  so  grievous  did  lie 
On  woman  'neath  Russia's  broad  sky. 

The  ages  have  passed:  all  for  pleasure  has  striven; 
To  manlfidd  change  all  on  earth  has  been  given. 


Digitized  by  Google 


Nikol&y  Aleksytevich  Nekr&sov 


The  poor  peasant  woman  alone  is  forgot: 
No  change  in  her  lot  has  God  made. 

Of  feminine  beauty  and  strength,  we  all  wot, 
The  type,  'mong  the  Slavs,  has  decayed. 

Fortuitous  victim  of  fate! 

Hast  suffered  unseen  and  unheard; 
The  world  has  not  told  of  thy  strait, 

Of  plaining  hast  uttered  no  word. 

But  me  thou,  my  friend,  wilt  tell  all; 

From  childhood  together  we 've  plodded:— 
Fatigue  and  dismay  on  thee  fall, 
All  misery  in  thee  is  embodied. 
No  heart  in  his  breast  carrieth  he 
Who  tears  doth  not  shed  over  thee. 

•  ••*•• 

We  've  thus  of  the  serf  woman  spoken, 
However,  with  purpose  to  aay : — 

The  type  of  the  stately  Slavonian, 
Perhaps,  may  be  found  e'en  to-day. 

In  Ruas  hamlelt  women  aie  dwelling, 

Of  oonntenanoe  earnest,  serene; 
In  all  grace  of  movement  excelling; 

In  beating  and  look  like  a  qneen. 

Perhaps  they  '11  escape  the  dim^ghted; 

But  one  who  can  see  says  of  them: — 
'*  She  paaBe8---with  sunshine  all  'a  lighted! 

And  looks— 't  is  like  giving  a  gem! " 

The  paths  all  our  people  are  thronging 
They  follow,— the  same  burthens  bring; 

But  mire,  to  their  low  lot  belonging. 
To  them  as  it  were  does  not  ding. 


350         The  Nineteenth  Centuiy 


See  blooming, — a  world's  admiration, — 
The  beauty!  tall,  rosy,  well-shaped; 

Proficient  in  each  occupation; 
A  beauty,  however  she  's  draped; 

Both  hunger  and  cold  oahnly  bfOoUag; 

Content,  ever  patient,  diacieet 
I  oft  aa  ahe  moved  have  been  looking: 

One  flonriab^-a  hayoock  complete! 

Her  kerchief  ia  o*er  her  ear  slipping. 

Her  tresses  are  ready  to  fall. 
ADd  then  some  young  fellow  comes  trippings 

The  xaacal!  and  up  throwa  them  all: 

The  flaxen,  luxuriant  tresses 

O'erspread  her  tanned  bosom,  and  wrap 
Her  little  bare  feet  in  caresses; 

Her  eyes,  too,  in  darkness  entrap: 

She  qnickly  her  locka  apart  broahea, 
And  fiercely  a  glance  at  him  throws; 

Her  treaa-enframed,  procid  face  wi£h  blnabes 
Of  paarion,  of  hot  anger  glows. 

On  work-days  she  likes  full  employment. 

But  strange  will  to  you  be  her  face 
When  from  it  the  smile  of  enjoyment 

The  sigil  of  toil  shall  erase: 

Such  laughter,  so  hearty!  such  measure 
In  aong  and  m  dance!  no  aoch  treats 

With  gold  can  be  purchaaed.   "  Whatpleaamce!" 
Badi  peasant  to  each  oft  lepeata. 

The  horaeman  ahe  'U  vanqniab  in  xadng; 

In  danger,  not  flinching,  she  'U  aave: 
A  galloping  steed  boldly  facing; 
To  enter  a  bnming  hut,  brave. 


Digitized  by  Google 


Nikol&y  Aieksy^evich  Nekriisov  35' 


Her  beaatiful,  regular  teeth 

Seem  pearls,  when  to  view  them  one  diaaces; 
But  firmly  the  lips'  tosy  sheath 

Conceals  them  f torn  people's  rude  glances. 

She  rarely  indulges  in  laughter, 

For  jesting  she  's  no  time  to  spare; 
Not  oft  dares  her  neighbour  come  after 

Some  item  of  her  kitchen  ware. 

No  pity  has  she  for  the  tramp, — 

Why  country  paths  uselessly  scour? 
Of  scrupulous  fitness  the  stamp 

She  bears  and  of  immanent  power. 

She  knows,  as 't  were  writ  in  lier  creed, 

In  laboor  is  all  their  salvation; 
And  labour  returns  her  the  meed  ;— 

Her  honaehoUl  knows  never  privation; 

Tbqr  *ve  always  a  warm  roof  o'eriiead, 
Bread  wdl-baked,  and  kvas  of  good  savour; 

The  diUdren  are  healthy,  weU-led; 
For  high-days  there  *s  some  esctra  fi&voor. 

This  woman  goes  forth  Sunday  mom 

To  mass,  all  her  family  guiding: 
Is  sitting  a  child,  two  years  bom. 

Her  bosom  upon,  and  there  riding: 

The  mother,  well  dressed,  by  the  hand 

Is  leading  her  six -years-old  boy. 
This  picture  all  friends  of  Russ  land, 
All  firiends  of  Russ  folk  will  enjoy. 

—From  [J.  S  umner  Smith's]  Red-Nosed 
Frosty  Boston,  1887. 


35^         The  Nineteenth  Century 


A  MORAL  MAN 

A  stricUy  moral  man  have  I  been  ever, 
And  never  injured  anybody— never. 

I  lent  my  friend  a  sum  he  oonld  not  pay, 
I  jogged  his  memory  in  a  friendly  way, — 
Then  took  the  law  of  him  th'  affair  to  end, — 
The  law  to  prison  sent  my  worthy  friend. 
He  died  thcxc^ — not  a  farthing  finr  poor  me  I 
I  am  not  angry,  though  I  've  cause  to  be. 
His  debt  that  very  moment  I  forgave, 
And  shed  sad  tears  of  sorrow  o'er  his  grave. 
A  strictly  moral  man  have  I  been  ever. 
And  never  injured  anybody — never. 

I  sent  my  slave  to  learn  the  art  of  dressing 

Meat; — he  succeeded, — a  good  cook 's  a  blessing; 

But  he  too  oft  would  leave  his  occupation, 

And  gained  a  taste  not  suited  to  his  station. 

He  liked  to  read,  to  reason,  and  dincuiw 

I,  tired  of  scolding,  without  further  fuss 

Had  the  rogue  flogged,— «11  for  the  love  of  him: 

He  went  and  drowned  ]iiniad(-*'t  was  a  strange  whim. 

A  strictly  moral  man  have  I  been  ever. 

And  never  injured  anjrbody— never. 

My  silly  daughter  fell  in  love  one  day, 

And  with  her  tutor  wished  to  run  away: 

I  threatened  curses  and  pronounced  my  ban; 

She  jrielded,  and  espoused  a  rich  old  man. 

Their  house  was  splendid,  brimming  o'er  with  wealth. 

But  suddenly  poor  Mary  lost  her  health, 

And  in  a  year  consumption  wrought  her  doom: 

She  left  us  mourning  o'er  her  early  tomb. 

A  strictly  moral  man  have  I  been  ever. 

And  never  injured  anybody — never. 

-*By  Alexander  Koumanin,  in  Comhill 
Magazine,  1863. 


Digitized  by  Google 


Nikol&y  Aleksytevich  Nekr&sov  353 


FROM  "WHO  I^IVBS  IN  RUSSIA  HAPPILY" 

BPII.OGUS 

What  year  it  was, — you  figure  out! 

What  land  it  was, — you  guess  yourself! 

Upon  a  level  country  road 

Were  gathered  seven  muzhiks: 

They  all  had  masters  whom  they  served 

r  the  Oovenunent  of  Strained-too-haid, 

The  ooanty  called  Bnduring-miidi, 

The  district  Pallowlandedness, 

In  villages  hard  by: 

In  Patchedupville  and  Raggedtown, 

In  Bmptyville  and  Pieezingtown, 

In  Bamedupville,  and  Hongerville, 

And  in  Cropfailingthorpe; 

They  met  and  quarrelled  straight  awfty: 

"  Who  lives  in  Russia  happily 

And  to  his  heart's  content  ?  " 

Romdn  declared—' '  The  landowner/' 

Demydn  declared—"  The  bureaucrat/' 

Lukd  declared—"  The  priest." 

"  The  merchant  with  his  goodly  paundi," 

The  Gubin  brothers  both  declared, 

Ivdn  and  Mitrod6r. 

But  old  Pakh6m  looked  gloomily 

Upon  the  ground,  and  said  at  last: 

"  The  gentleman  of  noble  birth. 

The  minister  of  the  Emperor," 

While  Prov  declared:  "  The  Tsar."— 

Muzhiks  are  stubborn  like  the  ox : 
Let  any  nonsense  fill  their  heads, 
You  cannot  pound  it  out  of  them, 
Each  one  sticks  to  his  mind. 
They  started  such  a  loud  dispute 


354 


The  Nineteenth  Centuiy 


Tliat  aU  the  paaaeiB-by  averred 

Th^  must  bave  found  a  treasoxe-trove, 

Tlie  fam  ift-lo  divide. 

Tbat  forenoon  each  liad  left  Ills  liQfiifle, 

On  hnaineflB  each  had  sallied  out: 

One  to  the  Uacksmith'a  ahop  was  bounds 

One  to  the  town  Ivdnkovo 

To  call  the  priest  FnkApivm, 

His  baby  to  baptise. 

Pakh6m  was  taking  honcgroombs 

To  market  in  Velfkoe, 

And  both  the  brothers  Gubin  bad 

With  bridle  started  out  to  catch 

The  wild  horse  of  the  herd. 

'T  were  better  that  they  long  ago 

Had  gone  each  one  where  business  called. 

Yet  they  together  keep ! 

They  walk  as  if  there  were  grey  wolves 

Behind  them,  chasing  after  them,— 

The  farther,  quicker  still ; 

They  walk,  they  brawl  unceasingly;  ^ 

They  cry  and  do  not  come  to  sense, 

But  time  waits  not  for  them. 

They  quarrelled  on,  they  did  not  see 

The  sun  was  red,  was  sittldng  fast, — 

The  evening  had  set  in. 

In  faith,  they  would  have  walked  all  night. 

They  would  have  walked  not  knowing  where, 

If  podonarked  old  Dnrindikha 

Had  not  addteased  them,  meeting  them. 

And  spoken  to  them:  "GentlenienI 

As  night  has  come  upon  you,  where 

Do  yon  intend  to  go?"  

The  old  witch  asked,  then  laughed  aloud; 
She  struck  her  gelding  with  a  wliip. 
And  galloped  ont  of  sight 


Digitized  by  Google 


Nikol&y  Aleksy^evich  Nekiisov  355 


Wlwre  fvm  tbqr?  As  they  gazed  anmnd, 

They  did  not  know  themselves; 

They  stood,  they  paused,  they  drooped  thdr  heads, 

'T  was  night-thne  kag  ago^ 

The  $Uxs  were  twinkling  way  above 

Upon  the  iranlted  sky. 

The  moon  swam  out,  the  shadows  dark 

Stopped  farther  headlong  gait. 

O  ^adows,  shadows  Uack  and  thick! 

Who  is  there  that  you  will  not  catch? 

Of  whom  will  you  not  get  ahead  ? 

And  yet  there  's  no  one,  shadows  black, 

Can  seize  yon  and  embraoel 

Into  the  wood  and  down  the  road 
Pakh6m  looked  round  him  silently ; 
He  looked,  he  pondered  in  his  mind. 
And  then  at  last  he  said: 

"  The  wood  spirit  has  played  on  us 

A  pretty  joke  to-night! 

Indeed  we  must  have  surely  tramped 

Some  thirty  versts '  at  least ; 

And,  as  for  walking  home  again, — 

We  *re  tired,  we  should  peter  out. 

Sit  down — there 's  nothing  to  be  done — 

I<et 's  rest  till  break  of  day !  '*  

Then  blaming  loud  the  wood  spirit, 
Beside  the  road,  right  in  the  wood, 
The  peasants  sat  them  down. 
They  made  a  fire,  each  did  his  part, 
And  two  of  them  for  v6dka '  went. 
The  while  the  others  to  the  wood 
Repaired  to  make  a  drinking  cup 

A  vent  is  abotit  three-fifths  of  a  mile. 

The  national  liquor  in  Rnasia,  conanmed  in  large  quantities. 


356 


The  Nineteenth  Century 


Of  bark  stripped  Ivam  the  biicli. 

The  v6dka  came  hi  proper  tfane; 

There  alao  aomdiow  came  aome  food, — 

A  feaat  jfor  the  mnzhOcal 

Three  ghuMea  each  man  had  to  dxink; 

They  ate,— they  quarrelled  once  again: 

"  Who  lives  in  Rtiaaia  happily 

And  to  his  heart's  content  ?  " 

Rom&n  cried  out:    The  landowner," 

Demydn  cried  out:  "  The  bureaucrat," 

Lukd  cried  out :  *  *  The  priest ' ' ; 

*'  The  merchant  with  his  goodly  paunch,"-^ 

The  Gubin  brothers  both  cried  out, 

Ivdn  and  Mitrod6r. 

Pakh6m  cried  out:  "  His  Excellence, 

The  gentleman  of  noble  birth, 

The  minister  of  the  Emperor," 

And  Prov  cried  out:    The  Tsar! " 

Thus  worse  than  ever  brawled  again 

The  quarrelsome  muzhiks; 

They  cursed,  they  called  each  other  names, 

Till  soon  enough  they  came  to  blows, 

And  grabbed  each  other's  hair. 

Jjxkl  aa  each  one  has  grabbed  the  next, 

Romdtt  fa  hitting  at  Pakh6m, 

Demyin  hita  at  I^uki, 

And  both  the  brothera  Odbin  hit 

At  Prov— while  each  one  ydla. 

The  fiff^reaonnding  echo  woke, 

And  rolling  wandered  on  and  on, 

And  louder  cried  from  aide  to  aide, 

As  if  to  tease,  to  imitate, 

The  obstinate  muzhiks. 

"  The  Tsar!  "  it  spoke  to  the  right  of  them. 

But  to  the  left  the  answer  came: 

"The  priest!  The  priest!  The  priest!" 


Digitized  by  Gopgle 


Nikol^y  Aleksy^evich  Nekrisov  357 


Then  all  the  wood  wie  fbll  of  IHght: 
The  very  birds  that  flit  about. 
The  very  beasts,  the  swift-footed, 
The  very  crawling,  creepii^  thii^ga,^ 
'T  was  groan  and  xoar  and  bawL 

The  gr^-haired  rabbit,  first  of  all, 

From  ont  the  bush  jumped  suddenly 

And  looked  around  distractedly,— 

He  jumped  and  disappeared. 

The  youthful  jackdaws  perched  alolt 

Upon  a  birch -tree  standing  near 

Set  up  a  piteous  squeak. 

And  in  the  neighbouring  peewit's  borne 

The  baby  from  its  mother's  nest 

Was  scared  and  tumbled  out. 

The  little  peewit  chirped  and  wept: 

Where  is  her  birdie  gone  ? 

The  old  and  feeble  cnchoo  woke, 

Awoke  and  aat  there  wondering 

If  ahe  ahoold  cuckoo  now; 

Ten  times,  at  least,  she  msde  a  start. 

But  every  time  she  lost  the  beat, 

And  had  to  start  again  

You  cuckoo^  cuckoo^  dear  M  birdl 

As  soon  as  wheat  is  in  the  ear 

You  '11  choke  yonradf  with  wheaten  ears^' 

You  'U  cuckoo  then  no  more. 

Next,  seven  homooots  from  all  sides 

Have  gathered  to  enjoy  the  fight,— 

They  peer  from  seven  trees: 

These  midnight  ones  are  laughing  loud; 

Their  large  round  eyes  of  yellow  hue 

Are  burning  just  like  fourteen  lights 

Of  pure  and  virgin  wax. 

The  raven,  bird  of  common -sense, 

>  According  to  a  popular  supentitioo  io  Riusia  the  cuckoo  is  tileiit 
when  the  wheat  is  in  the  ear. 


Digitized  by  Google 


The  Nineteenth  Century 


Is  lim  ftod  aittitig  on  a  tne 

Bailie  the  baming  fire; 

He  dts  end  to  the  devil  pmye 

That  they  may  somehoir  pound  to  death 

At  leeet  one  of  the  lot. 

The  cow,  that  with  her  bell  had  strayed 

Away  that  evening  from  the  herd, 

Approached,  attracted  by  the  sound 

Of  human  voices'  tones. 

She  slowly  walked  up  to  the  fiie* 

She  stared  at  the  muzhiks. 

She  listened  to  their  foolish  talk, 

And  then  began  with  all  her  might 

To  low,  to  low,  to  low. 

The  silly  cow  is  lowing  loud, 

The  yottthfiil  jsdEdaiis  squeak  sad  pipe, 

The  seven  musbfks  aie  boiafeeious,— 

The  echo  seooods  all. 

The  echo  has  but  this  desire: 

To  tease  an  honest  man,  to  scax« 

A  woman  or  a  cfaUd. 

No  one  has  ever  seen  it  yet, 

But  all  have  heard  it  more  than  oooe: 

Without  a  body — ^3ret  it  lives, 

Without  a  tongue— it  cries. 

The  owl,  a  Moscow  princess  once,' 

Is  flitting  here  from  side  to  side; 

She  flies  above  the  peasants'  heads, 

Or  with  her  wings  sweeps  o'er  the  ground 

Or  o'er  the  bush  nesiby. 

The  fiuL  himself,  of  crafty  mind, 
Witih  womsniflili  curiosity 
Crept  dose  to  the  mushfks. 
He  listened,  listened  csxefully, 


*A  Rnsslan  legend, 


Nikol&y  Aleksydevich  Nekr&sov  359 


And  went  awagr  at  lait  oonvinoed-- 
"  Tlie  Denoe  can't  nuke  it  out " ; 
The  brawlen  hazdly  knew  themaelvcs, — 
Thcgr  liad  fongotten  by  that  time 
Tlie  canae  of  all  the  row. 

Tbesr  hit  cacb  other  luidly* 
Came  to  their  senses  finally, — 
A^^ieed  to  strike  no  more* 
They  drank  some  water  from  the  pool, 
They  washed  themsdvea,  lefreahed  themsdves. 
And  sleepiness  set  in. 
— Transl.  by  L.  Wiener,  revised  by  A.  C.  Coolidge,  in 
The  Harvard  Monthly,  January,  1898,  and  in 
The  Anglo-Rossian  Literary  Society,  Na  35. 

THE  UNMOWN  STRIP 

XtfSte  In  tiie  antnnin,  the  rooks  are  diverted; 
Bare  Is  Uie  fiwest,  the  fidd  is  deserted. 

Only  one  atrip  which  is  lying  unmown: 
Sad  are  its  musings  in  stillness  alone. 

"  Truly,"  each  blade  to  the  other  is  sighing, 
*'  Weary  are  we  of  the  autnmn  wind  ciying: 

Weary  of  bowing  to  earth  as  we  must, 
Burying  our  grain-laden  heads  in  the  dust. 

Scarce  is  it  night,  when  the  birds  flocking  near  us 
Halt  on  their  passtge  to  greedily  tear  ub. 

Hares  tread  ns  down,  and  the  atorm  vents  its  liate. — 
Where  is  our  peasant?  What  more  does  he  wait? 

Were  we,  then,  worse  at  our  birth  than  all  others  ? 
Have  we  not  sprouted  and  grown  like  our  brothers? 


36o         The  Nineteenth  Century 


No!  We  're  not  worse  than  the  rest.   Long  in  vain 
In  ns  hath  genned  and  hath  ripened  the  grain. 

Was  it  for  this  he  was  ploughing  and  sowing, 

That  we  sboold  bend  to  the  automn  gales  blowing  ?  " 

Borne  on  the  breeze  the  sad  answer  came  back: 
*'  It  is  the  power  your  peasant  doth  lack. 

He  knew  the  why  of  his  ploughing  and  sowing, 
Started  hia  wock,  hat  hia  strength  all  unknowing* 

ni  fares  the  wight,  he  can  drink  not  nor  eat; 
For  hia  aick  heart  ia  the  canker-wonn'a  seat 

And  the  strong  arms  that  his  plough  used  to  guide  him. 
Dried  to  dead  stalks,  now  like  whips  hang  beside  him. 

Dim  were  his  eyes,  and  hia  voice  hoUow  rang; 
Moomfnl  hideei  was  the  song  that  he  sang 

When  with  hia  hand  at  the  plongh  ever  present. 
Wrapped  in  hia  thoughts,  o^er  the  atrip  moved  the  peasant.*' 
—By  A.  C.  Coolidge,  in  The  Harvard  Monthly,  1895. 

A  MOTHER'S  TBAR8 

Whtk  each  fresh  victim  in  the  strife. 
When  war's  dire  terrors  rotmd  na  roll, 

I  pity  neither  friend,  nor  wife, 
I  pity  not  the  heroic  soul. 

The  wife  will  soon  new  comfort  gain, 
His  friend  the  best  of  friends  forget, 

And  scarce  a  single  soul  remain, 
That,  until  death,  remembers  yet. 

Amid  the  poor,  prosaic  xoand 
Of  things,  which  here  so  faMy  diow. 


Digitized  by  Google 


Iv^  Savich  Nikitin 


361 


No  tears  are  true,  and  aacred,  found, 
Save  such  as  fxam  a  xnother  flow. 

The  aons,  in  battlefield  who  deep, 

Her  tears  to  memory  fimd  recall; 
B'en  like  to  willow-trees,  which  weep 

O'er  boughs,  that  ever  earthward  fall. 

—Prom  C  T.  Wilson's  Hwnam  Lyrkt. 

Ivftn  SAvich  Nikitin.  (1824-1861.) 

Nikftin  was  bom  In  Vcrdoedi,  the  Uxthplace  of  Ko3ti6T  (see  p. 
176)^  where  his  lather  was  a  chandler.  At  eight  ycais  of  age  he  en- 
tered a  religions  school,  and  later.  In  1841,  the  Seminary  in  his  na- 
tive town.  He  wrote  his  first  poem  while  at  school,  but  only  in  1855 
did  he  succeed  in  having  his  verses  printed  in  the  Vor6nczh  Govern- 
mental Gazette.  Tbeoe  brought  him  in  contact  with  the  local  cult- 
ured aociety  who  enoonragad  him  to  write  more.  His  first  volume 
of  collected  poetry  was  not  favourably  received  by  the  literary  circles 
of  St.  Petersburg,  who  saw  in  Nikitin's  verses  mere  imitations  of 
Kolts<Sv  and  Nekr&sov ;  his  reputation  has,  however,  risen  since,  and 
he  is  counted  among  the  better  popular  poets.  Among  his  best 
venea  are  The  Ifo^fkman,  The  Mough^  Tke  Wife  of  the  Driver^ 
TheFist^  while  audi  poems  as  The  Momimg^  The  SwaiUn^s  Nesi, 
AWinierNighiinthe  ^iWtfv,  belong  to  the  moat  popnhv  of  Ruwian 
aongs. 

W.  R.  S.  Ralston,  in  Contemporary  Review,  vol.  rxiii,  (1874),  has 
translated  The  Stubborn  Father,  Buriak,  A  Winter  Night  in  the 
ViUage.  In  C.  T.  Wilson's  Xussum  Lyrics  are  trandatcd  Tke 
YamMUk^s  Wiflt,  The  Gnmdfaiher,  Tke  SkOe  ^  ike  D^aHed, 

The  Churchyard.  In  The  Anglo-Russian  Literary  Society,  No.  28, 
F.  P.  Marchant  translated  The  Inheritance,  and  in  No.  30  Mrs.  Rosa 
Newmarch  gives  a  part  of  The  ViUage  Mon^Lender  and  The 
Gaffer, 

BURIJLK' 

Ah,  friends !  Yon  too  ha,Te  liad  yoor  sorrows,— c3ie 
A  song  would  never  make  yon  weep.   Well  now, 
Just  hear  what  I  have  gone  throngh,— then  yon  *U  know 
What  soROW  really  meana. 

A  Isbomer  towing  boats  up  the  V^lgs. 


362         The  Nineteenth  Century 


My  father  died 
When  I  was  just  nineteen,  and  I  waa  left 
An  orphan,  and  at  first  alone, — ^bnt  soon 
A  neighbour's  daughter  won  my  heart;  I  pleased  her, 
And  we  were  married, — happily  did  we  live 
Together.    I  could  fancy  she  had  brought  me 
Happiness  with  her — (Heaven  be  hers,  poor  thing!) 
You  can't  conceive  how  good  a  manager 
She  was, — she  would  n't  waste  a  single  farthing. 
In  the  long  winter  evenings,  she  would  light 
A  firewood  splinter,  and  then  spin  away 
For  hours, — not  pausing  till  the  cock  would  crow. 
Then  would  she  lay  her  down,— tmt  with  the  dawn 
She  was  up  again,— ^woold  ran  to  give  their  food 
To  the  afaeep  end  oowa,— nest  light  the  fixe,— end  then 
Betake  her  to  the  ipinning-wfaed  again, 
Or  find  aome  other  indoor  worie  to  do* 
When  aununer  came,  ahe  helped  to  cut  the  rye 
And  cany  it,  nor  ever  weaiy.  I  woold  aay, 
"lan'tittinietoieBt?" 

*' Oh,  nor*  ahe 'day, 

I 'm  not  a  bit  tiled."— 

Every  now  and  then 

Perhaps  I  *d  buy  her  something  as  a  present. 
"  You  need  n't  have  done  that,  my  bonny  bird,*' 
She  *d  say,  '*  we  love  each  other  much  too  well 
To  care  for  presenta— don't  go  wasting  mon^r 
On  me."— 

My  life  with  her  was  just  as  if 
I 'd  been  in  Paradise. 

But  no  one  knows 
How  calamity  may  fall  upon  him  t 
My  wife  lay  down  to  rest  within  the  gtave,— 
The  world  giowa  dark  whene'er  I  think  of  it 

ICy  only  consolation  waa  my  child,— 

I 'd  only  one,— a  lair-akinned,  daik-haired  boy. 


Digitized  by  Google 


Ivin  S&vich  Nikltin 


3^3 


Am  like  his  mother  as  one  drop  to  another; — 
He  had  began  to  spdl  a  bit  aUeady, 
And  I  to  think. '*  My  boy  win  be  a  tnan/' 
Bot  that  was  not  Ood*s  pleasnze.— In  the  spring 
He  got  some  kind  of  sickness.  We  called  in 
Wise  women,  soothsayers,  had  magic  drinks 
For  him  to  take.  I  promised  I  would  give 
A  rouble  for  a  candle, — to  be  burnt 

Before  the  holy  image  in  the  chttvch  

But  God  refused  to  listen  to  my  prayer — 
I  had  to  lay  my  darling  in  the  coffin. 
And  bear  him  to  the  graveyard.  

In  those  days. 
Those  dreary  days,  't  was  bitter  for  me,  friends! 
My  heavy  arms  hung  listlessly, — my  neighbours 
Gathered  their  harvest.    All  the  fields  around 
Were  blithe  with  song —    But  there  I  pined  away 
With  heavy  sorrow.    When  the  day  was  done, 
The  heavy-laden  carts  would  come  from  the  field 
And  in  a  line  drive  creaking  through  the  village. 
Bttt  in  my  cottage  I  would  sit  alone 
Tr3ring  to  stem  my  team. 

The  autumn  passed. 
I  waited  till  the  firrt  snow  ML. — Methooght 
I  *11  sdl  my  rye,  fit  up  a  sledge,  and  go 
And  earn  a  living  with  it  somewhere. 

Suddenly 

Woe  upon  woe !  A  murrain  seized  my  cattle,— 
Never  until  I  die  shall  I  forget 
That  £atal  year.— 

I  managed  to  get  through 
The  winter  somehow.    But  I  saw  I  'd  lost 
My  old  position.    In  our  village  meetings, 
This  one  would  flout  me,  saying: — "  Good!   It  seems 
The  barest  beggar  thinks  he  has  the  right 
To  meddle  in  the  business  of  the  Commune!  " 
That  one  would  gird  at  me  behind  my  back, 


Digitized  by  Google 


364         The  Nineteenth  Centuiy 


And  cry: — "  The  lazy  fellow !  Snch  a  one  as  lie 
Will  never  gain  bit  bread.   In  my  ofunioii. 
If  one 's  a  nun,  die  never  will  give  way. 
Whatever  liappens." 

All  this  talk  and  laoghter 
Aroused  me; — God  assisted  me,  I  think. 
I  felt  a  longing  for  a  freer  life. 
I  got  a  passport,  paid  up  all  my  taxes, 
And  joined  the  bargemen. 

Since  that  time  my  grief 
Has  yielded  to  the  V61ga's  dark  blue  wave 
Rest  follows  toil:  upon  the  river  side 
Bright  burns  the  evening  fire,— a  comrade  starts 
A  song, — the  rest  join  in, — your  spirits  rise, — 
A  thrill  mas  o*er  your  limbs,— you  sing  yoorsdl 
And  If  at  times  a  dreary  season  oomes, 
And  half-forgotten  sorrows  vex  your  soul, — 
There 's  solaoe  still.  Yon  hear  the  river's  niar. 
Singing  a  freedom  to  the  sweeping  plsin. 
Fast  beats  yo«r  heart;— you  bnm,— though  wintry  odd 
The  weather,  yet  you  want  no  doak  to  warm  you. 
Aboard  and  take  your  seat!  Pall  back  on  the  oar! 
Pleasant  it  is  to  brave  the  Russian  storm. 
The  waves  run  mountain-high, — in  snowy  flakes 
The  foam  flies  fast;  strange  voices  groan  and  waiL 
The  typ— >  roars  and  whistles,— from  your  soul 
A  cry  arises:  "  Let  God's  will  be  done. 
If  we  're  to  live,  we  '11  live.    And  if  to  die, — 
Well  then,  so  be  it!  "    And  you  feel  as  though 
Your  heart  had  never  known  what  sorrow  meant. 

—From  W.  R.  S.  Ralston  s  Russian  Idylls,  in  The 
Contemporary  Review,  1874  (vol.  xxiii.)* 

THE  GAFFER 

Old  Gafler,  with  his  beard  and  smooth  iMdd  head, 

Sits  in  his  chair. 
His  little  mug  of  water,  and  his  bread. 

Stand  near  him  there. 


Digitized  by  Google 


Aleksy^y  Nikolaevich  Pleshchdev  3^5 


Grey  as  a  badger  he:  his  brow  ia  lined; 

Hia  fifiattties  worn. 
He  'a  left  a  worid  of  catk  and  care  behind, 

Since  be  was  bom. 

'T  la  over  now,  hIa  eyesight  soon  must  go; 

His  strength  is  done. 
Death  laid  within  the  churchyard  long  ago 

Grandchild  and  aon. 

A  cat  the  smoke-grimed  hut  with  Gaffer  shares^ 

Upon  the  stove 
All  day  he  sleeps.   He  too  is  old,  nor  cares 

From  thence  to  move. 

The  old  man  still  plaits  shoes,  with  fingers  dow, 

From  tMurk  of  birch. 
His  wants  an  few,  Ua  gfeateet  joy  to  go 

Into  God'a  dinich. 

He  stands  within  the  porch,  against  the  wall, 

Mutt'ring  hIa  prayers. 
A  loyal  child,  he  thanks  the  I/»d  for  all 

Liife'a  gxlefii  and  carea. 

Cheery  he  lives, — with  one  foot  in  the  grave,— 

In  his  dark  hole, 
does  he  draw  the  strength  that  keeps  him  brave. 

Poor  peasant  soul  ? 
— Transl.  by  Mrs.  R.  Newmarch,  in  The  Anglo- 
Russian  I/iterary  Society,  No.  30. 


Aleksy^y  Nikolilevich  Pleshcheev.  (1825-1894.) 

Pleshch^ev  was  the  most  cultivated  and  the  most  sympathetic  poet 
who  belonged  to  Nekrdsov's  camp.  He  was  born  in  the  city  of  Kos- 
tromi,  of  an  ancient  noble  family.  He  studied  at  St.  Peteisbmig  at 
the  Schioot  of  the  Onaid  Cadefs  and  at  the  naivecalty,  wiUioot  gndnp 
atiag  from  etUwr.  Be  began  writing  poetry  at  the  age  of  eighteen, 
and  la  1846  afipeaied  the  lint  edition  of  hia  poena.   Theae  wttt 


Digitized  by  Google 


366        The  Nineteenth  Century 


pervaded  by  a  miliUnt  spirit  of  liberty,  ud  soon  his  sympafhiet  wiUi 

the  liberal  movement  brought  him  into  trouble,  for  he  was  arrested 
in  1849  and  banished  to  Orenburg,  with  loss  of  all  his  civil  rights. 
He  there  served  in  the  amij  as  a  common  soldier,  but  rose  in  1858  to 
the  zaak  of  a  commiiirioiicd  officer,  when  bit  privileges  wore  icotond 
to  UsD,  aad  lit  not  penaitted  to  letam  to  If  oscow.  13^  to  tbat  time 
he  had  entirely  abandoned  literature,  but  now  his  former  activity 
began  anew,  and  he  enriched  Russian  letters  with  a  large  number  of 
translations  from  various  languages,  and  with  original  lyrical  verses. 
These  no  longer  are  filled  with  the  aspirations  of  his  jonth,  but  bear 
tbit  imprint  of  melaadioly  disappointment  and  rennndation. 

Spring  and  fhssion  are  given  in  John  Pollen's  Rhjmes  from  the 
/Russian,  and  N.  B.  Dolc  hM  translated  A  Ltgmd  ^nblication 
vnascertainable). 

FORWARD 

Forward,  without  fear  or  dotibt,  to  the  valiant  deed,  my 
friends !  I  have  already  seen  the  dawn  of  the  holy  redemp- 
tion in  the  skies ! 

Courage!  We  will  take  each  other's  hands  and  boldly 
will  move  onward, — and  let  our  union  grow  and  be  strong 
under  the  banner  of  tdenoe! 

We^chaatiaetfaepflestsof  dn  and  fidaehood  with  the 
«oM  ol  tmtli,— and  we  wiU  awaken  the  sleeping  from  their 
sleep  and  will  lead  the  host  to  battle. 

We  will  not  build  an  idd  for  onrsdves,  either  upon 
earth,  or  in  hei^ven;  we  will  not  &U  before  it  in  the  dust 
ibr  all  the  gifts  and  benefits  of  the  world. 

We  will  proclaim  the  teaching  of  Love  to  the  poor  and  to 
the  rich,— and  for  it  we  will  endnie  peiseaition,  forgiving 
our  malevolent  enemies. 

Blessed  is  he  who  has  exhausted  his  life  in  a  sanguinary 
struggle,  in  heavy  cares;  he  has  not,  like  an  indolent  and 
tricky  slave,  buried  his  talent  in  the  ground! 

Let  holy  truth  burn  as  a  guiding  star  for  us, — and,  believe 
me,  a  noble  voice  will  not  resound  in  vain  in  the  world. 

Hearken,  then,  O  brothers,  to  the  word  of  a  brother,  as 
long  as  we  are  full  of  youthful  strength !  Forward,  forward, 
— and  without  returning,  whatever  fate  may  have  in  store 
for  us! 


Digitized  by  Google 


Aleksydy  Nikol4evich  Pleshchiev  367 


MY  COUNTRY 

Scanty  Nature  of  my  native  land,  you  are  dear  to  my  sad 
soul !  Formerly,  in  the  days  of  my  fleeting  spniig,  the  dis- 
tant shores  of  other  countries  enticed  me. 

And  my  glowing  imagination  painted  brilliant  pictures  be- 
fore me:  I  saw  the  transparently  blue  vault  of  the  heavens, 
and  the  crenelated  summits  of  mighty  mountains. 

Merged  in  the  gold  of  midday  beams,  it  seemed  to  me,  the 
myrtle,  the  planes,  and  the  olive  trees  called  me  into  the 
shade  of  apreading  branches,  and  roses  beckoned  silently  to 

Those  were  days  wlien  my  spirit  did  not  ponder,  among 
tlie  sednctkms  of  life,  over  the  aims  of  ezistenoe^  and,  being 
frivolotiak  I  only  demanded  enjc^jrment  from  it. 

But  that  time  speedily  disappeared  without  a  tnoe^ — and 
grief  nnezpectedly  Tisited  me^  and  much  with  wliidi  my 
•  sonl  was  not  fiuniliar  soddenly  became  dear  to  it. 

I  then  abandoned  my  secret  dream  of  a  magic  and  distant 
land,— and  in  my  oountiy  I  discovered  beauties  invisible  to 
the  worldly  eye. 

Furrowed  fields,  ears  of  yellow  grain-fields,  the  speechless, 
m^estic  expanse  of  the  steppes,  the  freshets  of  broad  rivers 
In  the  spring,  mysteriously  rustling  oak-forests; 

Sacred  silence  of  poor  villages,  where  the  labourer,  op- 
pressed by  misery,  prayed  to  heaven  for  a  new,  a  better  day, 
— the  great  day  of  liberty,  to  rise  over  him ; 

I  understood  you  then, — and  near  to  my  heart  suddenly 
grew  the  song  of  my  native  land,  whether  in  that  song  was 
heard  deep  pining  or  unrestrained  hilarity. 

My  country,  nothing  in  thee  captivates  the  stranger's  eye; 
but  thou  art  dear  by  thy  stem  beauty  to  him  who  himself 
has  yearned  for  freedom  and  the  wide  expanse,  and  whose 
i^ijrit  has  home  oppressive  fetters. 

A  LBOBND 

Christ,  when  a  child,  a  garden  made, 
And  many  roses  flourished  there. 


Digitized  by  Google 


368         The  Nineteenth  Centuiy 


He  watered  them  three  times  a  day 

To  make  a  garland  for  His  hair; 
And  when  in  time  the  roses  bloomedt 

He  called  the  children  in  to  share. 
They  tore  the  flowers  from  every  stem, 

And  left  the  garden  stript  and  bare. 

"  How  wilt  Thou  weave  Thyself  a  crown 
Now  that  Thy  roses  are  all  dead?  " 

"  Ye  have  forgotten  that  the  thorns 

Are  left  for  me,"  the  Christ-child  aaid. 
They  plaited  then  a  crown  of  thorns, 

And  laid  it  rudely  on  His  head,— 
A  garland  for  His  forehead  made; 
For  roses,  drops  of  blood  instead. 
^TxansL  by  N.  H.  Dole  (publication  unaacertainable). 

SPRING 

Ah!  who  art  thou,  fair  maid,  with  upland  flowers 

Twined  in  the  glossy  silk  of  golden  hair, 
With  smile  sunbright,  with  eyes  the  dove  in  hne, 

With  ray-like  raiment  spun  from  upper  air? 
Who  gifted  thee  with  deep  mysterious  power 

To  heal  the  aching  heart  of  human  woe  ? 
At  thy  approach  delights  that  long  lay  dead 

Re\'ive,  and  once  again  with  glad  life  glow. 
To  honour  thee  a  hymn  doth  Nature  raise; 

The  babbling  brooks  and  birds  in  chorus  blend; 
And  pine- woods  dark,  shimmering  in  every  spray, 

To  thee,  as  to  a  friend,  their  arms  extend. 

I 'm  but  a  Stranger-Guest,  sent  from  on  high 
To  weary  souls  a  draught  of  peace  to  bring, 

To  soften  wrath,  to  soothe  fierce  enmity; 

I 'm  but  a  Stranger-Guest, — they  call  me  "  Spring." 
—From  J.  PoUeu's  Rhymes  from  the  Russian, 


Digitized  by  Google 


Aleks&ndr  Nikol&evich  Ostr6vski  369 


AldnJUidr  rakoltevich  OsMTSkL  (1823  x886.) 

No  other  dtmatist  is  m>  cfaancteristiGally  RnwUn  as  Ottidfaki. 
His  fathor  was  a  poor  scribo  who  acted  as  a  kind  of  attorney  to  that 
merchant  daas  of  Moscow  which  had  not  yet  emerged  from  the 
manners  and  beliefs  preceding  the  days  of  the  reforms  of  Peter  the 
Great.  Ostr6%-ski  had,  consequently,  ample  opportunity  of  getting 
acquainted  with  these  people,  who  had  heretofore  entirely  escaped 
the  acmtioy  of  the  Uttessteius.  When,  in  1843,  ^  czpdted  fiom 
the  onifcnity  for  some  nisbehaTionr,  he  found  employment  in  the 
Commercial  Court,  where  he  again  came  in  contact  with  the  mer- 
chant class.  He  had  early  developed  a  passion  for  the  theatre,  and 
in  1847  appeared  two  of  his  dramas.  Pictures  0/  Family  Happiness 
and  We  Square  up  Aecmnts  with  Our  Oum,  The  latter  play  gave 
offence  to  the  merchants,  who  complained  to  the  anthorlties,  and 
Ostrdvski  was  placed  under  police  surveillance.  Only  five  years 
later  did  he  take  up  his  pen  again,  and  as  before  he  had  strictly  ad- 
hered to  the  traditions  of  G6gol's  school,  so  now  he  paid  his  tribute 
to  the  Slavophile  sentiments  of  Moscow  by  idealising  his  characters. 
The  beat  drama  of  that  period  la  Bnerfy  is  no  Viif.  Mttet  the 
Crimean  War  he  began  to  represent  in  his  dramas  the  n^^ve  sides 
of  the  wealthy  merchant  class,  and  to  oppose  to  them  the  honesty 
and  dignity  of  intelligent  men.  His  chief  production.  The  Storm, 
belongs  to  that  period.  He  also  tried  himself  in  historical  dramas, 
or  Dramalic  Chronicles^  as  he  called  them,  but  they  are  the  weakest 
of  his  weeks.  All  his  dramas  are  more  properly  realistic  scenes  lade* 
ing  the  dement  of  consdons  effect :  they  are  snpremely  natural  and 
tax  the  ability  of  the  greatest  actors.  Ostrdvski's  dramas  soon  be- 
came very  popular,  and  he  was  elected  president  of  the  Society  of 
Russian  Dramatic  Authors.  Just  before  his  death  the  Moscow 
Theatre  was  pnt  in  his  charge,  bat  his  new  activity  was  cat  short  by 
his  iUnesa,  bvougfat  ebout  by  yean  of  privation  and  sufifering. 

In  Bnglish  translation  are  to  be  found :  The  Slorm,  by  Constance 
Gamett,  London,  1899  ;  Incompatibility  of  Temper  and  Domestic 
Picture,  in  The  Humour  of  Russia,  by  E.  L.  Voynich,  London  and 
New  York,  1895.  extracts  from  several  dramas  are  given  in  The 
Modem  Rtusiom  Dramas  in  Qdinbmgh  Review,  czzviH.  (1868). 

THE  STORM 

ACTV.    SCBNBI.   TWZUOKT.    KUliGIN  AfffM), 
BUkBANOV  {walking  in  ike  square) 

Kul^in  {singing). 

**  In  darkness  shrouded  are  the  skies,— 
Td  rat  tfaemsdm  all  doae  their  eyes/' 

vou  n.--«4* 


Digitized  by  Google 


370         The  Nineteenth  Century 


{noticing  Kdbaniv),   Good-evening,  sirl  Which  way  are 

you  bound  ? 

Kabandv.  Home.  Good  friend,  have  you  beard  what  has 
happened  with  us  ?    Our  whole  family  is  upset. 

Ktdigin.  Yes,  I  have  heard  so,  sir. 

Kaban6v.  I  have  been  away  to  Moscow,  jrou  know. 
Mamma  kept  giving  me  all  kinds  of  instrnctions  for  my 
journey,  hot  no  sooner  I  got  away,  than  I  began  having  n 
good  time.  I  vmtaohappytobefiree.  I  drank  all  the  way 
uis  and  I  kept  on  drinking  in  Moscow.  I  Just  went  on  a 
sprae  to  last  me  for  a  whole  yesrl  Not  even  once  did  I  stop 
to  think  of  home,  and  if  I  did,  I  never  should  have  diesmed 
what  has  happened  here.  You  have  heard  about  it? 

Kul^n,  Yes,  I  have,  sir. 

KabatiSv.  My  friend,  I  am  a  miserable  man  now!  I  am 

ruined  just  for  nothing,  for  no  cause  at  alL 

Ktdfgin.  Your  mother  is  rather  harsh. 

Kabandv.  That 's  so.  She  is  the  cause  of  it  all.  Do  tell 
me,  why  should  I  suflFer  for  it  ?  I  just  stopped  at  Dik6y's, — 
well,  we  took  a  drink  together;  I  thought  it  might  make  me 
feel  easier,  but  no,  Kuh'gin,  it 's  worse!  See,  how  my  wife 
has  treated  me !    It  could  not  be  worse  

KuHgin.  It 's  a  mixed-up  affair,  sir.  It  is  hard  to  judge 
between  you. 

Kabandv.  No,  don't  say  that.  What  can  there  be  worse  ? 
It  is  not  enough  to  kill  her  for  that.  Mamma  says  she  ought 
be  buried  alive  for  a  punishment!  But  I  love  her,  and  it 
makes  me  feel  bad  to  lay  a  finger  upon  her.  I  did  give  her 
some  blows,  but  mamma  told  me  to  do  so.  You  must  under- 
stand, Knligin,  that  I  lieel  sorry  for  her.  Msmma  torments 
her  to  death,  mid  she  walks  around  like  a  shadow  snd  does 
not  say  a  word.  She  does  nothing  but  weep,  and  slie  is 
mdting  away  like  wax.  And  I  worry  myself  to  death,  ss  I 
look  at  her. 

Kul^pn.  Oonld  you  not,  sir,  make  up  with  her?  You 
ought  to  foigive  her,  and  never  mention  the  a&ir  again.  I 
suppose  you  yourself  are  not  without  sin  I 

Kabam6v,  Of  course  not! 


Aleks&ndr  Nikol&eyich  Ostr6vski  37^ 


JSTif^S^.  Only  yoa  most  not  xtpntuck  hu  whta  yoa  axe 
dranki  She  would  make  you  a  good  wUe,  air,  I  am  anie^ 

better  than  any  other. 

Kaban6v,  Don't  you  aee,  Kulfgin,  it  is  all  right  with  me, 
but  mamma — there  is  no  getting  along  with  her!  

KtUfgin.  It  is  time,  sir,  to  live  by  your  own  wits. 

Kabandv.  Well,  what  am  I  to  do, —  to  tear  myself  to 
pieces?  They  say,  I  have  no  sense  of  my  own,  and  so  I 
have  to  live  by  other  people's  sense.  I  tell  you,  I  '11  drink 
away  whatever  little  sense  I  have  left,  let  mammi^  then 
bother  with  me  as  with  a  senseless  fool. 

Kidigin.  It  is  bad,  sirl  Well,  and  Boris  Grig6revich, 
what  about  him  ? 

KabanSv.  They  are  sending  that  scoundrel  to  Kydkhta, 
into  China.  His  uncle  is  sending  him  to  the  office  of  a  mer- 
chant whom  he  knows  there.  He  is  going  there  for  three 
years. 

KuHgin,  Wdl,  what  does  he  do,  sir? 

Kabaniv.  He  is  anfferiog,  too:  he  weeps.  We  Idl  upon 
him,  his  undo  and  I,  and  we  kept  sodding  him,  but  lie  did 
not  say  a  word.  He  acts  like  a  wild  man.  "  Do  with  me 
what  you  please,"  says  he,  "  only  do  not  torment  her! " 
He  is  pitying  her  too. 

Kul^n.  He  is  a  good  man,  sir. 

Kaban&u.  He  is  ready  for  the  journey,  and  the  horses  axe 
waiting.  He  is  pining  lor  her  dreadfully.  He  wants  to  say 
good-bye  to  her,  I  see.  What  do  I  care  ?  He  has  done 
enough  harm.  He  is  my  enenqr,  you  know,  KuUginl  He 
Ol^ht  to  be  quartered,  so  that  he  might  know— 

KuUgin,  We  must  forgive  our  enemies,  sir! 

Kabandv.  Go  and  talk  to  mamma  about  that,  and  see  what 
she  will  tell  you.  Yes,  friend  Kulfgin,  all  our  family  is 
now  broken  up.  They  are  acting  not  like  relatives  to  each 
other,  but  like  enemies.  Mamma  has  been  nagging  Vdrvara 
so  long ;  she  could  stand  it  no  longer,  and  so  she  just  got  up, 
and  ran  away. 

KuUgin,  Where  has  she  gone  ? 

UTalimSv,  Who  knows?  They  say  she  has  run  away  with 


372         The  Nineteenth  Century 


Vdnka  Kudrydsb,  and  he  can't  be  found  anywhere  either. 
Now,  Kulfgin,  I  must  tell  you  that  is  all  mamma's  doing: 
she  has  been  tormenting  her,  and  locking  her  up.  "  Don't 
lock  me  up,"  she  said,  "or  it  will  be  only  worse!  "  And 
just  so  it  has  happened.  Do  tell  me,  what  I  am  to  do  now! 
Do  instruct  me  how  to  live  now!  I  loathe  the  house,  I  am 
ashamed  to  meet  people,  and  if  I  try  to  work,  my  hands 
drop  helpless.  Here  I  am  going  home,  but  it  is  not  to  &nd 
pleasure  there.    {Enkr  Gldsfia,) 

Gldsha.  Tfkhon  Ivdnych ! 

KabanSv.  What  is  it  now  ? 

Gldsha,  Things  have  gone  wrong  at  home,  air! 

Kabtmiv,  I^oidl  There  has  been  enough  trooblel  Speak, 
what  is  it? 

GUUkm,  Yoor  good  wife  

AMm^.  WeU,  what ?  lasbedead? 

ddska.  No,  sir,  die  has  gone  off,  and  we  can't  find  her 
anywhere.  We  have  nin  onr  legs  off,  trying  to  find  her. 
.  KubanSv*  Kulfgin  I  We  must  look  for  her.  Do  yon  know, 
fitoid,  what  I  am  afraid  of?  That  in  her  wretchedness  she 
may  lay  hands  upon  heiaelll  It  is  just  terrible,  how  she  is 
grieving !  It  makes  my  heart  burst  to  look  at  her.  (  To 
Gldsha.)  That  is  the  way  you  have  watched  her.  la  it 
long  she  has  been  gone  ? 

Gldsha.  Not  very  long,  sir!  It  is  our  fault,  we  did  not 
watch  her  better.  However,  one  can't  be  watching  every 
minute. 

Kabanov.  Well,  what  are  you  standing  for?  Go,  run! 
{Exit  Gldsha.)  Let  us  go,  too,  Kulfgin!  {Exeunt.  The 
stage  is  empty  for  a  little  while.  From  the  opposite  side  enters 
Katerfna^  and  slowly  walks  across  the  stage.) 

8CSNB  2.  KATERINA  ALONE.  {During  the  uhole  mo^iologue 
and  the  following  scenes  she  speaks  slowly  ajid  repeals 
words,  as  if  in  thought  and  in  a  state  of  forgetfulneu.) 

Kaierfna.  No,  he  is  nowhere!  What  is  he  doing  now, — 
the  poor  fellow  ?  If  I  only  oonld  bid  him  good-bye,  and  then 


Digitized  by  Google 


Aleksandr  Nikolaevich  Ostrovski  373- 


— and  then  I  do  not  mind  dying.  Why  did  I  lead  him  into 
misfortune  ?  I  am  no  better  off  for  that !  I  alone  ought  to 
suffer!  As  it  is,  I  have  ruined  myself,  and  I  have  ruined 
him:  tome — dishonour,  to  him — eternal  remorse!  Yes,  to 
me — dishonour,  to  him — eternal  remorse.  {Silence.)  If  I 
only  could  think  what  he  said  to  me  ?  How  he  pitied  me  ? 
What  were  the  words  he  said  ?  {Clasps  her  head. )  I  can't 
remember  them,  I  bave  forgotten  everything.  The  nights, 
the  nights  weigh  heavily  upon  met  All  lie  down  to  deep, 
I  too.  All  feel  well,  bnt  I  feel  as  if  I  were  going  into  the 
gravis.  It  is  so  terrible  in  the  dark!  I  hear  a  noise  and 
singing,  as  if  they  were  burying  someone,  only  so  soft,  and 

barely  heard,  far,  fax  from  me         How  glad  one  is  when 

daylight  comes  t  Bnt  I  do  not  like  to  get  np,— the  same 
people  again,  the  same  talks,  the  same  torment  Why  do 
they  look  that  way  at  me  ?  Why  don't  th^  kill  nowadays  ? 
Why  have  they  changed  it  ?  They  say,  they  used  to  kill. 
If  they  took  and  threw  me  into  the  V6]ga,  I  should  be 
happy.  "  If  we  kill  you,"  they  say,  "  yoor  sin  will  be  taken 
from  yon;  so  live  and  be  tormented  for  your  sin."  I  have 
suffered  enough !  How  much  longer  shall  I  suffer  ?  What 
am  I  to  live  for  now,  yes,  what  for?  I  want  nothings- 
nothing  gives  me  pleasure,  God's  world  gives  me  no  pleas- 
ure !  But  death  does  not  come.  You  call  for  it,  but  it  does 
not  come.  Whatever  I  see,  whatever  I  hear,  causes  me  pain 
here  {points  to  her  heart).  If  I  could  live  with  him,  maybe 
there  would  be  some  pleasure  yet  for  me.  Well,  what  dif* 
ferenoe  does  it  make  ?  I  have  lost  my  soul  anyway.  How 
I  long  for  him!  Oh,  how  I  long  for  him!  If  I  cannot  see 
you,  hear  me  at  least  from  far  away!  Boisterous  winds, 
bear  my  grief  to  him  I  O  Lord,  I  am  weary,  I  am  weary  I 
(  Walks  to  the  river  bank  and  cries  at  ike  top  of  her  voice:)  My 
joy,  my  soul,  my  life,  I  love  you  I  Answer  I  (  Weeps,  Enter 
Berts.) 

SCBNB  3.    KATERINA  AND  BORIS 

BorU  (noi  seeing  Kaierfna).  O  I<ord!  That  is  her  moel 
Where  is  she  ?  {Looks  round.) 


374         The  Nineteenth  Century 


ITiaier^  (runs  up  to  km  and /aUs  cm  kit  tudi)»  At  laat  I 
flee  yoa  again!  (JVt^am  Mt  irmui.  SUmee.) 

Bofit,  Well,  God  has  gnutted  ua  to  weep  together. 

iSMrfiM.  You  have  not  forgotten  me  ? 

BorU.  How  can  yon  apeak  of  forgetting? 

AoiifrfiM.  Oh,  no,  itwaanotthat^nottiiatl  Yoaarenot 
angry? 

Boris.  Angry  for  what  ? 

KaterfM,  Forgive  me!  I  did  not  mean  to  do  you  ai^ 
harm:  I  was  not  ftee  myaelf.  I  did  not  know  what  I  aaid, 

and  what  I  did. 

Horfs.  Don't  speak  of  it!  Don't! 

KaUHna,  Well,  llow  is  it  with  you  ^  What  are  yoa  going 

to  do? 

Boris.  I  am  going  away. 
KaUrina.  Where  are  you  going? 
Boris.  Far  away,  JCdtya,  to  Siberia. 
Kaierina.  Take  me  away  from  here. 

Boris.  I  can' t,  Kdtya.  I  am  not  going  of  my  own  will :  my 
uncle  is  sending  me  off,  and  the  horses  are  waiting  already. 
My  uncle  gave  me  but  a  minute  to  be  away;  I  wanted  to 
bid  farewell  to  the  place  where  we  used  to  see  each  other. 

Ktdertna.  God  speed  you!  Do  not  grieve  over  me.  At 
fint,  I  auppose,  you,  poor  fellow,  will  pine  for  me,  but  you 
will  floon  forget  me. 

Borti.  I^tnanottalkof  me!  I  amafreeUidl  But  how 
will  it  be  with  jroa?  What  of  your  mother-in-law? 

KalerUuL,  She  torments  me,  die  lodm  me  np.  She  tells 
everybody,  and  my  husband  too:  "  Do  not  trust  her,  she  is 
slyl "  They  follow  me  all  day  and  laugh  at  me  before  my 
eyes*  At  every  word  tb^  reproach  me  with  you* 

Boris,  And  your  huflband  ? 

Katerina.  He  is  now  kind,  and  now  angry,  but  he  b 
drinking  all  the  time.  I  loathe  him,  I  loathe  him;  I  loathe 
his  kindness  worse  than  his  blows. 

Boris.  It  is  hard  for  you,  Kdtya. 

Katerfna,  Yes^  so  liard,  so  hard,  that  death  would  be 
easierl 


Digitized  by  Google 


Aleks^dr  Nikol^evich  Ostrdvski  375 


BorU,  Who  could  have  told  that  we  would  have  to  suffer 
io  for  our  love  ?  It  would  have  been  better  if  I  had  run 
away  then. 

KaUfimm.  It  was  for  miafortmie  that  I  saw  you.  I  have 
seen  little  joy,  but  oh,  how  mndi  sonowl  And  how  much 
there  is  stiU  ahead  of  mel  Well,  what  use  is  there  to  think 
of  what  will  be  ?  I  am  seeing  yon  now,  and  that  they  will 
not  take  away  from  me  1  I  need  nothing  else.  AUIwanted 
was  to  see  yon.  Now  I  feel  mnch  more  at  ease:  ss  though 
a  motuttain  had  tolled  off  my  shouldera.  And  there,  I 
thought  that  you  were  angry  with  me^  that  yon  cnxsed 
me  

Boris.  How  could  you  ?   How  oould  3rou? 
Kaierfna,  No^  it  is  not  that  I  mean.   I  wanted  to  say 
something  else.   I  was  longing  for  you,  that  is  it;  and  now, 

I  have  seen  you  

Boris.  If  they  should  find  us  here! 

KateHna.  Wait,  wait!  I  wanted  to  tell  you  some- 
thing !  I  have  forgotten  again !  Something  important  I 
had  to  tell  youi  my  head  la  in  a  whirl,  I  can't  remember 

anything. 

BoHs.  It  is  time  for  me  to  go,  Kdtya!  • 
KaUrina   Wait,  wait! 

Boris.  Well,  what  was  it  you  wanted  to  say  ? 

Katcrina.  I  will  tell  you  right  away.  {Thinking  a  mo- 
ment,^ Yes!  As  you  will  travel  on  the  road,  don't  let  any 
b^gar  go  by  without  giving  him  something,  and  tell  them 
to  pray  for  my  sinful  sotd. 

BwU>  Ah,  if  these  people  knew  how  hsid  it  Is  for  me  to 
leave  youl  God  grant  they  may  some  day  feel  as  bad  as  I 
do  nowt  Good-bye,  K4tyal  {fimbmus  her  midUaiomi  to 
go^  Rascalst  Monsters!  If  I  only  had  the  power! 

KtOtftna.  Wait,  wait!  I<et  me  take  a  last  kMk  at  you! 
(Lo^  into  kb  eyes,)  Thatwilldome!  Now,  God  be  with 
you!  Gob  goquiddy! 

BetU  {walks  a  few  stops  and  stops).  Kdtya,  something  is 
wrong!  Yon  have  something  in  your  mind!  I  shall  worxy 
on  my  journey,  thinking  of  you! 


37^'         The  Nineteenth  Century 


Kaierina,  No,  nol  God  speed  yon!  {Boris  is  about  i» 
walk  up  io  her,)  Don't,  don't,  that  is  enough ! 

Boris  (^sMiug),  Well,  God  be  with  you!  I  mast  pny  to 
God  that  she  may  die  soon,  that  she  may  not  sitfler  long! 
Farewell!   {Greets  ker.) 

Kaierina,  Farewell!  {Exit  Boris.  Katerfna  foUoms  kim 
wiik  her  eyes  and  stands  a  whtU,  lost  in  thought,') 

SCBMS  4.    KATS&INA  {oione) 

Where  shall  I  go  now ?  Home?  No,  I  might  as  weU  go 
into  the  grave.  What— home,  what— grave?  It  is  better 

in  the  grave         A  little  grave  under  a  tree— how  nice! 

  The  sun  warms  it,  the  rain  waters  it— in  the  qpring 

the  grass,  the  soft  grass  will  grow  np— the  birds  will  fly  to 
that  tree,  they  will  sing,  and  will  bring  up  their  little  ones, 
the  flowers  will  bloom:  yellow,  red,  blue,  all  kinds  of  flowers 

{in  thoughi\  all  kinds  of  flowers         How  quiet!  how 

nice !  I  almost  feel  better !  I  do  not  wish  even  to  think  of 
life!  To  live  again?  No,  no,  I  do  not  wish  it — it  is  not 
good !  I  loathe  the  people,  I  loathe  the  house,  I  loathe  the 
walls!  I  will  not  go  there!  No,  no,  I  will  not!  If  I  go 
to  them,  they  will  come  and  talk  to  me,  and  what  is  that  to 
me?    Ah,  it  is  dark!    And  they  are  singing  somewhere! 

What  are  they  singing?    I  cannot  make  it  out          Oh,  if 

I  could  die  now   What  are  they  singing  ?    It  is  all  the 

same  whether  death  will  come  to  me,  or  I  myself — no,  I 
cannot  live!    It  is  a  sin!    They  will  not  pray  for  me?  He 

who  loves  me,  will  pray          They  cross  the  hands  over  the 

breast — in  the  coffin!    Yes.  it  is  so — I  remember.  And 

if  they  catch  me,  the^'^  will  take  me  home  by  force   Ah, 

quickly,  quickly!  {Goes  to  the  river  bank.  Alotid.)  My 
friend!  My  joy!  Farewell!  {Exit,  Enter  Mrs.  Kaban^v^ 
KabanSv,  Kultgin^  and  a  workman  with  a  lantern.) 

SCBNB  5.    MRS.  KABAKdV,  KABAN<W,  AMD  KUliOIN 

Kulfgin.  They  say,  they  saw  her  here. 
Kabandv.  Is  it  certain? 


Digitized  by  Google 


Aleks&ndr  Nikol&evich  05tr6vski  377 


Xul^i».  They  certainly  saw  her. 
Kabanfiv,  Thaok  the  Lord  tbey  saw  her  alive. 
Mrs,KabanSv,  And  yon  have  been  frightened  and  eryiog  I 
And  for  whom?  Don't  fret:  ahe  will  give  na  plenty  of 

trouble  yet. 

Kaban6v.  Who  would  have  thought  that  she  would  come 
here !  It  is  snch  a  public  place.   Who  would  ever  thinlc  of 

hiding  here. 

Mrs.  Kabanov.  You  see  for  yourself  what  she  is  doing. 
The  creature  she  is!  vShe  wants  to  keep  up  her  character! 
{People  come  from  all  sides  with  lanterns.') 

One  of  the  Crowd.  Well,  have  you  found  her  ? 

Mrs.  Kabanov.  Why,  no.    She  is  vanished. 

A  Few  Vakes.  \  djix^'oxtX  That  is  strange !  Where  could 
she  hide  ? 

One  of  ike  Crowd.  She  will  be  found  I 

Anoiker,  Of  course,  she  will  be! 

^  She  will  oome  herself,  I  tnink.  (AvokebMid 

ike  seene :  "  Hoa  there,  a  boat!  ") 

KvUgin  C/ivm  river  dank).  Who  la  calling?  What  is 
op?  (P^.- "A  wasnan  has  thrown  herself  in  the  water  I" 
HTu^gin  and  several  men  after  ktm  run  oui.) 

SC8MB  6.    THB  SAMB  VnTROVT  XULfOIN 

Kabandv.  O  God,  it  is  she!  {Wants  to  ruji  off,  Mrs. 
Kabandv  holds  him  back.)  Mamma,  let  me  go,  I  must !  I 
will  save  her!  or  I  will  myself-— what  is  the  use  of  living 
without  her ! 

Mrs.  Kahandv.  I  will  not  let  you,  indeed  not!  Kill  your- 
self for  her  sake  I— is  she  worth  it  ?  She  has  brought  enough 
disgrace  on  us  without  this! 

Kabandv.  Let  me ! 

Mrs.  Kaban6v.  They  '11  save  her  without  you.    I  'U  curse 

you  if  you  go. 
Kaban6v  {falling  on  kis  knees),  Jttst  to  look  at  herl 
Mfs.  JManSv,  Yon  wHl  look  at  her  when  th^  have 

pulled  her  out. 


Digitized  by  Google 


373         The  Nineteenth  Century 


KabanSv  (jrises*    To  the  €nwd,)   Well,  Irieuds,  did  you 

aee  anything  ? 

First.  It  is  dark  down  thm,  you  can't  see  aaythisg.  {A 
noise  behind  the  scene.) 
Second.  They  are  calling  there,  bat  I  can't  make  out  what. 

First.  That  is  KuHgin's  voice. 

Scco7id.  They  are  walking  along  the  bank  with  a  lantern. 

First.  They  are  coming  this  way.  They  are  carrying  her. 
{/I  few  people  are  returning.) 

One  of  the  Returning  Men.  Kulfgin  is  a  fine  fellow!  Here 
close  by,  in  the  whirlpool,  by  the  shore:  with  the  fire  we 
could  see  a  distance  off  in  the  water,  and  he  saw  her  dress, 
and  pulled  her  out. 

KalninSv.  Is  she  alive  ? 

Another  Man,  Alive?  Why,  she  leaped  high:  the  bank 
la  steep  here,  and  she  must  have  fallen  on  an  anchor,  the 
poor  woman  Is  brniaedl  And  yet,  my  friends,  she  looks  as 
though  alive!  Only  on  the  temple  tbeie  is  a  small  wmmd, 
and  only  one  small  drop  of  blood.  (jfMamSv  HaHs  io  mm, 
and  meets  Kul^n  with  the  people  carrying  Katerina,) 

SCBNB  7.    THB  SAICB  AND  KULfOIN 

Kulfgin.  Here  is  your  Katerfna.  Do  with  her  what  yotl 
please!  Her  body  is  here,  take  it;  but  her  soul  is  not  youts 
now:  she  is  now  before  the  Judge  who  is  more  merciful  than 
you!   {Puts  her  on  the  ground  and  runs  away.) 

KabanSv  {rushes  to  Katerfna).  Kdtj'a!  Kitya! 

Mrs.  KabanSv.  Enough!    It  is  a  sin  even  to  weep  for  her! 

KabanSv.  Mamma,  you  have  killed  her!    You!  You! 

Mrs.  KabanSv.  How  dare  you  ?  Are  you  forgetting  your* 
self?   Do  you  know  to  whom  you  are  speaking  ? 

Kaban6v.  You  have  killed  her!    You!  You! 

Mrs.  KabanSv.  I  '11  talk  to  you  at  home.  {Bowing  low  to 
the  people.)  I  thank  you,  good  people,  for  your  services! 
{All  bow.) 

KabanSv.  It  is  well  with  you,  Kdtj-a!  But  why  am  I  left 
in  this  world  to  suffer!   {Falls  on  his  wife's  body.) 


Digitized  by  Google 


Mikhail  Evgr&fovich  Saltyk6v  379 

Mikliall  Bvgrftlwldi  Saltykdr.   (pseud.  Shchedtfn). 

(1826-X889.) 

Saltyk6v  was  descended  from  an  ancient  noble  family.  He  re- 
ceived his  first  education  at  home,  at  ten  years  of  age  entered  the 
Moscow  Institute  for  Sons  of  Noblemea,  and  two  years  later  was 
choflcn,  on  acoomit  of  his  excellent  progress,  to  be  feat  to  the  hj* 
oeam  «t  Tliinkoe>8ci6.  In  tliat  Mhool  tlie  memocj  of  its  diedn- 
guished  alumnus,  Pfishkin,  was  still  fresb,  and  it  was  expected  that 
there  should  be  a  continuator  of  the  great  poet  in  every  class.  Thus 
Saltyk6v  wrote  his  first  poem  in  1841,  but  he  soon  abandoned  poetry 
for  satire.  After  leaving  the  Lyceum,  Saltjk6v  threw  himsdf  into 
the  wldrlpool  of  plessnres,  even  in  tUs  rmnlsting  flie  6lder  generir 
lion.  In  1847  appeared  his  first  story.  The  fbllowtng  yesr  he  wrote 
A  Mixed  Affair,  which,  like  his  previous  effort,  was  quite  weak  and 
insignificant,  but  as  it  happened  to  have  made  its  appearance  in  the 
critical  year  1848,  when  the  censorship  was  unusually  severe,  he  was 
suspected  of  evil  pmposes  snd  wss  hsnished  to  the  Government  <tf 
Vyitks.  He  there  remsined  e^ht  years,  but  served  iriUi  distinction 
under  the  Governor  and  rose  to  various  posts  of  eminence.  Upon  his 
return  from  exile  he  published  his  Provincial  Sketches^  in  which  he 
gave  some  gloomy  pictures  of  provincial  oppression  and  dishonesty. 
Saltyk6v  created  a  special  language  for  his  satires,  which,  on  account 
of  the  endless  allusions  and  masterly  word-creations,  are  the  despair 
of  the  transistor  and  have  made  Us  admhnble  works  less  known 
ahroad  than  they  deserve  to  be.  In  his  long  literacj  career  Saltyk6v 
has  adapted  himself  to  the  conditions  of  the  time,  and  thus  his  satires 
give  a  continuous  record  of  the  reverse  of  Russian  life  for  upwards  of 
forty  years.  Among  his  best  works  are  Fompadours  and  Pompa- 
iminatSt  Tht  TksiktmHamSt  Refuge  Momrepos^  Diary  of  a  Ao- 
vmdai  Hi  Si.  Pgiersdmrgr,  snd  his  frmoos  Tke  Goioviips,  which  en)^ 
a  reputation  like  GdgoPs  Dead  Souls. 

In  English  translation  are  to  be  found :  Tchinovniks,  Sketches  of 
Provincial  I Aft\  from  the  memoirs  of  the  retired  Conseiller  de  Cour 
Stchedrin  (Saltikow),  translated  with  notes  from  the  Russian  by  F. 
Aston,  London,  ;  The  RecoUeeOtms  qf  Onisime  Chenapan,  The 
SAf-Saer^ieU^  RabiUt  and  The  Eagie  tu  Meetemuj  in  TheHmmtmr 
of  Pussia,  by  E.  L.  Voynich,  London  and  New  York,  1895 ;  in  Free 
Russia  were  given  The  Fool,  in  vol.  i.,  No.  5,  The  Deceitful  Editor 
and  the  Credulous  Reader^  in  vol.  i.,  No.  9,  Story  of  how  One  Peasant 
Saved  T1V0  GeneralSf  in  vol.  ii.,  No.  6,  and  Misha  and  Vauia^  in  voU 
liL,  Nos.  6  and  7. 


3^         The  Nineteenth  Century 


FROM  BEYOND  THE  BORDER" 
Haying  grovm  tired  of  my  firniUeaa  aojoani  in  the  worid 
of  concrete  facts,  I  adf-confidently  attempted  to  fly  as  a 
ateel-grqr  eagle  into  the  sphere  of  abstractions.  In  my 
younger  days  I  took  such  flights  qoite  often.  Together 
with  my  other  companions  I  liked  to  pamper  myself  with 
ezcniaons  into  that  region  where  one  is  supposed  to  get 
''revelations  of  invisible  things,"  and,  I  remember,  these 
excursions  were  a  source  of  great  pleasure  to  me.  I  cannot 
say  I  saw  that  region  clearly  defined,  but,  in  any  case,  the 
contemplation  of  it  evoked  in  me  no  fear,  but  a  decidedly 
pleasurable  sensation.  In  general,  we  then  lived  with  more 
vigour  (of  course,  I  have  in  view  only  myself  and  my  con- 
temporaries), though  I  must  confess  our  basal  fund  of  life 
was  impaired  by  inconsistencies  that  bordered  on  frivolities. 
Two  lives  went  side  by  side:  one,  so  to  say,  pro  domo,  the 
other  for  the  fear  of  the  Jews,  that  is,  in  the  manner  of  a 
justificatory  document  to  the  authorities. 

You  are  sitting  at  home  and  with  your  whole  being,  so 
to  say,  have  transferred  yourself  into  the  sphere  of  the 
''revelation  of  invisible  things."  Snddenly,  the  Iftteful 
hour  8trikes,»mn  to  yoocr  bnreani  Yob  don  your  trowsers 
and  yonr  office  unifonn,  and  fifteen  minutes  later  you  are  in 
an  entirely  difierent  sphere,  in  the  sphere  of  the  "  confirma- 
tion (tf  visible  things.' '  Of  course^  the  questions  in  the  two 
places  are  quite  difierent.  In  the  fint  sphere  the  question 
is  whether  the  golden  age  is  to  be  sought  behind  or  before 
us;  in  the  second  the  questbn  is  the  establishment  of  golden 
ages  by  means  of  provincial  government  offices  and  depart- 
ments of  charity,  on  the  basis  of  explicit  statutory  enactments 
anent  this  subject.  You  stay  there  a  while,  scratch  your 
pen,  and  behold!  again  strikes  the  fateful  hour.  You  run 
home  again,  change  your  trowaers,  put  on  a  ooat  or  a 
smoking-jacket,  and  you  transport  yourself  once  more  into 
the  sphere  of  the  "  revelation  of  invinble  things."  Thus 

our  youth  passed  

The  present  generation  will,  no  doubt,  regard  this  running 
from  one  sphere  into  another  as  not  very  consistent,  but  in 


Mikhail  Evgrafovich  Saltykdv  381 


those  days  we  managed  to  unite  them,  and  we  felt  no  awk- 
wardness. And  now,  after  many,  many  year8>  passing  in 
accidental  sditode,  the  stream  of  my  sronth  has  suddenly 
burst  upon  me.  Come,  thought  I,  I  ^1  run,  as  in  olden 
days.  However,  I  did  not  get  as  fer  as  running,  for,  though 
my  yonthfitl  recollections  streamed  upon  me  witfi  vim,  I  had 
to  convince  myself  that  my  legs  were  not  what  they  used  to 
be,  and  that  the  blood  in  my  veins  was  no  longer  the  same. 
And  then,  the  questions  that  these  recollections  brought 
back — ^really,  I  do  not  know  what  to  call  them.  Some, 
who  are  more  lenient,  call  them  untimely,  while  others,  who 
axe  unquestionably  evil-minded,  blankly  call  them  harm* 
ful          Well,  you  may  judge  for  yourself. 

The  first  question :  ' '  Does  history  console  ?  ' '  Some  forty 
years  ago — I  am  quite  sure  of  it — I  should  in  all  truth  have 
answered:  **  Yes,  it  consoles."  But  what  shall  I  say  now? 
To  tell  the  truth,  I  have  even  forgotten  how  to  think  by 
principles,  without  prefatorj*  admixtures.  I  begin  with  the 
tenebrousness  of  Time,  and  no  sooner  does  light  begin  to 
glimmer  than  I  strike  river  Pin6ga  with  Vilytiy,  or  some 
statute  of  abatement,  and  there  I  stick  fast.  Precisely  that 
has  happened  now.  Barely  had  the  question  peeped  at  me, 
and  barely  had  I  proceeded  to  dismember  it,  when  God 
knows  whence  bobbed  up  Major-Geaeral  Terrible  and  so 
flashed  his  eyes  at  me  that  I  was  completely  stunned. 
"  No,  I  had  better  to-monow— "  I  coofiisedly  said  to  my- 
self, and  I  that  very  moment  hastened  to  duck  so  that  my 
'  ears  might  not  be  seen. 

The  second  question :  "  Can  one  live  with  the  people,  and 
depend  upon  them  ?  "  Forty  years  ago  I  certainly  should 
have  answered:  '*  One  not  only  can,  but  it  is  not  possible  to 
live  otherwise."  Now   No  sooner  do  I  begin  to  ex- 
patiate and  prove  "from  principle"  that  human  activity 
outside  of  the  sphere  of  the  people  is  objectless  and  sense- 
less, than  the  hide  of  my  whole  being  begins  to  shudder. 
There  stare  at  me  those  fellows  of  Hunting  Row,'  those 
colabouren  of  Hay  Market,  and,  at  last,  a  whole  mass  of 

I  Poultxy  and  game  market. 


The  Nineteenth  Century 


temporising  rascals,  d  la  Napoleon  III.,  wbo^  too,  had  pro- 

daimed:  tout  pour  le  peuple  d  par  le peuple         Of  ooone, 

the  conclusion  was  that  I  had  better  to-morrow  

The  third  question:  **  la  it  poanUe  to  lead  a  life  in  which 
you  are  supposed  to  eat  mushroom  pie  exclusively  that  yon 
may  restrain  your  tongue  behind  your  teeth  ?  "  Forty  years 
ago  I,  no  doubt,  should  have  answered  again:  "No,  it  is  not 
possible  to  live  that  way.  And  now? — Now:  "  No,  X  had 
better  to-morrow  ** 

In  short,  I  attempted  to  give  answers  to  a  whole  stack  of 
questions,  but  alas!  neither  concreteness,  nor  abstraction, — 
nothing  awakened  impotent  thought.  I  struggled  for  quite 
a  while,  and  I  came  very  near  calling  out:  "  V6dka!  "  but 
fortunately  that  drink  is  not  so  accessible  in  Paris  as  to  con- 
sole one  at  will. 

So  I  lay  me  down  to  aleep,  having  carried  away  from  my 
two-days'  blues  the  truth  that  under  certain  conditions  of 
Ufe  ft  wptitft  ntttk  be  oocatdered  nol  ao  nmcli  fiNwn  tius  atiiid> 
point  of  a  vitiated  will  as  in  the  aenae  of  an  iirepieaMUe 

neoeaaity  of  a  grieving  soul         I  had  a  disturbed,  painful 

dream*  At  first  tiieie  hovaed  befispe  me  some  lucoiicfmt 
fragments,  but  by  degrees  fhsy  fbcmed  themselves  into  some- 
thing oonnected,  there  was  a  whole  ooUoquy,  the  heroine  of 
whidi  was  a  swinel  However,  this  colloquy  is  so  interest- 
ing that  I  do  not  rsgaid  it  nugatmy  to  share  it  with  my 
readcre  in  the  form  in  which  my  memory  has  presaved  it 

THJJ  TRIUMPHANT  SWINE,  OR  THE  CONVERSATION  OF  TB8 
SWIMS  WITH  TRUTH— AN  INT£&&UPT£D  SCBMB 

DRAMATIS  PBBSONiS 

SWINE,  stall-fed  beast ;  his  bristles  have  become  glossy  and 
shifting  as  the  result  of  uninterrupted  contact  wUh  the 

stable  mire. 

TRUTH,  a  person  that,  by  rights,  is  supposed  to  be  eternally 
youngs  but  in  reality  is  badly  knocked  up.    By  order  of 


Digitized  by  Google 


Mikhail  Evgr&fovidi  Saltylc6v  383 


JSie  MUk^rUies  she  is  eovend  wUk  mgs^  thrvugk  wJUek 
gUmh  kir  full  classical  uniform,  i.  e.,  nakedness. 
Tike  atHon  takes  place  in  ike  siable. 

Swme  (serewAip  1^  kis/ace).  Isittraewhattlicgmy,  tluit 

the  sun  is  shining  in  fhe  aky  ? 
Truth.  Yes,  Swine. 

Swine.  Really  ?  I  have  never  seen  any  of  yoor  sons  lieie 

In  the  stable  where  I  live. 

Truth.  That 's  so,  Swine,  because  when  Nature  was  creat- 
ing you,  she  kept  on  saying:  'Tis  not  for  you,  O  Swine,  to 

aee  the  bright  sun ! 

Swine.  You  don't  say!  {Authoritatively.^  In  my  opinion, 
all  these  suns  of  yours  are  rank  heresy  —  eh  ? 

(  Truth,  silent  and  embarrassed,  arranges  her  rags.  In  the 
audience  are  heard  voices  :  ' '  You  are  rights  Swine  /  Heresy  / 
Heresy/'') 

Swine  (continues  to  grimace).  Is  it  so  ? — I  have  heard  that 
they  say  in  papers  that  liberty  is  the  most  precious  posses- 
8Km  be  human  society  ? 

ThUk.  Yea^  Swine. 

Swine.  In  my  opinion,  we  are  surfeited  wHh  liberty. 
Here,  I  have  heen  living  without  intennisBion  in  this  stable, 
and  I  have  no  worry!  What  more  do  I  want?  If  I  take  a 
notion,  I  sti^  my  snout  In  the  trough,  or  rummage  the 
manure  wnat  more  liberty  do  I  want?  {AutkfiHiaHvefy.) 
You  are  all  traitors,  as  I  look  at  yon — eh  ? 

{Truth  again  tries  to  conceal  her  nakedness.  The  audience 
skouls:  You  are  right,  Swine  /  Traitors/  Traitors/** 
Some  of  the  audience  demand  thai  Truth  shall  be  taken  to  the 
police  station.  The  swine  grunts  with  sdf'SaiisfadioM,  seeing 
himself  equal  to  the  situation,) 

Swine.  What  's  the  use,  taking  Truth  to  the  station  ? 
They  'U  only  keep  her  there  for  appearances,  and  then 
they  '11  let  her  out  again.  {Lies  down  in  the  manure,  and 
falls  into  sentimentality^  Oh,  nowadays  those  police 
people  speak  the  same  language  as  the  feuilleton  writers! 
A  few  days  ago  I  read  in  a  paper  that  the  cause  of  our  weak- 
ness is  that  our  laws  are  only  written  for  appearances  


384         The  Nineteenth  Century 


Truik,  So  you  read,  Swine  ? 

Swine,  Now  and  then.    Only  I  do  not  take  it  in  as  it  is 

written   I  understand  it  as  I  please   (7b  thf  audi- 

ence.)    So,  as  I  say,  my  friends!    We  will  not  send  her  to  the 

police  station,  we  '11  get  at  her  in  our  own  way   To  day 

we  '11  put  one  little  question  to  her,  and  to-morrow — two  

{Meditating.)    We  won't  get  away  with  her  at  once, — we  '11 

just  chaw  her  by  degrees          {Panting,  approaches  Truth, 

grabs  her  by  her  cal/^  and  begins  to  bite  her.)   That 's  the 
way! 

{TnUk  skrMs  wUk  pain  ;  MuUemg  yeOi,  SkatUt  one 
ketufd :  **  Ym  Oft  a  hrick,  Swme  f   Ycu  tone  a  good  one  f  **) 

Swine.  What?  You  Uke  it?  Well,  that  'U  be  enough 
for  this  timet  (Stops  dUming,)  ^om,  teU  me,  where  Is  the 
root  of  evil? 

ThUk  (eon/ifsed).  The  root  of  evil,  Swine?  The  rook  of 
evO— the  root  of  evil— Is  (wUk  decision,  and  unexpededfy  to 
herself)  in  you,  Swine! 

Svnne  {furious).  Ah,  that 's  the  way  you  talk!  Now, 
look  outl  Did  n't  you  say  that  univenal  truth  was  incom- 
parably superior  to  police-truth  ? 

Truth  {trying  to  avoid  a  direct  answer).  Though  under  cer- 
tain conditions  of  life,  one  cannot  deny  

Swine.  Stop  wagging  your  tail!  We  have  heard  of  those 
ifs  and  buts  before!  Talk  straight!  Is  there  in  your  opinion 
a  certain  special  truth  that  is  superior  to  police-truth  ? 

Truth.  O  Swine,  how  treacherously  mean  

Swine.  V ery  well,  we  '11  talk  later  about  that.  (  Treading 
with  heavier  step.)  Go  ahead!  Is  it  true  you  have  said 
that  the  laws  must  protect  all  alike,  for,  say  you,  otherwise 
human  society  would  change  into  a  chaotic  mass  of  warring 
elements  ?  What  kind  of  laws  have  you  been  talking  about  ? 
What  was  the  cause,  madam,  of  your  gUbness,  and  aft  whose  • 
door  did  you  wish  to  plsoe  It— eh  ? 

TVKtil.  Ah,  Swine! 

Swine,  Swine  me  no  swine  to  my  snout!  I  know  without 

you  that  I  am  a  swine.  I  am  a  swine,  and  you  are  Truth  

( 7%e  swings  gnmHng  ooitnds  like  irony,)  Go,  Swlne^  make 


Digitized  by  Google 


Dmitri  Iv&novich  Pisarev  385 


Ibr Truth!  (Begins ia Oaw.  T0 ike audieiue.)  Fine,  isn't 
it? 

(Truth  shudders  with  pain.    The  audience  goes  into  convul- 
sions.   On  all  sides  is  heard :  ''Fine  !   Give  it  to  her,  Swine  / 
Give  it  to  her  !    Go  for  her  I    Chaw  her  /   Look  ai  thai  im^ 
pudeni  one;  she  dares  hope  anything  to  say  I") 

•         ••••  ■•• 

The  colloquy  was  intemipted  here.  I  oonld  not  make  out 
anything^  else,  because  there  was  raised  such  a  hubbub  in 
the  stable  that  I  could  only  dimly  catdi  the  sounds:  "  Is  it 

true  that  in  the  university  **  *'  Is  it  true  that  in  the  female 

colleges  "   In  a  twinkling  of  the  eye  Truth  was  en* 

meshed  in  a  whole  net  of  stupidly  treacherous  deceit,  and 
every  attempt  at  disentangling  from  that  net  was  met  by  the 
swine's  chawing  and  the  thunder  of  the  crowd:  "  Friends^ 
let  us  judge  her  with  the  people's  judgment! " 

I  lay  like  one  fettered,  expecting  any  moment  to  be 
chawed  up  myself.  T,  who  had  all  my  life  been  repeating 
in  frivolous  self-confidence:  "  God  won't  permit  it,  the 
swine  won't  eat  me!  " — suddenly  yelled  out  at  the  top  of 
my  voice:  "  The  swine  will  eat  me  up!    He  will!  '* 

That  very  moment  a  loud  rap  at  the  door  made  me  wake 
up. 

Dmitri  ly&novich  Pisarev.  (1841-1868.) 

Pisarev  was  the  son  of  wealthy  gentlefolk  who  gave  him  a  very 
careful  training  at  home,  so  that  at  the  age  of  four  he  spoke  fluently 
tiiree  languages,  at  the  ^  of  deven  enteied  u  advanced  daaa  of  the 
Gynmasitttn,  gndoatiiig  wlfh  a  gold  medal,  and  at  aizteen  yeais  ma 
by  especial  pennlwioa  admitted  to  the  university.  While  there,  he 
contributed  some  reviews  for  periodicals  and  wrote  an  elaborate  dis- 
sertation on  ApoUonius  of  Tyana.  In  1862  he  was  arrested  for  having 
furnished  a  secret  printing  establishment  with  an  article  on  Herzen, 
and  was  kept  for  four  yean  in  prison.  Here  lie  compoaed  his  es- 
says  for  which  he  is  known.  He  taught  a  ptailosopbie  seosnalism 
and  denied  the  value  of  art,  and  with  it  of  poetry  for  art's  sake, — in 
short,  he  stood  on  the  standpoint  of  Bazdrov  in  Turg^nev's  Fathers 
and  Sons.  He  thus  represented  the  reaction  of  the  early  sixties 
against  the  opportunism  of  tlie  pcevions  deeade.  In  liis  Flowers  qf 

VOL.  IL-.tS. 


386         The  Nineteenth  Century 


I 


Harmless  Humour  he  made  an  attack  against  the  satirist  Shchednn, 
whom  he  advised  to  abandon  his  literary  labours  for  the  popolaiiMr 
tion  of  the  sciences.   He  died  by  accidental  drowning. 

FLOWERS  OP  HARMLBSS  HUMOUR 

Poets  fare  badly  in  our  days.  Their  credit  is  rapidly 
sinking.  Unfeeling  critics  and  soulless  scoffers  are  break- 
ing down  the  public's  respect  for  the  great  mysteries  of  the 
unconscious  creative  power.  Formerly  they  used  to  talk  of 
a  poet's  inspiration;  formerly  a  poet  was  thought  to  be  a 
favourite  of  the  gods  and  an  intimate  of  the  Muses.  Though 
these  mythological  metaphors  were  not  supposed  to  be  in- 
terpreted in  a  literal  sense,  yet  under  these  metaphors  one 
continually  felt  something  good  and  mysterious,  something 
intangible  and  inapproachable,  something  that  must  for  ever 
remain  inaccessible  to  us,  poor  clodhoppers.  Fellows  of 
our  kind  were  permitted  to  learn  something  about  it  only 
from  the  indistinct  accounts  of  the  artists  who  "  like  gods 
have  aooeas  to  the  Olympian  halls,"  where  thejr  aie  diowii 
very  interesting  and  frequently  very  immodeat  scenes. 

Now  all  that  has  Gfaanged.  Brother  clodhopper  has 
gathered  an  enormous  force,  and  he  nndertakes  to  discnsi 
eversrthlng.  He  does  not  acknowledge  any  inspiratioo,  does 
not  hanker  for  any  Olymidan  halls,  in  spite  of  the  ftct  that 
the  poet  gives  a  detailed  aooonnt  how  a  certain  artist  was 
once  shown  in  these  halls  *'  a  white  nape's  cnrvedness*'  in 
"  eternal  ideals,"  and  things  in  general  which  "  divinity 
disdoses  to  mortals  in  paltry  doles"  (A.  MAykov).  Oar 
brother  clodhopper  denies  all  that  with  his  innate  coarseness 
of  feeling  and  boldness  of  expression.  Those  are  all  flowers 
of  fancy,  he  says,  hut  yon  had  better  tell  us:  What  mental 
power  does  the  poet  possess?  Is  his  development  bn»d»  and 
his  culture  thorough  ? 

What  questions  these  are!  Are  they  pertinent  ?  Are 
they  refined  ?  Is  it  permissible  to  summon  a  favourite  of  the 
gods  and  to  question  him  like  a  guilty  high-school  boy  ?  If  it 
at  all  has  come  to  such  unheard  of  questions,  if  faith  has 
been  lost  in  divine  inspiration,  if  the  periodicals  find  it  more 


Digitized  by  Google 


Dmitri  Iv&novidi  Pisarev  387 


interesting  to  hvn  fhdr  coRespondentft  in  Paris  or  London, 
in  SozAtov  or  Irkutsk,  rather  than  upon  Paxnassos  or  in  the 
Olympian  hallSi^then,  of  course,  there  is  nothing  left  fi)r 
the  peaceable  poet  to  do  but  to  hang  his  dariing  lyre  on  a 
nail,  and  to  enter  the  Government  service  or  torn  to  the 
sombre  occupations  of  agricnlttire.  If  it  keeps  on  in  that 
way,  there  will  at  last  come  a  dramatic  moment,  when  the 
last  poet  wiU  embrace  the  last  esthetidan  and,  sobbing,  will 
say  to  him: 

'*  My  friend,  we  are  alone.  The  world  has  turned  sour 
and  is  decajring.  The  microscope  and  the  scalpel  give  us 
no  rest.  If  we  do  not  conceal  ourselves  or  do  not  turn 
naturalists,  they  will  put  us  alive  into  spirits,  in  order  to 
preserve  complete  the  last  specimens  of  an  extinct  species 
that  had  remarkable  external  resemblances  to  man.  My 
friend,  when  we  die,  the  last  gate  that  leads  to  the  Olympian 
dwellings  will  be  nailed  up  and  securely  hidden  from  view, 
not  by  bricks,  but  by  a  heap  of  all  the  unsold  copies  of  my 
poems  and  all  the  uncut  sheets  of  your  critical  essays." 

'*WeU/'  will  say  the  esthetidan,  "if  it  is  so,  then  all  is 
ended.  The  gate  will  for  ever  remain  inaccessible!  No  man 
will  ever  dimb,  no  animal  wiU  ever  jnmp  over  my  critiques 
and  your  poesy."  And,  dasping  each  other  in  a  tight  em- 
braoe,  as  people  embrace  on  the  grave  of  everything  that  is 
dear  to  them,  our  last  Mohicans  will  start  on  a  nm  to  the 
shop  to  boy  themsdves  amicroooope  and  diemical  retorts,  as 
appurtenances  of  a  masquerade  that  is  to  save  them  from  an 
untimdy  and  involuntary  descent  into  spirits.  The  history 
of  the  regenerated  spedmens  of  the  extinct  species  will  end 
by  the  esthetician's  and  poet's  marriage,  it  la  face  du  toUil  tt 
de  la  nature,  to  two  girls  who  are  medical  practitioners  and 
who  in  times  of  yore  used  to  completely  upset  their  present 
admirers  by  their  incomprehensibly  solid  education,  their 
indecently  firm  manner  of  thinking,  and  their  complete  ab- 
sence of  feminine  grace,  that  is,  weakness,  silliness,  and 
affectation.  The  children  of  these  two  happy  pairs  will  get 
to  hear  some  dim  references  to  estheticians  and  poets,  but 
their  grandchildren  will  never  hear  that.    Both  spedes  will 


388         The  Nineteenth  Century 


become  cntively  unknown,  as  are  unknown  to  tts  many  alngs 

of  the  primeval  world,  that  have  left  neither  bones,  nor 
shells,  nor  any  other  traces  of  their  mundane  existence. 

From  many  separate  features  that  are  scattered  in  my  pro- 
phetic improvisation,  the  reader  may  notice  that  its  realisa- 
tion belongs  to  a  very  distant  future.  In  all  likelihood  the 
great-great-g^ndfathers  and  the  great-great-grandmothers 
of  the  last  esthetician  and  the  last  poet  are  at  the  present 
moment  not  yet  in  the  wombs  of  their  mothers;  yet,  in  spite 
of  the  remoteness  of  the  decisive  catastrophe,  there  are  evil 
omens  of  it  even  in  our  own  time  There  are  very 

many  literary  parasites,  but  out  of  the  murky  and  miserable 
crowd  of  the  intellectual  proletariat  rise  only  those  who 
know  how  to  acquire  a  flexible  and  vari^;ated  fonn  of  ex- 
pfeaakm.  These  brilliant  parasitea  carry  fonn  to  a  tmly 
incredible  perfection.  They  produce  in  their  language  the 
same  kind  of  wonderful  roulades  that  K6ntski  does  on  the 
violin  or  Rubinstein  on  the  plana  If  this  virtuosity  is 
acquired  by  habit  and  practice,  it,  naturally,  behooves  to 
make  use  of  it:  it  is  a  capital  from  which  one  must  derive 
interest  And  all  the  simi^minded  reader  has  to  do^  is  to 
roll  his  eyes  and  take  in  the  wonder!  One  is  present  at  the 
creation  of  a  world  in  miniature:  evenrthing  is  made  out  of 
nothing;  emptiness  is  made  to  appear  as  fulness,  and  it  is 
made  to  appear  fulness  so  naturally  that  one  has  only  to 
shrug  his  shoulders:  "  Yes,  he  is  an  artist,  a  painter,  a  pro> 
fessor  of  white  magic,  a  Bosco,  and  even  a  Mikbdyla  Vasfle- 
vich!  Of  course,  the  public  says  "Ahi"  and  goes  into 
ecstasies,  and  how  can  it  help  going  into  ecstades^  when  the 
miracles  are  produced  right  before  its  eyes! 

When  the  parasite  begins  to  receive  interest  from  his 
capital,  he  simply  and  definitely  creates,  in  order  to  apply 
his  technical  skill  to  something.  He  has  no  prompting  to 
tell  society  any  ideas;  he  has  no  feeling  that  is  persistently 
seeking  to  come  out  and  manifest  itself ;  he  does  not  at  all 
wish  to  act  consciously  upon  the  development  of  society  in 
one  direction  or  another;  he  is  not  a  thinker,  not  a  social 
factor,  and  not  a  poet  in  the  higher  and  now  forgotten  sense 


Digitized  by  GoogI 


Dmitri  Ivinovich  Pisarev  389 


of  the  word.  He  is  a  master  workman  of  articles,  novels, 
or  venes,  and,  being  a  sensible  artisan,  he  does  not  wish  his 
skill  to  be  lost  in  vain.  Why  should  he  sit  with  fidded 
hands^  having  leaned  a  trade  ?  Why  should  he  not  start 
out  on  the  hunt  of  roubles  and  laurel  wreaths^  as  long  as 
there  are  good  people  who  lavish  both  in  fiur  abundance  ? 

His  reasoning  is  faultless,  and  this  reasoning  leads 
strsightway  to  the  complete  triumph  and  unlimited  domina- 
tion of  pure  art  Some  people  write  because  their  being 
boils  over  with  the  impasdoned  work  of  mind  and  feelings. 
It  is  evident  that  theur  mind  and  lieelings,  being  abroad  be- 
cause of  the  creative  process,  are  roused  by  impressions  that 
are  independent  of  that  process. 

Others  write  in  order  to  act  upon  society.  The  aim  of 
their  activity  is' independent  of  the  process,  as  we  see  in 
Byelinski,  Dobrolydbov,  and  the  author  of  lVka4  is  to  be 
Done  f  • 

Others  again  write  because  they  have  learned  to  write  and 
because  they  can  write  without  the  least  labour,  just  as 
a  nightingale  sings  and  a  rose  exhales  perfume.  Their 
activity  is  causeless  and  aimless,  that  is,  they  have  a  cause 
and  an  aim,  but  these  can  have  no  effect  upon  the  direction 
of  the  creative  process.  Suppose  the  versifier  wants  to  have 
a  beaver  collar  sewn  on  to  his  warm  overcoat.  Here  is  a 
stimulating  cause  for  dipping  his  pen  in  the  inkstand;  how- 
ever, he  will,  in  all  probability,  not  write  of  beaver  collars, 
but  of  the  vicissitudes  of  fate  that  affected  three  ancient 
sages,'  or  of  the  misfortunes  of  a  poor  girl  who  died  in  the 
spring  by  the  sounds  of  her  fitther's  fiddle^  or  of  some  other 
elevated  and  beautiful  thing  that  has  nothing  in  oommon 
with  the  tempting  display  of  the  furrier  next  door. 

He  has  also  an  aim:  the  versifier  wishes  to  sell  his  poem 
to  a  periodical,  to  get  for  it  as  much  as  possible,  and  to  re- 
ceive on  account  aU  they  will  give  him.  Yet  Seneca,  Lucan, 
and  IfUdus  warmly  discuss  the  immortality  ol  the  soul,  and 
not  where  he  will  get  most,  whether  in  the  "  Contempor- 

'  Chernysh^kl,  wlioee  twue  was  tabooed  by  the  ceoson. 
*  Ittykov  it  meant ;  see  pi  344. 


390         The  Nineteenth  Centiuy 


aiy "  or  the  "  Manoixs  of  the  Fatheriand."  And  dying 
M^nya,  in  her  last  momenta^  is  intenated  in  the  epring 
lealage,  instead  of  disquieting  herself  with  tlie  tiddiah  qnes> 
tion:  I  wonder  whether  they  will  let  me  have  fifty  roubles 
in  advance  at  the  "  Russian  Word ' '  ? 

It  is  clear  that  cause  and  aim  do  not  penetrate  into  the 
sanctuary  of  creativeness.  The  sanctuary  remains  unpol- 
luted, and  people  that  pine  for  a  beaver  collar  and  that 
dream  of  a  tempting  advance  payment  may  be  recognised  as 
high  priests  of  pure  art.  The  question  will,  naturally,  not 
be  changed  if  instead  of  a  beaver  collar  I  should  put  a  crav- 
ing for  literary  glory,  and  instead  of  an  advance  payment  of 
fifty  roubles — applauses  at  public  readings.  The  priest  of 
pure  art  will  in  either  case  remain  true  to  his  vocation,  and 
in  either  case  he  will  remain  a  magnificent  specimen  of  the 
genus  parasite. 

If  it  is  not  quite  clear  to  the  readers  why  our  lyric  poets, 
who  represent  a  complete  absence  of  ideas^  may  be  included 
in  the  list  of  parasites  that  despoil  the  idess  of  others,  I  win 
at  once  set  them  aright.  Our  lyric  poets  feed  their  destitu- 
tion on  the  tiniest  grains  of  thought  and  feelings  that  are 
the  common  possession  of  all  men,  stupid  and  wise,  cultured 
and  uncultured,  honest  and  dishonest  Every  man  has  some 
kind  of  a  feding  wlien  he  looim  st  a  pretty  womaay  and 
everjrtxidy  knows  that  sensation  and  understands  that  it  is 
known  to  others  also,  and  that,  consequently,  it  is  useless 
and  uninteresting  to  tell  others  about  it  But  the  lyricists 
live,  like  the  humming-birds,  on  flower  dust;  they  have 
turned  this  trifling  and  well-known  sentiment  to  their  advant- 
age  and  have  begun  to  elicit  an  income  from  it,  thanks  to 
their  ability  to  create  something  out  of  nothing  and  to  clothe 
the  intangible  dust  in  thin-woven  and  variegated  garments 
of  iambics,  chorees,  anapests,  dactyls,  and  amphibrachs. 

The  lyric  poets,  being  tiny  birds  in  the  great  family  of 
parasites,  prosper  on  what  everybody  knows  and  none  but 
the  lyric  poets  can  or  wish  to  make  use  of.  Other  larger 
parasites  exploit  in  their  favour  not  small  grains  of  feeling 
and  germs  of  thought,  but  whole,  big  feelings  and  whole, 


Digitized  by  Google 


Count  Lev  Nikol&evich  Tolstdy  391 


wdl-developed  thoughta.  These  priests  of  pure  art  devour 
remarkable  theories  and  majestic  world  oomseptions.  There 
are  among  these  priests  sparrows,  and  there  are  also  ele- 
phants, and,  as  the  proverb  sajra,  the  bigger  the  vessel,  the 
better  the  sailing, — the  elephants,  naturally,  lay  hold  of  the 
broadest  and  most  daring  world  conceptions.  They  discuss 
with  another's  voice  the  most  important  and  the  gieatest 
questions  of  life;  they  perform  their  variations  with  so  much 
aplomb  and  with  such  overpowering  thunder  that  the  reader 
is  intimidated  and  reverentially  bows  his  head  before  them. 

But  the  temple  of  pure  art  is  open  alike  for  all  its  real 
devotees,  for  all  the  priests  who  have  a  pure  heart  and  are 
innocent  of  independent  mental  labour.  Thanks  to  this  cir- 
cumstance, the  reader,  though  he  may  marvel  aud  not  be- 
lieve his  eyes,  will  see  at  the  same  altar,  on  the  one  hand, 
our  little  lyric  poet  Fet,  on  the  other,  our  great  humorist 
Shchedrin. 

Cottot  Lev  NikolAevfeh  Tolst6y.  (x8a8-.) 

Cooot  Tolstdy  was  bora  ia  the  estate  of  Yitnajm  Myiba,  in  the 
Oofermnent  of  Tfils.  In  1837  his  ftmlly  settled  in  Moscow,  bat  Ids 
&tlier  died  soon  after,  and  he  returned  to  Ydsnaya  Polydna.   In  1843 

he  entered  tbe  university  at  Kazdn,  and  in  1848  graduated  from  the 
Faculty  of  Jurisprudence  at  St  Petersburg.  He  again  returned  to 
bis  estate,  where  he  remained  till  1851.  He  then  enrolled  in  the 
srmj  and  «w  itstioiied  in  the  CancMos,  wheie  he  begin  his  litersfy 
ciieer  with  his  sketches,  CMidkoed,  The  Inrnnkm,  Beg^tood,  The 
OuMUkt,  He  took  part  in  tbe  Crimean  War.  and  during  the  cam- 
paign wrote  his  stories  about  Sebastopol.  After  the  war  Tol5t6y 
settled  in  St.  Petersburg,  where  he  published  a  series  of  shorter 
stories.  In  these  his  disenchantment  with  existing  conditions  is 
deacly  perceptible.  In  i86a  he  married  tbe  dang^ter  of  Doctor  Behrs, 
and  went  hack  to  tbe  estste  of  Ytewya  Polyiiia.  Hen  he  devoted 
hhnadf  to  the  education  of  the  pcssents  and  edited  an  educational 
periodical,  VAsnaya  Poly&na^  in  which  he  evolved  his  radical  views. 
Soon  after  he  assumed  a  negative  attitude  to  all  progress,  and  has 
remained  in  it  ever  since.  From  1865  to  1869  appeared  his  great  novel 
WarmidBtttie,  Then  he  again  tctnned  to  his  pedagogical  activity, 
and  composed  a  latge  number  of  diort  stories  for  the  peasants.  In 
1875  began  to  appear  his  other  great  novel,  Anna  Karitnin.  At  the 
tame  time  he  wrote  his  Confession^  and  devoted  himself  to  the  com- 


» 

392         The  Nineteenth  Century 


position  of  theologicnl  trncts.  His  newly  fornmlated  theory  of  a  retnm 
to  common  labour  and  simplicity  of  life  has  found  many  followers  who 
emnlate  the  life  of  their  master  under  the  name  of  Tolstoyists. 

The  lint  novd  of  Tolat^'t  to  be  txaadated  wet  The  Cmtuks,  by 
Bngene  Schiqrler,  in  1878.  Sisoe  then  mdi  e  large  namber  of  trmii»- 
lations  of  moat  of  his  works  have  appeared  that  it  is  not  advisable  to 
give  them  here  ;  they  may  easily  be  found  in  late  publishers'  annuals. 
The  following  names  figure  as  translators  of  Tolfit6y:  A.  Hulme 
Baamao,  M.  Cruger,  E.  J.  Dillon,  A.  Delano,  N.  H.  Dole,  H.  Suther- 
land Bdwardt,  Conatanee  Ganctt,  G.  B.  Haltted,  Isabel  Hapgood,  Ch. 
Johnston,  A.  Loranger,  Y.  A.  Lndwig,  Looiie  Maude,  W.  Aylmer 
Maude,  Count  Norraikow,  C.  Dopofif,  S.  Rapoport  and  J.  Keaworthy, 
V.  Tchertkoff,  W.  M.  Thompsoo,  B.  R.  Tucker. 

FROM  "Anna  karbnin" 

"  Do  you  know,  I  Imve  been  thinking  of  yon,*'  teid  Seig- 
yiif  IvkoxmiSti,  "  Fkom  wket  that  doctor  has  told  me,  these 
are  some  awful  things  gdng  on  in  your  county;  the  doctor 
is  quite  a  clever  fellow.  I  have  been  telling  you  and  I  xepeat 
it  now:  it  is  wrong  for  you  not  to  go  to  the  meetings  and 
altogether  to  keep  away  from  all  agrarian  interests.  If  de- 
cent people  are  going  to  withdraw  from  them,  then,  of  oouise, 
everything  will  go  God  knows  how.  We  are  paying  out 
money;  it  all  goes  on  salaries,  and  we  have  no  schools^  no 
medical  assistanta,  no  midwives,  no  apothecaiy  ahops^ 
nothing." 

"  I  have  tried,"  Levin  answered  softly  and  unwillingly, 
**  but  I  can't!    What 's  to  be  done  ?  " 

"  What  is  it  that  you  can't!  I  confess,  I  do  not  under- 
stand you.  Indifference  and  inability  I  do  not  admit;  is  it, 
then,  simply  indolence?" 

**  Neither  the  one,  nor  the  other,  nor  the  third.  I  have 
tried,  and  I  see  that  I  can't  do  anything,"  said  Levin. 

He  did  not  pay  much  attention  to  what  his  brother  was 
saying.  As  he  looked  beyond  the  river  at  the  field,  he  dis- 
tingtiished  something  black,  but  he  ooidd  not  make  out 
whether  it  was  a  horse  or  a  derk  on  horseback. 

"  Why  can't  you  do  anything?  You  have  made  an  at- 


Digitized  by  Google 


Count  Lev  Nikol&evich  Tolst5y  393 


tempt,  and  in  yonr  opinion  yon  did  not  snooeed,  ao  yon  bave 
given  it  np.  Have  n't  3ron  any  ambition  ?  *' 

"Ambition,"  aaid  I^vfn,  touched  to  tbe  qnldk  by  bia 
biotber'a  woida,  **  is  inoompielienaible  to  me.  If  they  bad 
told  me  in  tbe  tmiverrity  that  others  underatand  integral  cal- 
culus,  and  that  I  do  not,  there  would  be  a  case  for  ambition* 
But  here  one  must  be  convinced  first  of  all  that  one  must 
bave  a  certain  ability  for  that,  and  above  all,  that  these 
affairs  are  really  important." 

**  Well,  is  n't  that  important?"  said  Sergy^y  Ivdnovich, 
himself  touched  to  the  quick  because  his  brother  regarded  as 
unimportant  that  which  interested  him,  and  because,  evid- 
ently, he  was  not  listening. 

'*  It  does  not  seem  important  to  me,  and  does  not  interest 
me,  so  what  are  you  going  to  do  about  that?"  answered 
L,evin,  having  in  the  meantime  made  out  that  what  he  saw 
was  really  the  clerk  and  that  the  clerk  had,  no  doubt,  told 
the  peasants  to  stop  ploughing.  They  were  turning  over 
the  ploughs.  "Is  it  possible,  they  have  done  the  plough- 
ing ?  "  he  thought. 

"  But  listen,"  said  his  elder  brother,  with  a  frown  on  bia 
beautiful,  intelligent  face,  "  there  are  limits  to  everything. 
It  'a  all  very  nice  to  be  an  odd  fellow,  and  a  sincere  man, 
and  not  to  like  deoeption.^I  understand  all  that;  but  what 
ycra  are  saying  has  either  no  sense,  or  a  very  bad  sense. 
How  is  it  yon  find  it  unimportant  that  tbe  people  whom  you 
profess  to  lore  " 

"  I  never  professed,"  thought  Konstantfh  Levfn. 

"Are  dying  without  receiving  any  aid  ?  Coane  nddwives 
axe  killing  the  children,  and  the  people  axe  steeped  in  ignor- 
ance and  xemain  in  the  power  of  every  scribe,  whereas  you 
have  the  means  at  band  to  correct  all  that,  and  you  do  no- 
thing, because  in  your  opinion  it  is  not  important." 

Sergy^y  Iv^ovicfa  had  placed  a  dilemma  before  him: 
' '  Kither  you  are  ao  undeveloped  that  you  cannot  see  all  that 
you  are  able  to  do,  or  you  do  not  wish  to  sacrifice  your  quiet 
and  your  vainglory,  or  what  not,  in  order  to  do  it." 

Konstantin  I^via  felt  that  there  was  nothing  left  for  him 


The  Nineteenth  Centuiy 


I 


to  do  tmt  submit  or  confess  an  absence  of  love  for  the  com* 
mon  weal.    And  this  offended  and  grieved  him. 
"Both,"  he  q;K>ke  with  decwon;  *'  I  can't  see  hour  one 

*' What?  You  can't,  by  making  ptoper  oae  d  maaeyt 

^ve  them  medical  help  ?  " 

"  As  far  as  I  can  see,  it  is  impossible   I  see  no  p>ossi- 

bility  of  furnishing  medical  aid  in  all  the  places  of  the  four 
thousand  square  versts  of  our  county,  with  our  freshets, 
blizzards,  and  working  season.  Besides,  I  have  no  £uth  in 
medicine." 

"Come  now,  that  is  not  just   I  can  give  yon  a  thou- 
sand examples          Well,  and  schools  ?  " 

"  What  are  the  schools  for  ? " 

"  You  don't  mean  that!  Can  there  be  any  doubt  of  the 
use  of  education  ?  If  it  is  good  for  yon,  it  is  also  good  for 
everybody  else." 

Koafltantfa  I«civfa  Mt  Idnudf  morally  ptiabed  to  tlie  wall, 
and  ao  lie  became  exdted  and  in^niUarily  expreaeed  tbe 
main  canae  off  bla  indifieienoe  to  the  common  good. 

"  May  be  idi  that  ia  good.  Bat  why  abonld  I  bother 
about  establishing  medical  centres  which  I  am  not  going  to 
use,  or  schools  to  which  I  am  not  going  to  send  my  cfaildxen, 
to  whicb  even  die  pcaaanta  do  not  want  to  aend  thein,  and 
I  am  not  yet  firmly  oomrlnoed  that  tlicy  aboold?  "  aaid  he. 

This  unexpected  view  of  the  a£fair  for  a  moment  atartled 
Sergy^y  Ivinovich ;  but  he  at  once  thought  out  a  new  plan 
of  attack.  He  kept  ailent,  pulled  out  one  fishing-rod,  threw 
it  in  at  another  plaoe»  and,  smiling,  turned  to  his  brother. 

**  You  will  pardon  me:  in  the  first  place,  a  medical  centre 
Is  much  needed.  There,  we  had  to  send  for  the  county 
doctor  to  attend  to  Agdfya  Mikhdylovna." 

'*  Well,  I  think  her  hand  will  always  stay  crooked." 

"  That  is  an  open  question         Then,  a  literate  peasant 

will  make  a  more  useful  labourer." 

"I  don't  know,  you  may  ask  anybody  you  please,"  an- 
swered Konstantfn  Levin  emphatically, — '*  literate  peasants 
are  mnch  worse  as  labourers.    You  can't  fix  the  roads  with 


Digitized  by  Google 


Count  Lev  Nikolievich  Tolst6y  395 


fbem;  and  if  th^  luwe  to  build  a  bridge,  they  'U  swipe  the 
materiaL" 

"  However,"  frowningly  aaidSergy^y  Ivdnovicfa,  wbodid 
not  like  oontiadjctioo8»  especially  such  as  oontinaaliy  jumped 
from  one  subject  to  another  and  without  connection  adduced 
new  pioofii»  ao  that  it  was  impossible  to  tdl  what  to  answer 
first,  "  however,  tliat  is  not  the  question.  Let  me  ask  you, 
do  you  acknowledge  education  to  be  a  benefit  to  the  people?  " 

"I  Co,**  said  Levfn  inoantiously,  and  immediately  was 
consdous  that  he  did  not  say  what  was  in  his  mind.  He 
felt  that  since  he  did  acknowledge  it,  the  proof  would  be 
forthcoming  that  he  was  talking  senseless  bosh.  He  did 
not  know  how  that  would  be  argued,  but  he  was  sure  that 
the  logical  deduction  was  forthcoming,  and  he  waited  for 
that  proof. 

The  argument  was  much  simpler  than  Konstantin  Levin 
had  expected  it. 

*'  If  you  acknowledge  it  to  be  beneficial,"  said  Serg^^y 
Ivdnovich,  '*  you,  as  an  honest  man,  can't  help  loving  this 
thing  and  sympathising  with  it,  and  consequently  you  can't 
help  wishing  to  work  for  it." 

"  But  I  have  not  yet  acknowledged  this  to  be  good,"  said 
Konstantfn  Levfn,  blushing. 

"  What  ?   You  have  just  told  me  " 

"  That  is,  I  do  not  acknowledge  it  to  be  good  or  possible.'* 

"  You  can't  know  that,  not  having  made  an  efot" 

"Well,  gr&nted,"  said  Levfn,  though  he  did  not  at  all 
grant  it,  "  granted,  it  is  so;  I  still  can't  see,  why  I  should 
bother  about  it" 

"  What  do  yon  mean  ?  *' 

"  Wdl,  since  we  have  gotten  so  fiur  in  our  discossioo,  ex- 
plain it  to  me  firam  the  philosophical  point  of  view,"  said 
Levin. 

"  I  don't  understand  what  need  there  is  here  of  philo- 
sophy," said  Sergy6y  Ivinovich,  in  a  tone  which  sounded  to 
Levfn  as  if  he  did  not  acknowledge  his  brother's  right  to 
discuss  philosophy.   This  irritated  Levfn. 

It  is  this»"  he  said  excitedly,  "  I  think  that  the  prime 


30         The  Nineteenth  Century 


mover  of  all  onr  actioiis  im,  after  all,  our  personal  bappiness. 
I,  as  a  nobleman,  see  at  present  nothing  in  the  agrarian  in- 
stitutions by  which  my  interests  are  advanced.  The  loads 
axe  no  better*  and  they  can't  be  better;  my  horMS  take  me 
just  as  easily  over  bad  roads.  I  need  no  doctors  and  no 
medical  centres.  I  don't  want  a  justice  of  the  peace, — I 
have  never  had  recourse  to  him,  and  I  never  \y\\\.  I  not 
only  need  no  schools,  but  I  find  them  injurious,  as  I  have 
told  you.  For  me  the  agrarian  institutions  mean  only  an 
obligation  to  pay  eighteen  kopeks  per  desyatfna,  to  travel  to 
town,  in  order  to  pass  the  nights  with  bedbugs,  and  to  listen 
to  all  kinds  of  nonsense  and  commonplaces, — but  my  per- 
sonal interest  in  no  way  incites  me." 

"  Wait  a  moment,"  Sergyey  Ivduovich  interrupted  him, 
with  a  smile,  "our  personal  interest  did  not  incite  us  to  work 
for  the  liberation  of  the  peasants,  yet  we  worked." 

"  No! "  Konatantfn  interrupted  him,  getting  ever  more 
exdted.  "  The  liberation  of  tbe  peaMStt  was  an  entirely 
difeent  matter.  Theie  was  a  personal  interest  connected 
with  it.  We  wanted  to  get  rid  of  the  jroke  whidi  was  op- 
pressing us,  all  the  good  people.  But  to  be  an  aldennan,  to 
discuss  how  many  cleaners  of  privies  are  needed,  and  how 
tbe  pipes  ere  to  be  laid  in  the  town  I  am  not  living  in,— to 
be  a  jttxyman  and  ait  in  judgment  over  a  peasant  who  hss 
stolen  a  ham,  and  for  sbc  honn  to  listen  to  all  kinds  of  non- 
sense that  is  threshed  out  by  the  defence  and  by  the  pro- 
curators, and  the  presiding  judge  asking  my  old  peasant, 
Al^ka  the  fool:  '  Do  you,  Mr.  Defendant,  plead  guilty  to 
misappropriating  the  ham,  eh  ? '  " 

Konstantfn  Levin  was  getting  away  from  the  argument, 
and  began  to  act  the  presiding  judge  and  Al^shka  the  fool; 
it  seemed  to  him  that  it  all  was  pertinent  to  the  discussion. 

Bnt  Sergy^y  Ivdnovich  shrugged  his  shoulders. 

"  Well,  what  is  it  you  are  up  to  ?  " 

"  I  want  to  say  that  I  will  always,  with  all  my  might,  de- 
fend the  rights  that  touch  me  —  my  interest;  that,  when  I 
was  a  student  and  the  secret  police  made  a  raid  on  us  and 
read  our  letters,  I  was  ready  with  all  my  might  to  defend 


Digitized  by  Google 


Count  Lev  Nikol&evich  Tolst6y  397 


fhese  nff1it8»  to  defend  my  rights  of  culture  and  of  liberty. 
I  can  undentand  military  duties  that  touch  the  fate  of  my 
children,  my  brothers,  and  myself;  I  am  ready  to  discuss 
what  touches  me;  but  I  do  not  underBtand,  and  do  not  want 

to  understand,  why  I  should  consider  what  to  do  with  forty 
thousand  roubles  of  the  county  money,  or  why  I  should  sit 
in  judgment  over  Al^shka  the  fool." 

Konstanlfn  Levfn  spoke  as  if  the  dam  of  his  words  had 
broken  loose,    Serg^^y  Ivdnovich  smiled. 

"Suppose  you  will  have  a  case  at  law  to-morrow:  well, 
would  you  prefer  to  be  judged  in  the  old  criminal  court  ?  *' 

'*  I  will  not  have  a  case  in  court.  I  will  not  cut  anybody's 
throat,  and  I  have  no  need  to  do  so.  By  the  way!  "  he  con- 
tinued, again  jumping  over  to  an  entirely  irrelevant  matter, 
'*  all  our  county  institutions  and  such  things  are  very  much 
like  the  birch  saplings  that  we  stick  up,  as  on  Whitsun  Mon- 
day, in  order  to  make  them  look  like  a  forest  that  has  grown 
up  of  its  own  accord  in  Europe;  but  I  have  not  tho  heart  to 
water  these  Urches,  nor  have  I  any  £uth  in  them." 

Sergy^y  lydnovidi  only  shrugged  his  shoulders,  escpress- 
ing  by  this  motion  that  he  was  at  a  loss  to  sooount  for  these 
birches  in  their  discussion,  though  he  immediatdy  saw  what 
his  brother  hsd  intended  to  say  by  them. 

"  Really,  that  is  not  a  way  of  discussing  the  matter,"  he 
remarked. 

But  Konstantfn  Levin  was  anxious  to  put  himself  right 
in  regard  to  his  defect,  of  which  he  was  conscious,  that  is» 

his  indifference  to  the  common  good,  and  he  continued: 

**I  think,"  said  Konstantfn,  "that  no  activity  can  be 
permanent  if  it  is  not  based  on  personal  interest.  This  is  a 
universal  truth,  a  philosophic  truth,"  said  he,  emphatically 
repeating  the  word  "philosophic,"  as  if  to  show  that  he, 
too,  had  a  right,  like  anybody  else,  to  talk  of  philosophy. 

Sergydy  Ivdnovich  smiled  again.  "  He  has  a  philosophy 
irfhis  own  to  suit  his  inclinations,"  thought  he. 

"  Well,  you  had  better  leave  philosophy  alone,"  said  he. 
"  The  main  problem  of  philosophy  has  been  in  all  ages  to 
discover  tiie  necessary  connection  that  exists  between  per- 


Digitized  by  Google 


39^         The  Nineteenth  Century 


sonal  and  common  interests.  But  that  is  not  to  the  point; 
it  behooves  me  to  correct  your  comparison.  The  birch  sap- 
lings were  not  stuck  up,  but  some  were  set  out,  and  some 
were  planted,  and  one  has  to  tend  them  carefully.  Only 
those  nations  have  a  future,  only  those  nations  may  be 
called  historical,  that  have  discernment  in  what  is  impor- 
tant and  significant  in  their  institutions,  and  that  value 
them." 

Sergy^y  Ivinovich  transferred  the  question  into  the  field 
of  philosophical  history,  which  was  inaooearifale  to  Kon* 
stantiii  Levin,  and  aboiwed  him  tbe  whole  injuidoe  of  his 
view. 

"  But  ss  to  your  having  no  love  for  itf—yon  moat  paidoo 
me,— it  is  a  case  of  our  Rosaian  indolenee  and  manneriam, 
and  I  am  convinced  that  it  is  only  a  temporaxy  abenatlon 
which  will  pass.*' 

Konstantfn  was  nlent  He  felt  that  he  had  heen  demol- 
ished all  amnd,  bnt  he  felt  at  the  same  time  that  his  hiother 
did  not  undeiatand  what  he  had  intended  to  oonvqr.  But 
he  did  not  know  why  he  was  not  tudeistood:  because  he  did 
not  express  clearly  his  thoughts,  or  becatiae  his  brother  dad 
not  wish  to  understand  him,  or  because  he  ooold  not.  How- 
ever, he  did  not  pursue  this  thought  any  longer;  he  did  not 
answer  his  brother,  and  fell  to  musing  about  something 
different,  some  personal  matter  of  his. 

Sergydy  Ivdnovich  fastened  his  last  fishing-rod,  untied 
the  horse,  and  they  drove  away. 

The  waggon-load  was  full.  Ivdn  jumped  down  and  led  the 
gentle,  well-fed  horse  by  the  bridle.  The  woman  threw  her 
rake  on  the  waggon,  and,  swinging  her  arms,  went  with  a 
rapid  step  to  the  other  women  who  were  walking  together. 
When  Iv^n  drove  into  the  road,  he  joined  a  whole  procession 
of  other  waggons.  The  women  were  walking  behind  the 
waggons,  with  their  rakes  over  their  shoulders,  adorned  with 
bright  flowers  and  prating  away  with  their  sonorous,  merry 
voices.  A  coarse,  low,  woman's  voice  started  a  song  and 
sang  it  out  to  the  refrain;  then  half  a  hundred  of  low  and 


Digitized  by  GoogI 


Count  Lev  Nikol&evich  Tolst6y  399 


blgh  Iiatlfhy  voices  caught  the  xdhdn  and  sang  the  aoog 
again  fnm  the  beginning. 

The  singing  women  were  appmdiing  I<evfn,  and  it  ap- 
peared to  him  as  though  a  dond,  disdiaxging  peals  of  j<7» 
weie  passing  over  him.  The  doad  came  nearer,  and  over- 
whdmed  him,  and  the  stack  on  which  he  was  Isring,  and  all 
the  other  stacks,  and  the  waggons,  and  the  whole  meadow 
with  the  distant  field,— all  moved  and  rocked  with  the 
rhythmical  measure  of  this  wild,  hilarious  song,  with  its  ez- 
damations,  its  whistling  and  shouting.  Levfn  envied  them 
their  healthy  merriment,  and  he  wished  to  take  part  in  the 
expression  of  this  joy  of  life.  But  he  could  do  nothing,  and 
he  was  obliged  to  lie,  and  look  and  listen.  When  the  people 
disappeared  with  their  song  from  the  eye  and  the  ear,  a 
heavy  feeling  of  melancholy,  on  account  of  his  loneliness, 
his  physical  inactivity,  his  hostility  to  this  world,  took  pos- 
session of  Levin. 

Some  of  the  very  peasants  who  had  more  than  anybody 
else  been  disputing  with  him  on  account  of  the  hay,  those 
whom  he  had  offended,  or  those  who  had  wished  to  cheat 
him, — those  very  peasants  merrily  bowed  to  him  and  evid- 
ently had  no  evil  thought  of  him,  nor  could  they  have  any; 
they  had  not  only  no  repentance  but  even  no  recollection  of 
their  having  wished  to  cheat  him.  Everything  was  drowned 
in  the  sea  of  the  merry  mass  work.  God  has  given  the  day, 
God  has  given  tiie  strength  to  woik.  And  the  day  and  the 
strength  are  devoted  to  work,  and  in  it  is  its  own  reward. 
Por  whom  is  this  work?  What  will  be  the  fruits  of  this 
work  ?  These  are  secondary,  unimportant  considerations. 

Levfn  often  admired  this  life,  often  experienced  the  feeling 
of  envy  towards  the  people  that  lived  this  life,  but  it  was  to- 
day fbr  the  first  time,  espedsUy  under  the  influence  of  what 
he  had  seen  of  the  rdations  of  Ivdn  Parm6nov  to  his  young 
wife,  that  Levin  was  possessed  of  the  idea  that  it  depended 
upon  him  to  diange  the  burdensome,  empty,  artificial,  and 
personal  life  which  he  was  living  for  this  busy,  pure,  sodal, 
charming  life. 

The  oild  man  who  had  been  sitting  by  his  side  had  long 


400         The  Nineteenth  Century 

ago  gone  home:  the  people  had  all  disappeared.  Those  who 
lived  near  by  had  gone  home,  and  those  that  were  from  a 
distanoe  were  preparing  their  anpper  and  their  camp  in  the 
meadow.  Unnoticed  by  the  people,  Levin  remained  lying 
on  the  stack,  in  order  to  see,  listen,  and  think.  Those  who 
had  stayed  for  the  night  in  the  field  hardly  closed  their  eyes 
in  the  short  suuinier  night.  At  first  one  could  hear  a  uni- 
versal merry  conversation  and  laughter  during  the  supper, 
and  then  again  songs  and  laughter. 

The  whole  long  work-day  had  left  no  other  trace  in  them 
but  merriment.  Before  the  morning  dawn  everj'thing 
grew  quiet.  One  could  hear  only  the  nocturnal  sounds  of 
the  uusilenced  frogs  in  the  swamp,  and  of  the  horses  that 
neighed  in  the  meadow  in  the  mist  that  rose  before  morning. 
Awakening  from  his  revery,  Levin  climbed  down  from  the 
stack  and,  looking  at  the  stars,  he  knew  that  night  had 
passed. 

**  Well,  what  am  I  going  to  do  ?  How  am  I  going  to  do 
it?"  aaid  he  to  himself,  tr>'ing  toibnmilate  for  himself  all 
that  he  had  thought  out  and  that  he  had  folt  in  that  short 
night.  All  that  he  had  thought  and  felt  was  divided  into 
three  different  mental  processea.  One  was  the  renunciattoo 
of  his  old  life,  of  his  uadesB  edncatioii.  This  rennnciation 
caused  him  pleasure,  and  it  was  ea^  and  simple  for  him. 
Other  thoughts  and  ideas  toudied  upon  the  life  which  he  now 
wanted  to  live.  He  dearly  felt  the  simplictty,  purity,  and 
legality  of  this  life,  and  he  was  convinced  that  he  would  find 
in  it  that  satisfaction,  that  rest  and  dignity,  the  absence  of 
which  had  caused  him  snch  painful  sensations.  But  the 
third  series  of  thoughts  circled  about  the  question  how  to 
make  that  transition  from  the  old  life  to  the  new.  But  here 
he  could  see  nothing  clearly.  "To  have  a  wife.  Have 
work  and  the  necessity  for  work.  Should  I  leave  Pokr6v- 
skoe  ?  Should  I  buy  land  ?  Join  society  ?  Marry  a  peasant 
woman  ?  How  am  I  to  do  it  ?"  he  asked  himself  again  and 
found  no  answer.  *  *  However,  I  have  not  slept  the  whole 
night,  and  I  have  no  clear  ideas,"  said  he  to  himself.  *'  I 
will  think  it  out  later.   One  thing  is  certain,  this  night  has 


Digitized  by  Google 


Count  Lev  Nikolievich  Tolst6y  401 


decided  my  fate.  All  my  former  ideas  of  family  life  are 
bosb,"  said  he  to  himself.  "This  is  much  simpler  and 
better  " 

*'  How  beautiful! "  thought  he,  as  he  looked  at  a  strange, 
nmCliar-of-pearl  ahell  of  white  drrus  doads  thAt  stopped  over 
Bis  bead  in  the  middle  of  the  sky.  "  How  snperb  every- 
thing is  in  this  snperb  nightl  When  has  this  shdl  been 
formed?  It  is  only  a  moment  ago  I  was  looking  at  the  aiky, 
and  there  was  nothing  there  but  two  white  streaks.  Yes, 
jnst  so  imperceptibly  have  my  views  of  life  been  changed! " 

PROM  "WAR  AND  PEACfi" 

NAP0I«B0N'S  entry  into  MOSCOW 

On  the  night  of  the  thirteenth  of  September  was  given 
Kutdzov's  order  for  the  Russian  army  to  retreat  beyond  the 

Moskvd  on  the  Ryazda  road. 

The  first  divisions  started  in  the  night.  As  long  as  it  was 
dark,  they  were  in  no  huny  and  moved  slowly  and  in  good 
order.  But  when  the  moving  army  reached  the  DorogomClov 
bridge  at  daybreak,  they  could  see  ahead  of  them  the  endless 
masses  of  the  army,  pressing  and  hurrj  ing  over  the  bridge, 
and  emerging  on  the  other  side,  and  stopping  up  the  streets 
and  byways,  and  behind  them  followed  similar  endless 
masses.  An  unnecessary'  haste  and  alarm  took  possession 
of  the  army.  They  all  pushed  forward  to  the  bridge,  over 
the  bridge,  to  the  fords,  and  into  the  boats.  Kutiizov  had 
himself  taken  by  back  streets  l>eyoud  the  Moskvd. 

By  ten  o'clock  on  the  morning  of  September  14th  there 
were  left  at  large  in  the  Dorogonnlov  suburb  only  the  bat- 
talions of  the  rear-guard.  The  army  was  already  beyond 
the  Moskvd  and  out  of  sight  of  Moscow. 

At  jnst  that  time,  at  ten  o'dock  on  the  morning  of  Sep- 
tember 14th,  Napoleon  stood  smong  his  soldiers  on  the  Pok- 
]6nna3ra  Hill,  and  surveyed  the  spectacle  before  him. 
Beginning  with  September  7th  and  np  to  September  14th, 
from  the  battle  at  Borodin6  up  to  the  enemy's  entry  into 
Moscow,  during  all  the  days  of  that  alarming  and  memorable 


402         The  Nineteenth  Century 


week,  there  ms  that  unnsiiftl  autuiim  weather,  whJdi  alwa^ 
puzzles  people,  when  the  low  san  is  wanner  than  in  qpring, 
when  everything  gleams  in  the  pure,  rarified  air,  so  as  to 
hurt  the  eyes,  when  the  breast  grows  stronger  and  fresher 
as  it  inhales  the  fragrant  autumn  air,  when  even  the  nights 
are  warm,  and  when  in  these  dark  and  warm  nights  golden 
stars  shower  down  from  the  heavens,  causing  continnal  fear 
and  joy. 

It  was  just  such  weather  on  September  14th,  at  ten  o'clock 
in  the  morning.  The  morning  shone  with  a  magic  glow. 
Moscow  spread  far  and  wide  from  the  Pokl6nnaya  Hill,  with 
its  river,  its  gardens  and  churches,  and  seemed  to  be  living 
its  own  life,  its  cupolas  sparkling  like  stars  in  the  sunbeams. 

At  the  sight  of  the  strange  city  with  its  unfamiliar  forms 
of  unusual  architecture,  Napoleon  experienced  that  some- 
what envious  and  restless  curiosity  which  people  generally 
experience  at  the  sight  of  forms  of  a  strange  life  that  knows 
nothing  of  them.  Evidently  the  city  was  living  with  all  the 
manifestations  of  its  life.  By  those  indefinable  signs,  by 
which  a  living  body  is  unfailingly  distinguished  at  a  great 
distance  from  a  dead  one,  Napoleon  saw  from  the  Pokldnnaya 
Hill  the  palpitation  of  life  in  the  dty,  and,  as  it  were^  Mt 
the  breath  of  that  great  and  beantifnl  body.  Looking  at 
Moscow,  every  Russian  feds  that  she  is  a  mother;  eveiy 
stranger,  who  looks  at  her  and  does  not  know  her  maternal 
meaning,  most  perceive  the  feminine  character  of  this  dty, 
and  Napoleon  f dt  it  toa 

"  There  it  is,  at  last,  that  femoos  Asiatic  dty  with  its  in- 
nnmerable  churdies,— that  holy  Moscow!  I  ought  to  have 
seen  it  long  ago! "  said  Napoleon  and,  dismounting  his  horae, 
ordered  to  unfold  before  him  the  map  of  that  Moscow  and 
called  up  the  translator,  Lelorme  d'Ideville. 

"  A  city  that  is  taken  by  the  enemy  is  like  a  girl  who  has 
lost  her  innocence,"  thought  he  (he  had  said  so  to  Tochk6v 
in  Smolensk).  And  from  this  point  of  view  he  surveyed  the 
Eastern  beauty  that  lay  before  him  and  that  he  had  not  yet 
seen.  It  appeared  strange  to  him  that  at  last  his  old  wish, 
which  had  seemed  to  him  to  be  impossible,  was  f  nlfiiled.  In 


Digitized  by  GoogI 


Count  Lev  Nikol&evich  Tolst6y  403 


the  dfiflff  moniiDg  light  be  looked,  now  at  fhe  dty,  now  at 
tbe  mtLp,  fltndying  the  details  of  the  dty,  and  tlie  ooofidenoe 
of  poaaesBing  it  agitated  uid  frtgliteiied  Uiii. 

"Bttt  coold  it  have  been  otherwiae?"  thonght  be. 
'*  There  ia  the  capital:  it  Ilea  at  my  feet,  expectlt^  its  fiite. 
Whece  la  Alexander  now,  and  what  ia  he  thinking  about? 
Strange,  beantifol,  majestic  city !  And  tbia  is  a  atrange  and 
majestic  moment!  In  what  light  do  I  appear  to  them?'* 
thought  he  of  his  amiy.  "  Here  is  the  reward  for  all  these 
men  of  little  faith,"  thought  he,  as  he  looked  at  those  who 
surrounded  him  and  at  the  battalions  that  were  defiled  be- 
fore him.  "  One  word  of  mine,  one  motion  of  my  hand,  and 
this  andent  dty  of  the  Tsars  is  in  ruins.  But  my  mercy  is 
ever  ready  to  be  shown  to  the  conquered.  I  must  be  mag- 
nanimous and  truly  great.  But  no,  it  is  not  true  that  I  am 
in  Moscow,"  it  suddenly  occurred  to  him.  "Still,  there  it 
lies  at  my  feet,  playing  and  trembling  with  its  golden  cupolas 
and  crosses  in  the  rays  of  the  sun.  But  I  will  spare  it.  On 
the  andent  monuments  of  barbarism  and  despotism  I  will 

write  great  words  of  justice  and  mercy          Alexander  will 

feel  that  more  painfully  than  anything  dse,  I  know  him." 
It  aeemed  to  Kapotoon  that  the  chief  meaning  of  what  waa 
happening  consisted  in  bis  personal  contest  with  Alexander. 
"  From  the  summit  of  the  Kremlins-yes^  that  ia  the  Kiem- 
tin,  yes  will  I  give  them  laws  of  justice,  will  I  show  them 
the  tme  mesning  of  civilisation:  I  will  cause  geneiations  of 
boyte  to  mention  with  love  the  name  of  their  oonquerar.  I 
wHl  teU  the  deputatioa  that  I  did  not  wish  and  do  not  now 
wish  war;  that  I  have  made  war  only  on  the  fiUse  politics  of 
their  Cotut,  that  I  love  and  respect  Alexander,  and  that  I 
will  accept  in  Moscow  the  conditions  of  peace,  such  as  is 
worthy  of  me  and  of  my  nations.  I  will  not  make  use  of  the 
fortune  of  war  in  order  to  lower  their  respected  Tsar. 
'  Boydrs,'  will  I  say  to  them,  '  I  want  no  war,  I  want  the 

peace  and  well-being  of  all  my  subjects  '    Indeed,  I 

know  their  presence  will  inspire  me,  and  I  shall  speak  as  I 
always  do, — clearly,  majestically,  and  grandly.  But  is  it 
really  true  that  I  am  in  Moscow  ?   Yes,  there  it  isl 


Digitized  by  Google 


404         The  Nineteenth  Century 


''Briiigtheboytotome,"  liewidtoliisstiite.  Agenenl 
ftt  onoe  galloped  away  with  a  bfiUlant  mite  to  fetdi  the 
boyin. 

Two  hours  paand.  Napoleon  had  his  breakfast,  and 
again  stood  in  the  same  place  upon  Pokl6nnaya  Hill,  waiting 
for  the  deputation.  His  speech  to  the  boyirs  was  already 
clearly  formed  in  his  imagination.  That  speech  was  full  of 
dignity  and  grandeur,  as  Napoleon  understood  them. 

That  mood  of  magnanimity  which  Napoleon  intended  to 
exercise  in  Moscow  carried  him  away.  In  his  imagination 
he  appointed  days  of  assembly  in  the  palace  of  the  Tsars, 
where  the  Russian  dignitaries  were  to  meet  the  dignitaries 
of  the  French  Emperor.  He  mentally  appointed  a  governor 
who  would  be  able  to  gain  the  love  of  the  populace.  Having 
heard  that  there  were  many  charitable  institutions  in  Mos- 
cow, he  decided  in  his  imagination  to  shower  his  favours  on 
all  these  establishments.  He  thought  that,  as  it  was  neoee- 
saiy  in  Africa  to  alt  in  the  mosque  in  a  bumooa^  so  one 
ninst  in  Moscow  be  as  chsritable  as  the  Tsaca.  And  in 
Older  to  touch  most  deeply  the  hesrts  of  the  Russians^  he, 
like  every  Prencfaman,  who  cannot  imagine  anything  tonch- 
ing  without  the  memory  of  his  dear,  his  tender,  bis  poor 
mother,  decided  to  have  written  in  large  letters  over  tnese 
institutious :  ' '  Establishment  dedicated  to  my  dear  mother.*' 
No,  simply:  "House  of  my  mother,'*  he  conduded  with  him- 
self.  ' '  But  am  I  really  in  Moscow  ?  Yes,  there  it  is,  be&we 
me;  but  why  is  the  deputation  so  late  in  making  its  appear- 
ance ?  "  thought  he. 

In  the  meanwhile  an  agitated  consultation  took  place  be- 
tween the  Imperial  generals  and  marshals  in  the  back  of  his 
suite.  Those  who  had  been  sent  out  to  fetch  the  deputation 
returned  with  the  news  that  Moscow  was  deserted,  that 
everybody  had  left  the  city.  The  faces  of  the  consulting 
men  were  pale  and  agitated.  Not  the  fact  that  Moscow  had 
been  abandoned  by  its  inhabitants,  however  important  that 
incident  may  have  appeared,  frightened  them,  but  how  they 
were  to  announce  it  to  the  Emperor,  and  how  to  avmd 
placing  his  Majesty  into  that  terrible  position  whidi  the 


Digitized  by  Google 


Count  Lev  Nikol^evich  Tolstoy  405 


French  call  lidiculous,  when  they  would  inform  him  that  he 
had  in  viin  been  ^vaiting  so  long  for  the  boydrs,  that  there 
were  left  crowds  of  drunken  men,  but  no  one  elae.  Some 
aaid  that  it  was  by  all  means  ncccaaary  to  get  together  acme 
Kind  of  a  deputation;  other  rqecfeed  that  opinion  and  insisted 
that  it  behooved  them  eaiefnUy  and  deverly  to  prepare  the 
Emperor,  and  to  tell  him  the  truth. 

"  But  we  must  tell  him  by  all  means,"  aaid  the  gentlemen 
of  the  suite.  "  But,  gentlemen — "  The  situation  was  the 
more  difficult  since  the  Emperor,  in  considering  his  plans  of 
magnammity,  was  patiently  walking  up  and  down,  in  front 
of  the  map,  now  and  then  shielding  his  eyes,  in  order  to  look 
down  the  road  to  Moscow,  and  smiling  happily  and  proudly. 
"  But  it  is  awkward  —  impossible!"  raid  the  gentlemen  of 
the  suite,  shrugging  their  shoulders,  and  not  venturing  to 
pronounce  the  suppressed  terrible  word,  le  ridiaile. 

In  the  meanwhile  the  Kmperor,  tiring  of  his  vain  expecta- 
tion and  feeling  with  his  histrionic  sentiment  that  the  ma- 
jestic moment  was  lasting  too  long  and,  consequently,  was 
beginning  to  lose  its  majesticalness,  gave  a  sign  with  his 
hand.  A  single  shot  of  the  signalling  cannon  was  heard, 
and  the  troops  that  were  besieging  Moscow  from  various 
sides  moved  upon  the  dty,  through  the  Tver,  Kaliiga,  and 
Dorogomflov  toll-gates.  The  troops  moved  faster  and  fiuter, 
outrunning  each  other,  in  a  rapid  march  and  a  gallop,  dis- 
appearing in  the  clouds  of  dust  ¥^hich  they  raised,  and  filling 
the  air  with  their  deafening  voices.  Carried  away  by  the 
movement  of  the  troops,  Napoleon  rode  with  the  army  to  the 
Dorogomflov  toll-gate,  but  there  he  stopped  again  and,  dis- 
mounting his  horse,  walked  up  and  down  by  the  Kammer- 
Kolleg  rampart,  awaiting  the  deputation  

All  this  time  Moscow  was  deserted.  There  were  still  some 
people  in  it,  there  was  still  left  one  fiftieth  part  of  all  its 
former  inhabitants,  but  it  was  deserted.  It  was  as  deserted 
as  is  a  qneenless  beehive  in  its  last  moments. 

In  the  queenless  hive  there  is  no  life,  but  at  a  superficial 
glance  it  appears  as  full  of  life  as  others.  The  bees  swarm 
in  the  warm  rays  of  an  afternoon  sun  just  as  merrily  about 


I 


406         The  Nineteenth  Century 

tlie  queenlen  hive,  aa  anmnd  the  oCber  five  hives;  from  a 
distance  it  is  just  as  fiagrant  with  honey,  and  bees  fly  in  and 
oat  of  it  as  befoie.  Bat  one  hss  only  to  look  more  dosdy 
at  it,  to  discover  that  there  is  no  life  left  within.  Tlie  bees 
do  not  fly  here  as  in  the  live  hives;  not  the  same  odour  and 
not  the  same  sound  strike  the  bee-keeper.  To  the  bee- 
keeper's tap  on  the  wall  of  the  great  bedbive  tlwre  is  no 
longer  the  former  immediate,  unison  answer  and  humming 
of  tens  of  thousands  of  bees  that  threateningly  lower  their 
backs  and  by  the  swift  motimi  of  their  wings  produce  that 
aerial  life  sound,  but  some  discordant  buzzing  is  heard  in 
various  places  of  the  empty  beehive.  From  the  entrance 
does  not  proceed,  as  formerly,  a  fragrant  alcoholic  odour  of 
honey  and  pollen,  nor  does  it  exhale  a  warm  breath  of  ful- 
ness, but  with  the  odour  of  honey  is  mingled  an  odour  of 
emptiness  and  decay. 

At  the  entrance  are  no  longer  found  the  watch-bees,  read}' 
to  defend  the  hive  to  the  last  extremity,  with  their  backs 
raised  up  and  trumpeting  the  alarm.  There  is  no  longer 
that  even  and  soft  sound,  that  palpitation  of  work,  resem- 
bling the  sound  of  boiling,  but  one  hears  the  incoherent, 
discordant  noise  of  disorder.  Black,  slender,  honey-covered 
plunderer-bees  fly  timidly  and  stealthily  out  of  one  hive  into 
another;  they  do  not  sting,  but  avoid  danger.  Formerly 
bees  flew  In  wiUi  burdens  and  ont  again  without  anything; 
now  they  fly  off  laden  with  booty. 

The  bee-keeper  opens  the  lower  part  of  the  hive  and  looks 
at  its  bottom.  Instead  of  the  black  rows  of  wdl-fed  bees 
that,  pacified  by  their  work,  hang  down  to  the  veiy  bottom, 
holding  each  other  by  the  legs,  and  with  a  oontinaons  mur- 
mur of  laboor  drawing  oat  the  wax,  now  ste^yy,  diied-np 
bees  wander  about  distractedly  over  the  bottom  and  over 
the  walls  of  the  hive.  Instead  of  the  floor  being  pasted  even 
with  gloe,  and  swept  dean  by  the  fenning  wings,  it  Is  oov- 
ered  with  bits  of  wax,  with  excrements  of  the  bees,  and 
with  half-dead  bees  that  barely  move  their  feet,  and  with 
entirely  dead  bees  that  have  not  been  removed. 

The  bee*ke^er  opens  the  upper  part  of  the  hive,  and  in- 


Digitized  by  Google 


Count  Lev  Nikol&evich  Tolst6y  407 


spects  the  top.  Instead  of  serried  tanks  of  bees  that  haive 
filled  ttp  all  the  interstices  in  the  honeycomb  and  that  are 
warming  thdr  jronng  brood,  he  sees  only  the  artistic;  com- 
plicated  work  of  the  comb,  but  no  longer  in  its  pfevious 
virgin  purity.  Everything  is  neglected  and  obstructed: 
the  bUu±  plunderer-bees  race  rapidly  and  stealtliily  over  the 
stmctnre;  while  his  own  bees,  dried  up,  wizened,  and  flaccid 
as  if  from  age,  loiter  slowly,  without  disturbing  anyone, 
wishing  nothing,  and  having  lost  the  consciousness  of  life. 
Drones,  wasps,  humble-bees,  and  moths  in  their  flight  aim- 
lessly beat  against  the  walls  of  the  hive.  Here  and  there, 
between  the  wax  with  the  dead  brood  and  the  honey,  is  at 
times  heard  from  various  sides  an  angry  buzzing:  two  bees, 
from  old  habit,  are  somewhere  cleaning  a  nest  of  the  hive, 
and  carefullj',  above  their  strength,  dragging  away  a  bee  or 
humble-bee,  not  knowing  themselves  why  they  are  doing  it. 
In  another  comer,  two  old  bees  are  quarrelling,  or  cleaning, 
or  feeding  each  other,  without  thinking  whether  they  are 
doing  it  out  of  friendship  or  enmity.  In  a  third  place  a 
crowd  of  bees  press  against  each  other,  and,  attacking  some 
victim,  beat  and  choke  it.  And  the  weakened  or  killed  bee 
dowly,  sofUy,  like  down,  falls  from  above  upon  the  heap  of 
corpses* 

The  bee-keeper  unscrews  the  two  middle  combs^  in  order 
to  see  ffae  nest  In  place  of  the  thick,  black  rows  of  thou- 
sands of  beeSk  sitting  back  to  back,  and  guarding  the  highest 
secrets  <tf  birth,  he  sees  hundreds  of  drowsy,  barely  living 
skeletons  of  bees.  They  have  died,  nearly  all  of  them,  be- 
fine  they  knew  it,  sitting  on  the  sanctum  which  they  have 
guarded,  and  which  is  no  more.  They  exhale  an  odour  of 
decay  and  death.  Only  a  few  of  them  are  stirring:  they 
rise,  lazily  fly  up  and  alight  on  the  hand  of  the  enemy,  whom 
they  sting,  not  being  able  to  die,  while  the  other,  the  dead 
bees  ftll  down  like  scales  of  fishes.  The  bee-keeper  doses 
the  hive  and  marks  it  with  a  piece  of  chalk,  and  in  jvoper 
time  breaks  it  open  and  bums  it  out. 

Just  so  empty  was  Moscow  when  Napoleon,  tired,  rest- 
less, and  frowning,  walked  up  and  down  the  Kammer- 


4o8         The  Nineteenth  Century 


Kolleg  rampart,  waiting  for  the  external,  but,  according  to 
his  ideas,  necessary  preservation  of  proprieties, — the  deputa- 
tion. 

Some  people  were  still  moving  about  senselessly  in  various 
corners  of  Moscow,  preserving  the  old  habits,  but  not  under- 
standing what  they  were  doing. 

When,  with  proper  caution,  it  was  annoonced  to  Napoleon 
that  Moioow  was  deserted,  lie  angrily  looked  at  him  who 
reported  It  and,  toming  away,  contiiitied  to  walk  In  aOenoe. 

"  Bring  the  carriage^"  said  be.  He  seated  himself  in  the 
carriage  with  an  adjutant  of  the  day,  and  drove  into  the 
suborb. 

"  Moscow  is  deserted.  What  an  incredible  event!"  said 

be  to  himself. 

He  did  not  drive  into  the  dty,  but  stopped  at  an  inn  in 

the  Dorogomflov  suburb. 

The  finale  of  the  theatrical  performanoe  was  note  anccesi! 

Glyeb  Iv&noyich  Usp6nski.  (1840-1902.) 

Usp^nski  was  born  in  the  city  of  T61a,  where  his  father  was  a 
government  official.  He  attended  the  Gymnasia  at  Tdla.  and 
Chemfgov,  devoting  much  of  hit  time  to  the  teading  of  the  Russian 
dassict.  He  then  studied  at  the  nnivcfsltiet  of  St.  Peteftbnig  and 
Moscow,  leaving  them  in  1863  without  graduating.  His  literary 
career  began  in  1866  with  a  series  of  sketches  under  the  general  title 
of  Cusfoms  of  Pt  rdttion  Street,  in  which  he  described  the  proletariat 
that  eke  out  their  existence  iu  small  provincial  towns,  struggling 
with  hunger  and  cold,  and  drowning  in  liqoor  the  cbeenleMtiMNiotoDj 
of  thdr  lives.  He  next  gaire,  in  ObservaHons  of  a  Lazy  Fellow  and 
other  stories,  a  series  of  types  from  the  proletariat  of  intelligence  in 
the  same  provincial  towns.  In  1871  he  went  abroad,  and  wrote  bis 
Letters  from  Servia.  Upon  his  return  be  determined  to  turn  his  at- 
tention to  the  **  •onrce,"  that  la,  to  tfie  peisaiit  He  MtlkdliBrfhat 
piupoae  hi  the  countiy,  in  the  GovcraiiieBt  of  Sandra,  bat  his  ei^ 
periesce  was  disappointing:  he  saw  the  peasant  in  his  crude  and 
savape  nakedness.  His  Drttdgery,  which  is  the  result  of  his  study 
of  peasant  morality,  was  a  revelation  to  Russia.  Heretofore  the 
peasant  had  been  either  idealised  or  detracted,  according  to  the 
litemy  camp  to  which  the  writer  hdonged,  hot  now  be  was  <br 
the  first  time  painted  from  nature,  without  reserve  or  biaa.  Hu  great- 
eat  pradnction  is  Jlu  Power  <^  the  Lamd^  based  on  another  study  ta 


Digitized  by  Google 


Giyeb  Ivimovich  Uspdnski  409 

the  Government  of  N6vgorod,  in  which  he  comes  to  the  conclnsion 
that  the  peasant  can  be  saved  only  when  he  is  returned  to  his  land. 

In  English  translation  :  The  Steam  Chicken  and  A  Trifling  Defect 
in  the  Mechanism^  in  The  Humour  of  Rmsia,  by  B.  L.  Voynich, 
I<oadon  and  New  York,  1895. 

FROM  '*THK  POWER  OF  THE 

ivAn  pbtr6v 

Ivdn  Petr6v  belongs  to  that  useless,  incomprehensible, 
disgraceful  class  of  village  people  (certainly  disgraceful  to 
such  a  country  as  Russia)  that  has  grown  up  in  the  last 
twenty  years  and  that  one  can't  help  calling  by  any  other 
name  than  ' '  village  proletariat.'*  This  new-born  proletariat 
could  absolutely  have  been  avoided,  if  millions  of  measures 
that  are  directed  for  the  good  of  the  masses  paid  at  least  as 
much  attention  to  the  people's  conception  of  the  world  as 
they  do  to  tbeir  taxable  qualities. 

A  peaaant  is  Itequently  led  to  ttm  hia  back  on  bis  land 
and  to  prefier  the  tavern  to  his  house  by  some  sndi  inoom- 
aistenqr  in  the  peasant "  lights"  by  which  he  may  one  day 
be  a  foceman  of  a  jtny  or  a  judge  who^  by  pronouncing  the 
life-giving  words  "  not  guilty! "  magnanimously  saves  some 
unfortunate  man,  and  the  next  day  after  this  manifestation 
of  his  great  "  right"  may  be  beaten  black  and  blue  by  the 
village  official  because  while  intoxicated  he  had  insulted  his 
elder  with  the  words:  "  O  you  stub-nosed  bunny!  "  One 
would  have  to  discard  all  morality,  all  spiritual  life,  all 
ability  to  live  according  to  one's  own  ideas,  if  one  wanted  to 
move  silently  and  without  murmuring  between  these  two 
poles  of  the  peasant  "  rights."  But  this  example  is  only  a 
drop  in  the  sea  of  that  radical  disorder  that  undermines  the 
most  radical  foundations  of  the  popular  world  conception  and 
that  evolves  a  man  "  without  any  prospects,'*  '*  without  a  to- 
morrow," and  tries  to  make  a  labourer  and  slave  of  a  man 
who,  by  the  very  essence  of  his  nature,  cannot  exist  other- 
wise than  with  the  consciousness  that  he  is  a  "  master." 

Look  at  this  Ivdn  Petr6v,  nicknamed  Bosykh:  he  is 


Digitized  by  Google 


4IO         The  Nineteenth  Century 


a  man  of  great  physical  power,  and  an  agile  and  skilful 
workman;  his  wife  is  strong,  clever,  and  skilful,  and  was 
once  a  beauty;  he  can  have  all  the  land  he  wants.  In 
addition  to  being  a  husbandman,  he  is  also  a  good  village 
joiner  and  a  shoemaker;  and  even  as  a  common  day  la- 
bourer— chopping  wood,  or  pressing  hay — he  could,  by  re- 
ceiving seventy  kopeks  a  day  and  his  board,  live  without 
any  care.  Instead,  he  has  given  up  his  farm,  he  beats  his 
wife,  and  she  is  continually  weeping  and  complaining  against 
him;  his  fhxee  difldren  loiter  for  days  at  a  tlmtf  In  ditty 
rags  in  the  streets  and  without  being  cared  for,  and  nobody 
knows  whether  they  are  being  fed.  Though  his  hat  is  one 
of  a  row  of  new  peasant  huts  where  one  may  see  print  cur- 
tains,  Vienna  furniture,  clocks  under  glass  globes,  etc,  it  is 
the  acme  of  diaoider:  it  is  nearly  all  in  rains;  instead  of 
window  panes  there  are  only  rags;  and  yet  one  may  see  by 
the  structure  of  the  cabin  and  outhouses  that  it  was  once  a 
'*  rich  house,  and  that  the  bams  extended  some  two  hund- 
red feet  in  length;  the  posts  are  all  of  oak,  nearly  six  feet 
in  circumference  

And  the  "  master"  himself?  Ask  about  him  the  village 
people  of  standing,  and  they  will  all  g^ve  bad  reports  of  him: 
he  has  sold  the  same  hay  to  three  difTereut  parties,  and  the 
money  he  has  spent  in  drinks;  he  has  taken  on  credit, 
**  against  the  calf,"  in  three  different  shops,  but  he  has  not 
paid  anywhere,  while  he  has  sold  the  calf  to  somebody  else 
and,  as  usual,  has  spent  the  money  in  liquor.  He  has  been 
several  times  flogged  in  the  village  office  for  using  abusive 
language  to  the  authorities,  for  unpaid  taxes,  and  for  beating 
his  wife,  whom,  upon  returning  from  his  punishment,  he 
beat  again  mercilessly  in  the  field. 

'*  Don't  give  him  any  money,  for  the  Lord's  sake,  don't 
advance  him  any! "  is  the  advice  a  wary  villager  gives  yon. 

**  Don't  trust  him  a  hair's  breadth! "  says  another  villager 
who  has  been  cheated  by  Ivdn. 

And  yet,  let  IvAn  "  oome  to"  for  a  week  or  two,  what  a 
splendid,  what  a  good  and  clever,  man  he  is!  How  mudi 
humour  there  is  in  him,  how  much  observation,  tenderness^ 


Digitized  by 


Glyeb  Iv&novich  Uspenski  411 


magnanimity,  adf-debnctkm,  and  how  mash  yoaHdvl  fruh- 
neas  aS  aoul!  What  ia  it  then  that  aenda  him  in  an  intOK* 
icated  atate  into  the  wet  and  dirty  gutter,  without  boots, 

without  garments,  his  swollen  face  downward,  and  his  broad 
ahoulders  beaten  by  the  rains  and  the  wind  ?  The  whole 
village  remembers  his  family,  and  all  say  that  the  Bosykhs 
were  at  one  time  among  the  first  farmers,  that  Tvdn  used  to 
live  peaceably  with  his  wife,  that  they  had  been  "first- 
class"  workers;  all  are  convinced  that  let  him  only  awaken 
and  he  will  be  priceless,  that  he  has  "  golden  hands" ;  and 
they  wonder  why  he  has  turned  his  back  to  everything,  why 
he  cheats,  causes  disturbances,  and  like  a  tramp  does  an 
occasional  day's  work  only  to  spend  his  wages  in  the 
tavern. 

Now,  Ivdn's  intoxication  has  changed  into  a  disease. 
The  people  characterise  this  diaeaae  that  oppresses  not  only 
Ivin,  but  wbole  maaMa  of  the  village  proletariat  lika  him,  by 
the  name  of  "  weakneaa."  Phyaically  Mai  ia,  like  hnnd- 
feda  of  aimllar  "weak"  peaaantBk  not  only  healthy  and 
atrong,  but  even  powerful,  oonaequently  hia  weakneaa  did 
not  spring  from  physical  but  some  other  causes.  I  have 
had^ficqncnt  eomveiaationa  with  Iv^  in  regard  to  these 
*'  weakneases  " ;  for  a  kmg  time  they  led  to  no  satisfactory 
reaulta,  and  often  they  were  only  confusing,  especially  to  the 
writer  of  these  lines,  that  is,  to  a  man  who  haa  been  in  the 
haUt  of  eiEplaining  the  wretched  state  of  the  maaaes  almost 
exclusively  as  springing  from  material  want,  misery,  taxes, 
and  so  forth.  I  shall  here  relate  one  of  theae  oonveraationa 
as  an  example. 

"  Do  tell  me,  Ivdn,  why  are  you  drinking  so  much  ?  "  I 
ask  Ivdn  in  one  of  those  clear  moments  when  he  "  comes 
to, ' '  repents  his  dreadful  actions,  and  ponders  over  his  bitter 
fate. 

Ivdn  draws  a  deep  sigh  and  ^)eaks  with  contrition,  almost 
in  a  whisper: 

"  I  have  htmioured  myself  too  much         I  don't  know 

what  to  think        We  had  better  not  i^eak  of  it(  


4^2         The  Nineteenth  Century 


When  I  think  it  over,  I  wish  X  were  dead,  I  swear  I  wish  I 
were! " 

"  But  why  ?    Do  tell  me! " 

**  Why  ?  Well,  it  's  all — on  account  of — freedom! 
That  's  why !    On  account  of  too  much  freedom!  '* 

As  this  answer  p>erplexes  me,  and  I  am  absolutely  unable 
to  see  how  "  freedom  "  should  ruin  a  man,  Ivdn  tries  to  dis- 
pel my  perplexity,  and  he  gives  me  a  more  detailed  expla- 
nation: 

'  *  On  account  of  a  free  life,  that '  a  what  it  ial  * ' 

*'  But  what  doeatliat  mean?"  laakhim,  still  perplexed. 

"Itmaanathia:  when  I  waa  living  at  the  railroad  station, 
I  received  thirtjr-five  nonhlea  a  month,  and  I  had  about  ten 
men  under  my  charge,  and  I  had  an  additional  income  ofa 
rouble  in  silver  for  every  wagg<oii,»now  figure  out  how  many 
waggona  we  sent  out  in  a  wmter?  WeU,  it  waa  there  that 
I  humoured  mysdf  " 

The  word  "  humour"  does  not  at  all  fit  a  strapping,  forty 
years  old,  bearded  man,  and  it  is  hard  to  imderstand  how  in 
the  explanation  of  his  conduct  he  can  use  an  expression  that 
is  proper  only  for  a  baby.  But  Ivin  cannot  find  a  more  ex- 
act word. 

'*  Well,  so  I  began  to  humour  myself.  When  father  was 
alive,  I  never  took  a  drop.  He  would  have  killed  me,  if  I 
had,  yes,  he  would  have  killed  me  dead  with  his  own  hands. 
After  father  died,  and  I  got  married  atid  had  my  own  house- 
hold, I  allowed  myself  a  drink  only  when  I  was  treated  to  it, 

on  a  holiday,  or  once  in  a  while  a  glass  when  I  felt  blue  

I  was  careful,  and  I  watched  myself  as  long  as  I  could.  But 
when  I  had  my  freedom  at  the  railroad  station,  that  is,  my 
fnll  liberty,  then  I  began,  well,  in  a  word,  to  be  short,  I  let 

myself  loose         I  kept  it  up  for  days  at  a  time,  and  I 

never  could  get  enough         I  remember  how  it  all  began, 

as  though  it  were  but  yesterday:  roadmaster  Ma  Rodi- 

6nych*8  name  day  lUl  on  John  of  the  Lent         Well,  he 

poured  me  out  a  glass  of  the  grape  juice,  thqr  call  It  port  

I  liked  it,  as  I  swallowed  it— so  I  took  some  more— and 
then  gin,  lemonade         Since  then  that  plague  has  stayed 


Digitized  by  Google 


Glyeb  Iv&novich  Uspinski  4^3 

mXh  me.  And  why  ?  It  *8  all  on  aooocmt  of  freedom!  

Not  being  need  to  it         Making  an  eaqr  living  

Tliat  'a  what  it  ia  froml         I  naed  to  have  my  podwta 

fall  of  monqr         Well,  aince  then  I  have  been  a  fegnlar 

pig  " 

So  it  appears  that  "freedom,"  "liberty,  easy  living, 
plenty  of  money, ' '  that  ia»  tliat  which  is  necessary  for  a  man 
to  establish  himself,  canaea  his  whole  diaocder,  nntil  he  be- 
comes "  a  regular  pig." 

' '  Why  did  you  spend  your  money  not  on  your  house  bnt 
on  drinking?  "  I  ask  him. 

*'  That 's  the  trouble,  I  was  not  used  to  it!    Life  was  too 

free  to  think  of  house  and  farm          Do  anything  you 

please,  and  nobody  interferes  with  you          In  short,  there 

is  a  good  chance  to  humour  yourself  " 

Seeing  that  his  explanation  explains  nothing  and  that  I 
am  unable  to  understand  why  an  easy  life  makes  a  pig  of  a 
man,  Ivdn  tries  to  make  his  idea  clearer  by  an  example,  such 
as  peasants  are  in  tlie  habit  of  having  recourse  to  in  their 
conversations.  I  shall  hefe  give  his  example,  though  I 
know  that  the  reader  will  hardDy  be  mndi  enlightened  by  it. 

"  Because/*  says  he,  "  oar  peasant  nature  ia  n't  osed  to 

it         We  are  by  nature  a  working  lot         Let  me  tell 

yoa  an  example         There  waa  living  in  oar  netghlxmr- 

hood  a  gentleman,  by  the  name  of  Pods61nakhov,  and  he 

was  fanning         So  he  farmed  and  &mied,  and  seeing 

that  there  was  no  profit  in  farming,  he  got  it  into  his  head 
to  go  into  the  dairy  business.  He  had  no  use  for  our  breed 
of  cattle,  and  it 's  so,  our  cows  are  rather  thin  and  coarse- 
haired  •  Well/  says  he,  '  I  '11  get  a  cow  from  abroad.' 

He  sent  for  one.    A  telegram  came,  the  cow  was  on  her  way, 

and  a  learned  German  was  bringing  her          There  they 

were  leading  her,  why,  almost  in  chains, — such  a  monster, 

some  seven  feet  in  height,  ten  feet  in  length   Her 

horns,  her  eyes,  and  such  things, — God's  wonder, — a  regu- 
lar giant,  an  Erusldn  L^zarevich  '          They  cleaned  out 

the  cattle  yard  for  her,  spread  some  straw  over  it,  and  the 

'  Giant  of  Russian  fairy  tales. 


414         The  Nineteenth  Century 


moment  she  came,  she  lay  down  on  her  side  upon  it.  And 
the  German  asked  for  a  lamp  to  be  used  in  the  night.  Very 
well.  And  the  cow  remained  lying  on  her  side  and  eating 
in  that  posture.  All  the  women  did  was  to  put  the  feed 
within  reach  of  her  mouth.  She  kept  on  eating,  bat  of  milk 
there  was  not  a  trace. 

"  '  What  is  the  matter,'  says  I  to  the  German, '  she  is  not 
giving  any  milk? ' 

*• '  Well/  says  he,  *  she  is  resting;  it 's  so  and  so,'  says 
he.  '  She  has  been  travelling  a  long  distance,  and  in  the 
car,  and  so  she  is  tired,  and  is  taking  it  easy  ' 

"'How  long,'  says  I, '  will  she  be  taking  it  ea^  ?  * 

**  *  ICaybe  a  month.' 

"  AU  right  We  thought  we  would  let  her  whOie  away 
her  time  with  our  village  bull, — ^bnt  that  was  a  dreadful 
blunder.  No  sooner  did  he  lay  his  eyes  on  her  majestic 
form,  when  he  got  frightened  like  a  rabbit,  for  he  saw  at 
once  that  he,  with  his  coimtry  nont,  had  no  businesB  in  her 
presence, — and  so  he  picked  himself  up  and  off  he  went,  and 
it  was  only  twelve  versts  away  that  some  peasants  succeeded 
in  catching  him.  Bat  she  was  resting  herself  all  the  time. 
She  ate,  and  yawned,  and  ate  again  At  last  she  evid- 
ently felt  conscience-stricken  and  gave  a  whole  pail  of  milk. 
So  our  master  said : 

"  '  Do  you  see,  Ivin  ? '  says  he, — *  there  is  no  comparison 
with  our  sickly  little  cows! ' 

"  '  Well,  no,  sir,'  says  I ;  '  considering  what  she  has  eaten 
up,  our  cattle  are  worth  more.' 

"•How  so?' 

**  *  It 's  like  this:  figure  out,  how  much  she  has  eaten  up, 
and  compare  it  with  the  milk  she  is  giving.  It 's  so,  she 
does  give  a  pailful,  but  that  pailful  costs  too  much.  If 
you  were  to  give  her  feed  to  ten  of  our  cows,  they  would 
give  yon  ten  times  the  amount  this  monster  Is  giving  you.' 

"Says  the  German:  '  She  it  not  the  kind  of  a  hueed,*  says 
he, '  that  *sjast  good  for  the  milk;  shelsoonsideringherKlf 
too;  she  Is  eating  for  her  own  benefit— jnat  look  v^t  firm 
fle^  she  has.' 


Digitized  by  Google 


Glyeb  Iv&novich  Usp^nski  415 


"After  these  words  says  I  to  my  master:  'Doyousee^sir,' 
says  I, '  it  *s  just  it:  onr  cows  suit  oar  case  much  better. 

We  do  Dot  care  about  their  flesh,  and  they  do  not  live  for 
their  benefit,  but  for  work;  they  give  bade  what  they  eat 
tip^  and  they  do  not  consider  themselves.  Our  cows  are 
bora  for  work,  and  for  work  they  live  all  their  lives, — ^that  *8 
their  purpose.' 

"  And  so  there  are  all  kinds  of  men.  And  we  peasants 
are  just  the  same.  We  work  the  year  round,  and  all  our 
lives,  without  stopping.  I  tried  to  get  away  from  niy  peas- 
ant's life,  and  I  have  almost  killed  myself  with  drinking  

There  are  some  who  like  that  which  is  easy,  and  who  want 

to  do  nothing          Some  get  rich  by  saving  their  money,  but 

when  I  turned  my  back  on  the  village  and  ran  away  from  a 
peasant's  work,  and  began  to  live  freely, — my  money  flew 
like  chips.  All  I  was  interested  in  was  how  to  get  rid  of  it, 
and  I  could  think  of  no  other  place  to  spend  it  in  but  the 
tavern.  What?  Well,  I  '11  make  a  clean  breast  of  it»" 
Ivdn  spoke  in  a  whisper,  "  I  had  three  mamzelles!  I  forgot 

the  I«aw!  I  am  speaking  before  the  I«ord   PreedomI 

I4bertyl  I  was  only  thinking  how  to  do  wrong,  pahawl  I 
so  fiur  forgot  myself  that  I  began  to  oppress  my  own  kind, 
my  feUow-peasantsI  Why  did  I  do  it?  I  had  simply  lost 

my  oonsdenoe         Some  cold  day  th^  would  be  looking 

for  me  and  having  found  me  in  a  saloon,  they  would  bow 
and  say: 

" '  ns  have  our  hay;  we  have  been  here  two  days  and 
spending  oor  money,  but  we  can't  get  at  it' 

"  It  seems,  it  was  not  much  for  me  to  say  to  my  assistant: 
*  Mikhdylol  Go  and  get  them  the  car ! '  but  Satan  himself 
began  to  tirge  me  on ;  so  I  sat  over  my  bottle,  looking  im- 
portant,  and  said:  '  Yon  have  to  do  the  best  you  can.* 

' '  *  But,  friend,  how  are  we  to  find  it  ?  We  have  walked  all 
over  the  yards,  among  whistling  engines  and  no  end  of 
smoke,  and  we  are  afraid  we  shall  get  killed  yet,  and  we  are 
worn  out  besides.' 

"  '  Look  for  it!   Find  the  fellow  you  needl * 

«•  *  But  you,  our  protector  ' 


4i6         The  Nineteenth  Century 


"And  I  would  keep  them  off  nntii  flomeoae  of  those 
praKBt  would  eay  to  them: 
" '  Stick  three  nmbles  into  his  mng»— thst's  what  yon 

want  to  do!  * 

"And  it  was  only  thos  that  I  did  them  any  favoon   If 

my  wife  came  my  way,  I  uded  to  scold  her  roundly.  As 
long  as  I  stayed  in  the  village  I  had  use  for  her,  but  here 
where  I  had  my  freedom,  I  had  others  to  pass  my  time  with, 
and  what  was  I  to  do  with  her,  a  common  peasant  woman  ? 
That  's  the  kind  of  lawlessness  I  came  to.  I  drank  more 
and  more,  and  the  authorities  heard  of  it,  and  the  super- 
intendent of  the  division  came  and  mauled  me  all  up  (his 
face  shone  as  he  was  telling  this),  and  the  superintendent 
of  traffic  gave  me  a  few  mighty  blows  (a  childish  joy  was 
spread  over  his  face),  and  they  took  me  to  the  round-house, 
and  laid  it  on  to  me, — so  I  made  the  sign  of  the  cross  and, 
just  as  if  I  had  risen  from  the  grave,  I  jumped  up,  and 
started  on  a  ruu  home,  without  my  hat,  right  through  the 
cold!  Over  fields,  over  snowdrifts,  by  back  roads,  I  flew 
like  a  bird,  not  stopping  for  twenty-five  versts,  until  I  was 
back  to  my  fann.  There  I  was,  in  my  yard,  without  a 
thing  to  my  name,  everything  in  ruins,  bnt  I  felt  as  happy 
as  if  I  had  been  resnrreded.  Praised  be  the  Lord!  Praised 
be  the  Queen  of  Heaven!  I  am  again  a  man,  I  have  found 
myself!  I  fell  to  my  wife's  feet 

"*  Forgive  me,  my  dear  wife  I  I<et  me  work,  look  afler  the 
farm!  I  shall  give  all  my  foolishness^  I  will  be  a  msn 
again!' 

"  And  I  went  at  it  with  a  vim!  I  loved  it  all,— my  field, 
my  plough  and  harrow,  the  sheds,  the  calf,  the  tMmi  that 
was  beginning  to  lean  to  one  side^  and  the  fence,  and  the 

woodittle         They  were  all  my  dear  friends,  my  nearest 

ones.  It  was  jnst  terrible  to  look  at  the  desolation,  bnt  it 
cmly  gave  me  more  courage.  The  more  work  I  saw,  the 
more  work  there  was  ahead,  the  greater  was  my  desire  to  do 

it,  and  the  greater  my  strength   That  's  what  our 

peasant  nature  is!  But  there  where  I  had  been  there  was 
no  work,  but  ail  kinds  of  distractions^ — and  money;  but  that 


Aleksandr  Ivanovich  Levitov 


417 


had  almost  deprived  me  of  my  senses,  and  I  dragged  my 
soul  through  the  mud,  as  a  swine  drags  her  belly.  And 

what  from  ?  Freedom !  *  * 

IvAa  would  always  begin  and  end  Us  oonvetaatioos  with 
me  by  tlda  inoompielienflibile  correlation  of  "freedom"  and 
*'  moral  fall,"  but  yon  aee,  he  not  only  did  not  make  my 
misgivings  clearer,  bnt  considerably  increased  them. 

Aleks^dr  Ivdnovich  Levitov.  (1842-1877.) 

Levitov  was  the  son  of  a  village  priest  in  the  Government  of  Tam- 
b6v.  His  early  youth  was  passed  at  home  in  sordid  peasant  surround- 
iBgi»  whete  be  teamed  just  enoa^  fiom  hit  fttber  to  be  aUe  to  teed 
vdigioiis  books.  A  seminarist  having  pcovided  him  with  some  of  the 
Russian  classics,  he  acquired  a  taste  for  literature  and  entered  a 
Seminary.  He  was  a  brilliant  student,  but  had  to  suffer  much  insult 
from  his  brutal  companions  for  his  physical  weakness.  Scenes  from 
tbe  Seminary  later  formed  the  main  subject  of  his  stories.  He  then 
entered  tbt  Uosoow  Univenity,  bat  soon  afterwaids  tranafened  bim- 
self  to  the  Hedioo-SttrglcBl  Institute  at  St.  Petersburg.  Having 
taken  part  in  some  political  agitation,  he  v/as  exiled  to  the  nortli- 
east  Here  he  associated  entirely  with  the  lower  classes,  confirmed 
himself  in  his  vicious  habit  of  drinking,  and  in  his  sober  moments 
oomposed  Ida  eaoeUent  Stifipe  SkMst,  tbat  aboond  in  poeticel  de» 
acriptioiia  of  Mmthern  nature  and  in  detaited  pictoree  of  the  inhabit- 
anta  of  the  steppe.  Then  began  his  rovine:  life  from  town  to  town, 
from  one  capital  to  another,  living  all  the  time  in  the  purlieus  of 
the  cities,  and  in  cellars,  garrets,  and  outhouses.  This,  combined 
with  his  chronic  state  of  intoxication,  led  to  consumption,  and  he 
finally  died  in  a  diaic.  Levftov  has  given  a  tcfiea  of  pictiifee  ftom 
the  life  of  the  moat  degraded  townspeople  with  whom  he  came  in 
contact,  nnder  the  name  of  Tk^  Misery  of  Country^  Roads,  and 
Towns.  They  are  a  reflex  of  his  own  experiences  and  make  painful 
reading,  though,  but  for  some  discursiveness,  they  are  artistic  in  con- 
ception and  execution. 

SHOEMAKER  COCK-OF-THG-BOOTS 

I 

There  was  in  oor  village  a  good  fellow»— a  shoemaker. 
We  just  called  him  Cock-of*the-Boola,  becanse  he  deserved 
the  name.   Early  in  the  morning  and  late  at  night  yon 

VOL.  U.— «7. 


4i8         The  Nineteenth  Centuiy 


might  have  aeen  him  ■taggering  thnmgh  Hie  village itieeCfl^ 
and  ydling*  in  his  dmnken  fit,  and  npeating  the  aame 
phrase: 

"  Come  out,  you  village  wiseacre,  if  there  is  such  a  one 
among  yonl  Come  out,"  he  shouted,  *'  and  I  will  have  a 
chat  with  3m." 

Bnt  no  one  dated  to  come  out,  being  sue  to  get  the  wont 

of  it 

He  had  come  to  us  from  down  XJsmin  way.  He  was  sndi 
a  thidc-set,  homely-looking  fellow,  with  thick,  monstroos 
moustaches,  and  he  wore  a  blue  coaL  His  wife  was  as 
stubby  and  homely  as  he,  and  all  in  wrinkles,  bnt  she  had 
on  a  chintz  dress  that  was  good  enough  for  a  shopkeeper's 
wife  and  a  red  shawl  over  her  shoulders.  You  would  think 
that  the  moment  he  drove  into  the  village  he  would  make 
for  the  inn  ?  The  Lord  bless  you,  he  made  plump  for  the 
tavern.  That  is,  he  and  his  wife  went  into  the  tavern,  but 
the  cart  was  left  in  charge  of  six  good-looking  young  fel- 
lows, all  of  them  in  extensible  boots,  caps,  and  blue  nankeen 
coats.  They  stood  around  the  cart.  People  b^;an  to  come 
up  to  them,  and  somebody  asked  them: 

"  Say,  what  kind  of  people  are  you,  honourable  gentle- 
men  ?    Whence  do  you  come  and  whither  do  you  tend  ?  ** 

*'  Step  aside,"  they  replied  to  us,  '*  step  aside  as  far  as  you 
can,  before  dad  comes  back  from  the  tavern,  or  there  will  be 
trouble!** 

We  all  had  to  laugh,  seeing  that  these  strapping  fellows 
were  trying  to  frighten  us  with  their  "  dad." 

We  looked  around:  there  he  was  coming  out  of  the  tavern 
with  a  bretzel  in  his  hands,  his  cap  poised  way  back  on  his 
head,  while  his  wife  carried  a  quart  of  brandy  itf  her  hand, 
in  order  to  treat  her  sons. 

"  Go  ahesd,"  he  said,  "  and  drink,  and  then  find  aome 
quarters,  for  I  am  sleepsr." 

Right  near  the  tavern  there  was  living  in  a  hut  a  cnzjr 
old  woman.  We  had  nicknamed  her  the  Blue  Rig.  She 
had  no  relatives  of  any  sort,  and  managed  to  live  somehow 
by  charity.  Whilehewascoolinghimself  off  in  the  tavern. 


Digitized  by  Google 


Aleksandr  Ivanovich  Levitov  419 

his  youngsters  found  out  that  she  was  helpless,  and  so  they 
immediately  reported  to  him: 

**  Dad,  there  is  hereabouts  a  destitute  old  woman.  They 
call  her  Blue  Rig,  and  we  might  stop  at  her  hut." 

They  settled  there,  and  before  long  they  smoked  the  old 
woman  out  of  her  hxwae.  The  township  chief  sent  some 
hnndred-men  to  oust  Cock-ol-the-Boots,  but  he  gave  the 
handxed-men  a  mighty  drnbUng,  and  told  them  that  it  was 
his  hooaep  and  that  the  chief  had  better  attend  to  his  own 
htunneaa. 

The  chief  marvelled  at  the  fiellow,  and  himsdf  came  down 
xxpoisk  him  with  a  poose.  The  whde  village  went  to  aee  the 
fun. 

Cock-of-the-Boota  took  up  a  daring  atdtnde  in  front  of  the 
diie^  his  hands  akimbo;  then  he  stroked  his  moustache  and 
said: 

"  What  made  yon,  sir,  omie  to  me  when  I  did  not  invite 
yon?  Yon  had  better  wait  for  an  invitation." 
**  How  dare  you  ?  **  btgui  the  chief. 
Now  each  of  Cock-of-the-Boota's  sons  had  a  special  name: 

their  father  called  one  of  them  Prince  Knt6aov»  another 
Pask^vich,  a  third  Dfbich.  "They  are  all  my  generalis- 
aimoa,"  he  would  say.   When  the  chief  began  to  call  him 

names,  he  turned  to  Dibich : 
"Dfbich!   Take  him  out!" 

Dfbich,  without  any  further  ado,  took  the  chief  by  his 
shoulder  and  led  him  out.  The  hundred-men  and  some  of 
the  villagers  tried  to  interfere, — but  these  protectors  got 
dreadfully  mauled  by  Cock-of-the- Boots  and  his  sons. 

"  I  myself,"  cried  Cock-of-the-Boots,  "  with  my  good  fel- 
lows can  kick  out  two  such  villages  as  this.  I,"  says  he, 
"  will  root  out  any  man  that  will  undertake  to  oppress  me, 
because  I  am  not  afraid  of  anybody,  and  my  children  are 
not  afraid  of  anybody  but  me." 

And  his  wife  seconded  him:  "That 's  right,"  says  she, 
"  we  are  not  afraid  of  anybody!  " 

It  was  a  fine  family  we  had  to  deal  with. 

"  It  *8  now  up  with  Cock  -  of  •  the  -  Boots,"  we  villagers 


420         The  Nineteenth  Century 


thought,  afker  that  oocurrenoe.  "  They  'U  certainly  drag 
him  to  Siberia  for  iosiiltitig  audi  a  great  gentleman."  But 
that  'a  where  we  were  wrong.  The  ditef  complained  to  tiie 
district  superintendent,  saying:  "It  is  so  and 80^  and  I  can't 
do  anjrtliing  with  Cock-ol-the-Boota,  becanse,*'  says  he,  "  he 
has  a  powerful  lot  of  sons,  and  they  get  the  better  oC  the 
whole  village." 

No  sooner  did  Cock-of-the- Boots  hear  of  that  letter  than 
he  slung  a  wallet  with  a  slice  of  bread  over  his  shoulder, 
lighted  his  pipe, — he  had  a  small  pipe  with  a  short  carved 
stem, — and  oflf  he  went  to  the  capital  of  the  province.  A 
lot  of  gentlemen  were  just  entering  the  Governor's  palace, 
and  he  somehow  managed  to  slip  in  with  them  into  the 
audience  room,  where  he  waited  for  the  Governor  to  appear, 
in  the  meantime  angrily  twisting  his  moustache. 

Then  came  his  turn. 

"  Who  are  you  ? "  asked  the  Chief^  "  and  what  do  yon 

want?" 

"  I  am,  sir,"  answered  Cock-of-the- Boots,  "  a  crown  peas- 
ant and  a  shoemaker.  And  what  I  want  is  that  you  should 
kick  out  the  township  chief, — his  name  is  so  and  so, — be- 
cause he  is  an  embezzler  of  the  Tsar's  treasure,  and  a  great 
noiaance  to  the  commune.  That 's  what  I  want,"  says  he. 

They  say  that  the  gentlemen  that  were  present  were 
stnnnol,  seeing  how  freely  he  spoke  with  the  GenersL  The 
Governor  himself  frowned  and  looked  for  a  long  time  at 
Cock-of-tfae-Boots  with  angr}'  eyes,  and  finally  he  said: 

'*  Do  yon,  Cock-of-the-Boots,"  says  he,  "  want  me  to  pat 
yon  in  jail  for  insulting  me  in  that  way  ?  '* 

But  Cockmf-the-Boots  only  smiled,  and  his  moostaches 
twitched,  and  he  said  to  the  Governor:  '*  Let  me  tell  yoo," 
says  he,  "  that  I  won't  go  to  jail,  but  straight  to  Peter,  to 
complsin  to  the  Bmperor  himsdf ;  and  yon  are  not  strong 
enough  to  stop  me,"  says  he,  because  I  am  not  afraid  of 
anybody  except  God  in  heaven,"  and  he  threw  his  wallet 
over  his  shoulderB,  and  started  out. 

The  gentlemen  present  could  not  keep  baibk  any  longer 
and  burst  out  laughing,  and  the  Governor  himself  laughed. 


Digitized  by  Google 


Aleksindr  Iviinovich  Levitov  4*1 


"  Wliat  a  bold  ftUowI "  says  he^  "  I  have  not  seen  the  like 
of  him  in  all  my  life.  Fetch  him  ba6k,"  says  he,  "and  send 
him  to  my  cabinet  I  will  talk  to  him  later." 

"  I  aee  no  obj  ection  to  having  a  talk  with  him, ' '  said  Codc- 
of-the-Boots,  smiling.  "  I  am  always  leady  to  talk  to  a 
Gov«mor." 

It  is  not  known  what  tho  Governor  and  he  talked  abont, 
<mly,  Oock-of-the-Boots  had  not  yet  readied  his  Ullage 
when  the  township  chief  had  an  order  from  the  capital  to 
the  effect  that  he  had  been  a  ddef  long  enough. 

n 

You  ought  to  have  seen  how  we  ever  after  honoured  Cock- 
of-the-Boots.  As  he  and  his  wife  passed  a  great  part  of  their 
time  in  the  tavern,  they  were  treated  to  many  a  cup  by  any- 
body who  happened  to  be  there  and  who  felt  that  they  must 
ofiFer  them  a  part  of  their  just  labour.  But  Cock-of-the- Boots 
would  keep  one  of  his  hands  in  his  pocket,  and  with  the 
other  he  would  twist  his  moustache  around  his  ears,  saying: 

"  Now  let  we  tell  you  why  I  am  drinking  all  the  time. 
It 's  because  you  are  all  fools,  and  I  can't  do  anything  with 
you." 

**  That 's  correct,"  was  the  invariable  refrain  of  his  wife. 

And  to  tell  the  truth,  if  he  had  not  been  drinking  so  hard, 
he  could  have  gotten  away  with  many  a  fellow,  for  he  was 
very  clever.  He  was  a  great  hand  at  his  business!  He 
could  make  any  kind  of  boots,  gentlemen's  and  shopkeepers' 
boots,  extensible  and  simple  peasant  boots, — it  was  just  a  joy 
to  took  at  them!  The  only  trouble  was,  that  accursed 
Oodc*of-tfae-Boots  tardy  ever  fiidshed  a  job.  He  nearly 
always  carried  the  leather  that  hia  castamen  gave  him  to 
the  tavern  to  ezdmnge  it  ibr  drinks. 

"How  did  yon  dare,  Codc-of-the-Boots,  to  bay  drinks 
with  my  leather?  "  they  wonld  adc  him. 

*'  Simply  becanse  I  wanted  to^"  says  he. 

Nobody  entered  any  complaints  against  him,  becanse  It 
did  no  good.  Ete  knew  how  to  amuse  all  the  diiefs  with  his 
convcra^tions  and  to  gain  all  kinds  of  favours  from  them. 


422         The  Nineteenth  Century 


Th^  tried  to  take  the  law  into  their  own  hand8»  bat  tiiat 
only  ended  in  an  all  aroondfig^ht,  te  bia  wife  and  aons  took 
his  aide,  and  alao  a  stalwart  aezton, — thiey  called  him  Kate- 
rfnych,— and  they  easily  yanqnidied  the  whole  village. 
However,  we  learned  to  find  onr  way  into  Cock-of-t]ie> 
Boota's  heart,  only  it  took  us  quite  a  while  to  find  it  onL 
All  one  had  to  do,  when  Cock-of-the-Boota  had  spent  the 
leather  in  drinks,  waa  to  take  at  once  another  piece  to  him, 
and  beg  him  not  to  spend  this  second  piece* 

"  Won't  you,  Grig6ri  Kuzmfch,  make  me  a  pair  of  boots 
out  of  this?   We  '11  square  up  about  the  first  piece  later." 

' '  That 's  what  I  like ! ' '  Cock-of- the- Boots  would  say.  ' '  I 
like  to  be  trusted!  "  he  would  shout,  "just  as  I  would  like 
to  trust  others,  only  I  have  uothing  to  give."  And  he  im- 
mediately ordered  his  sons  to  make  a  qpecial  effort  with  these 
boots. 

*'  As  you  command,  dad! "  his  sons  would  say,  and  they 
at  once  set  to  work,  so  that  you  could  see  chips  flying.  They 
were  a  fine  lot,  and  they  obeyed  their  parents  so  that  we  all 
envied  them. 

*'  Just  look!  "  the  whole  village  said,  "  father  and  mother 
are  drunkards,  but  the  children  are  all  right."  They  not 
only  were  skilled  in  their  trade  and  could  read  and  write, 
but  every  one  of  them  had  picked  up  some  specialty :  <me 
could  play  the  accordion,  another  the  guitar,  or  horn.  They 
naed  to  go  oat,  of  a  summer  evening,  into  the  street,  after 
their  work  waa  done,  and,  aeating  themadvea  in  ficont  of  their 
hnt,  they  began  to  play  aome  aweet  aong.  There  waa  not 
one  of  the  whole  fimiily  that  did  not  have  a  good  voice. 
Their  mother  waa  each  an  inaignificant  woman  to  look  at; 
bat  wlien  ahe  began  to  trill  "  I<ovely  fofget-me-not"  with 
her  aoft  voice,  everybody  would  atop  to  listen^  Oock-of- 
tfae-Boota  himadf  waa  reg^tfded  aa  a  firat-claaa  ahvger  in  theae 
enteitainmenta.  At  firrt  he  would  atart  with  a  fine  tenor, 
and  then  he  would  carry  the  whole  aong  in  a  heavy  baaa 
Where  in  the  world  did  he  get  that  bass  from  ? 

The  whole  village  and  people  fimm  the  outlying  hamleta 
naed  to  come  to  hear  tit**"*- 


Digitized  by  Google 


Aleks&adr  Iv&novich  Levftov  423 


Cock-of-the-Booto  lived  in  this  manner  for  thiee  or  four 
yeaxa.  We  all  got  used  to  hia  i&tosicatton,  and  dumtingr  at 
night  time,  and  hia  Uaaphemiog.  We  quit  gettiag  augry 
at  him,  becanae,  in  the  first  place,  he  was  a  hopdeas  ease, 
and,  in  the  aeoond,  he  did  a  great  deal  of  good  in  the  village 
and  the  ndghbonring  hamleta.  For  example^  if  a  ridi  mer- 
chant began  to  flay  the  people  in  too  open  a  manner,  or  the 
chief  or  acribe  put  down  the  acrewa  a  little  too  tight,  Code* 
of-the-Boota  and  hia  friend,  the  aexton,  would  go  to  their 
windows  and  would  read  them  a  aemum,  whidi  made  them 
wiah  they  were  dead. 

"Just  go  away  from  these  windows,  good  fellowa,  and  atop 
this  disgracefal  bosiDess,"  such  a  man  would  say  to  them. 
*'  I  '11  treat  you  to  all  the  brandy  you  wish,"  he  would  add. 

They  particularly  annoyed  the  village  dean.  Hia  daugh- 
ters did  not  dare  to  go  out  into  the  streets,  or  even  stand 
outside  the  door,  because  the  dean  had  oflFended  the  sexton. 

*'  Just  wait,  Katerfnych! ' '  the  dean  threatened  the  sexton, 
**  I  '11  see  to  it  that  you  get  your  hair  shaved  off." 

"  I  am  ready  any  minute,"  said  the  sexton,  "  for  I  would 
rather  live  with  the  devil  in  hell  than  be  under  your  rule." 

The  dean  would  spit  out  in  anger,  as  he  listened  to  these 
talks  of  the  sexton,  and  would  walk  away.  But  Cock-of- 
the-Boots  and  his  friend  rolled  with  laughter,  and  they  pro- 
claimed all  his  secrets  to  the  whole  Christian  world: 

' '  We  '11  teach  you  a  thing  or  two!  You  just  make  a  move 
against  us!  ** 

When  they  got  tired  standing  under  the  window,  they  lay 
down  opposite  the  house,  and  proceeded  with  thdr  scolding, 
and  tbey  would  not  go  away  any  sooner  than  they  would  be 
treated  to  brandy  or  mon^.  When  this  was  sent  oat  to 
them  they  only  laughed: 

"  Look  at  these  infidd  devils!  They  think  that  they  can 
wadi  down  their  wrongs  with  this  brandy.  Don't  worry,  yon 
will  not  wadi  them  down! "  Having  had  their  fan,  thQr 
walked  away,  and  the  aexton  invariably  atarted  a  chant  apon 
theae  oocadona. 

Th^  were  particalarly  anooeaafol  in  aaving  yoong  men 


424         The  Nineteenth  Century 


from  conscriptioii*  if  these  were  unjusUy  wonied  by  the 
commune,  on  aoooont  of  their  poverty  <»r  orphaned  atate. 
All  such  an  nnfortunate  man  had  to  do  waa  to  bay  a  htg  of 
brandy,  paper,  and  ink,  and  the  sexton  was  ready  to  oom- 
pose  a  letter.  He  pieaented  hia  case  to  the  higher  anthori^ 
ties  in  ao  oonyindng  a  manner  that  many  a  recmit  was 
returned  from  service  and  the  commune  received  severe 
reprimands.  And  if  the  higher  authorities  stood  in  with  the 
commune  against  these  luckless  fellows, our  scribes  would  add 
a  postscript  to  their  petition  to  the  effect  that:  "  If  your 
honour  will  not  free  Ivdn  Luchin  who  has  been  shaven  a  re- 
cruit against  the  law,  we  will  at  once  go  to  Peter  to  complain 
to  our  father  the  Tsar."     And  they  both  signed  that  letter. 

**  This  petition,"  they  wrote,  "  has  been  signed  in  person 
by  the  village  sexton  Kuzma  Lukich  Zabub^uuy  and  the 
crown  peasant  and  shoemaker  Giigdri  Kuzmich,  nicknamed 
Cock-of-the-Boots.** 

Many  a  fellow  was  freed  after  such  a  letter.  But  they 
refused  to  interv^ene  in  the  case  of  a  man  whose  evident  fate 
it  was  to  be  a  soldier,  and  in  no  case  did  they  receive  any 
Other  remuneration  than  brandy. 

It  waa  on  account  of  his  good  soul,  which  we  all  saw,  that 
we  did  not  Interfere  with  his  drinking.  AU  of  a  sadden  we 
heard  the  news  of  a  general  conscription. 

Oar  town  offioera  aeared  as  with  aocb  phrases:  "  There 
will  be  an  onaaoally  large  oooacription.  Three  countries 
have  risen  against  as.  We  'U  have  a  job  on  hand." 

'*WeU,"  weaaid,**ifthereistobeaUgconscriptioQ,  let 
there  be.  Evidently  it  has  to  be.*'  In  the  tneantime  we 
began  to  fit  out  any  of  the  yoong  fellows  that  might  he 
called,  that  th^  might  be  ready  at  any  time  and  hoar,  for 
it  was  not  for  a  day  ortwo  thatoor  yoongsteni  were  to  leave 

These  rnmoors  began  to  spread  just  before  the  battle  of 
Sebastopol. 

At  last  the  time  came  to  draw  lots,  and  then  to  be  es* 
amined  asrecrnits.  Cock-of-the-Boots  did  nothavelowociy 
about  his  sons  for  something  like  three  years»  beoanse  a 


Digitized  by  Google 


Aleks&ndr  Iv&novich  Levitov  425 


n^hew  of  his  had  become  a  addier  and,  oonaequently,  hia 
f amfly  waa  for  the  tune  being  exempt. 

Thia  Oock-of-the-Boota  la  a  luc^  diap/'  we  aaid.  "  He 
haaxaiaed  aiz  fine  eaglea*  and  thece  they  are  to  atay  at  home.*' 

One  mofnhig.  we  aaw  to  ottr  aorpriae  that  Codc-Qf*the- 
Boota  was  starting  out  on  the  road  with  all  his  sons.  He 
was  walking  at  their  head  and  smoking  his  pipe,  and  he 
looked  gloomy  and  hia  moustache  hung  down,  but  he  waa 
not  drunk.  The  mother  waa  acoQmpanying  them  and  weep- 
ing torrents  of  teaxi. 

"  Where  are  you  starting  out,  Grig6ri  Kuzmfch  ?  Have 
you  taken  a  lildng  to  another  place,  and  do  you  want  to 
leave  us  ?  " 

"  Good-bye,  friends!  "  he  said.  "  I  am  going  to  enter  my 
sons,  every  one  of  them,  into  the  army,  because  a  large  host 
is  up  against  us,  and  there  are  as  many  of  them  as  stars  in 
heaven." 

Sexton  Kuzmd  was  walking  with  them. 

"Orthodox  people,"  he  said,  "don't  recall  me  with  an 
evil  thought!  I  sha'n't  think  of  you  at  all,  because  I  am  sick 
of  your  foolishness.    I  '11  try  to  find  a  place  somewhere." 

'*  They  are  jesting!  "  we  thought.  "  They  are,  no  doubt, 
going  out  on  the  chase  or  catching  fish." 

But  it  was  not  a  jest  at  all.  He  really  inscribed  all  his 
sous  and  the  sexton  in  the  army!  And  the  provincial  au- 
thorities were  so  much  pleased  with  his  act,  that  he  and  his 
boys  received  a  great  deal  of  money,  and  he  was  promised 
that  all  his  sons  and  the  sexton  were  to  serve  in  one  and  the 
same  company. 

They  had  wanted  to  put  all  hia  aooa  in  the  bodyguard, 
but  CoGk-of-tfae-Boota  begged  them  to  let  them  go  atxaight- 
wmy  to  the  war. 

"  I  have  brought  them  to  go  againat  the  enemy,*'  he  aaid. 

The  authoritiea  gave  him  a  written  document  in  which 
they  eKpreaaed  their  thanka  to  him.  When  he  returned 
home,  be  hung  that  letter  up  in  the  hut  of  the  Blue  Rig,  and 
alarted  on  a  protracted  i^nee. 

Hia  wife  could  not  believe  for  a  long  time  that  he  would 


Digitized  by  Google 


426         The  Nineteenth  Centuiy 


give  up  all  hk  miis  at  once.  She  kept  on  hoping  tiiat  to* 
day,  or  to-morrow,  one  of  tlieiii  at  least  would  retnm,  aay, 
the  yonofeit  Bat  when  she  saw  that  there  was  no  retitni 
from  the  army,  she  joined  her  husband  in  the  spree. 

She  was  all  bent  up  and  crushed,  and  she  sailed  along, 
vainly  moving  her  hands,  and  mumbling  something;  her 
red  shawl  fell  down  from  one  ahoulder  and  dragged  along 
the  ground. 

She  did  not  long  continue  to  walk  that  way.  She  soon 
died.  While  on  her  deathbed,  she  gave  her  husband  a  ter- 
rible tongue-lashing  for  having  separated  her  from  her  dear 

children. 

Some  people  came  to  look  at  the  dead  person,  and  they 
found  Cock-of-the- Boots  talking  to  her  as  if  she  were  alive, 
for  he  was  dreadfully  drunk  just  then. 

"Foolish  woman!"  he  muttered.  "You  do  not  know 
your  own  good  luck.  You  will  be  better  off  there!  I  my- 
self have  long  wished  to  die,  but  death  does  not  come  to  me. ' ' 

He  muttered  that  in  an  undertone,  and  not  aloud  as  he 
used  to.  It  was  a  pity  to  see  him  left  so  alone.  The  hut 
looked  dreadfhlly  d^olate,  and  destitute  of  everything. 
The  stove  had  all  faHen  in.  The  Blue  Rig,  tattered  and 
torn,  and  all  wrinkled  up»  lay  on  the  stove,  and  lotd^ed  at 
everybody  like  an  insensate  beast,  and  angrily  gnashed  her 
teeth  at  them  

m 

Cock-of-the-Boots  became  gentler  than  a  lamb  when  his 
family  had  all  left  him.  He  sat  for  dasrsat  a  time  in  the  hut 
with  the  Blue  Rig,  and  they  looked  at  each  other.  VilUige 
urchins  came  in  and  made  fun  of  the  old  people,  but  they  re- 
ceived no  reply.  Only  at  midnight,  when  the  whole  village 
was  asleep,  the  neighbours  could  hear  Codc-of-Uie>Boots 
wailing: 

"  My  ddldren,  my  children,  what  have  I  don^  with  you  ?  *' 
Neighbours  stale  up  to  the  window,  and  they  saw  him 
wallowing  on  the  ground  and  tearing  his  hair.   In  daytime 
he  again  sat  down  in  his  den,  not  leaving  his  place,  uid  he 


Digitized  by  Google 


Nikol&y  Nikol&evich  Zlatovr&tski  427 


ma  to  nd,  grey,  andbftld.  When  the  vfllagen  saw  tint  tisA 
old  people  not  only  oonld  not  provide  fat  themadviea,  bat 
were  even  too  weak  to  go  a-beggiug,  they  began  to  bring 
them  bread,  water,  and  kvaa. 

"  Why  do  you  alt  here,  Grig6ri  Kiismldi?"  old  people 
would  aiik  him,  when  he  came  a  little  to  his  aeniea. 

'*  I  am  waiting  for  death,  dear  people!  Maybe  it  will 
cany  away  my  great  grief,  which  I  have  tried  all  my 
li&  to  drown  in  the  taverns^  bat  never  aocceeded  in  drown- 
ing!" And  he  began  to  weep  bitterly,  tears  flowii^  in 
torrents. 

We  wondered  mnch  what  grief  he  was  talking  aboat.  He 
had  feasted  nearly  all  his  life  in  taverns  at  other  people's 
expense,  and  now  he  was  grieving.  If  he  was  weeping  for 
his  maa,  he  had  himself  taken  tiiem  to  be  inscribed  in  the 
army. 

His  grief  must,  indeed,  have  been  very  great,  for  he  la- 
mented dreadfully  at  night,  and  often  woke  us  up.  He 
woke  us  with  his  awful  cries,  like  the  sound  of  the  house 
spirit  when  he  calls  for  an  evil  omen;  and  we,  hearing  them, 
were  very  much  frightened  and,  rising  in  the  morning,  fer- 
vently prayed  to  our  hoxd  

Nikol4y  NikoUevich  ZUtovr&tskL  (1845-.) 

Zlatovr&taki,  the  son  of  a  village  priest,  was  bora  in  Vladdnir, 
wiMre  he  attmded  the  OjnuMsiniii.  Hb  IkthMr  having  ertabMihcd  a 
lifarary  for  tlie  people^  ZhrtovvilSki  had  an  opportuutty  to  acquaint 
himself  with  Rnssian  literature.  He  then  studied  at  the  St.  Peters- 
burg Technological  Institute,  but  his  extreme  poverty  compelled 
him  to  look  for  work,  and  he  became  a  proof-reader  in  one  of  the 
newspapers.  This  gave  him  an  impetus  to  try  himself  in  authorship, 
and  his  fiist  Sketefa,  TV  JIfmndm,  appeared  in  1866.  Stoce  then  he 
has  written  a  lafge  number  of  shorter  and  longer  storks,  dealing 
with  the  life  of  the  peasants  in  thepctlod  of  the  emaacipation,  and 
also  with  the  intelligent  elates  at  the  same  time.  To  the  latter  he 
assumes  a  negative  attitude,  regarding  them  as  ha\'ing  departed  from 
the  simple,  fundamental  life  of  the  Russian  peasant.  Though  he 
treats  hii  peassBts  with  more  consideratioa,  there  is  a  strong  element 
of  pcssimiim  even  in  Uie  sketches  of  that  kind,  thus,  diftriag  fiom 


Digitized  by  Gopgle 


4^8         The  Nineteenth  Century 


ihe  similar  stories  by  Uspdnski.   They  also  differ  from  Ui^^nski's 

novels  by  the  mnsicalness  of  their  language  and  the  greater  wealth 
of  tietailed  descriptions.  Among  his  best  stories  are  The  Histoty  of 
a  Village,  Village  Work  Days,  The  Karavdevs,  The  Wanderer. 

OLD  SHADOWS 

In  moments  of  heavy  anguish  of  soul  my  "  little  grand- 
father" would  visit  me,  and  he  brought  with  him  from  the 
darkness  of  oblivion  a  series  of  just  such  little  and  insignifi- 
cant existences  as  himself.  My  childhood  and  youth  are,  it 
seems,  inseparably  connected  with  these  little  existences. 
I  particularly  recall  those  strange,  mysterious  forms  that 
suddenly  appeared,  one  knew  not  whence, — both  in  our 
*'  old  house  **  in  the  provincial  city,  and  in  the  old,  weather- 
stained  cabin  of  my  grandfather, — and  just  so  vanished,  one 
knew  not  whither.  They  were  wandering  shadows  that 
frightened  our  childish  imagination, — especially,  since  my 
grandmother,  whom  I  cannot  picture  to  myself  otherwise 
than  in  an  euornious  kerchief,  with  overhanging  eyebrows 
and  a  huge  frying  fork  in  her  hand,  had  no  use  for  them  and 
called  them  "tramps,"  "loafing  people,"  and  **  worthless 
lot."  Yet,  in  spite  of  the  existence  of  my  stem  old  grand- 
mother,  who  tSmvyn  appeared  before  me  as  an  Incarnatiozi 
of  Uiat  atem  peiiod,— these  "  loafing  people/'  it  aeemed  to 
me,  were  tneeding  more  and  more  in  our  Rturian  land,  and 
Willi  it  nqr  atem  gnndmother  gave  ever  nune  a  piece  of  her 
mind  to  my  irisionaxy  mother  and  to  the  "  village  windbag," 
my  little  grand&ther,  who  weregiving  refiige  to  these  peo> 
pie,  and  to  whom,  it  seemed,  they  dang  as  a  moth  flitsabout 
the  light 

Dimly  pass  before  me  tiiose  strange,  mjrateiioiia  forms 
which  that  irrevocable  past  prodooed  in  sodi  large  nambers. 
I  have  before  my  mind  the  tall,  smoke-stained  old  cabin  of 
my  gnmdfather  that  was  roughly  made  of  big  logs.  It  is 
warm  within,  but  in  the  open  the  frost  is  getting  stronger 
towards  evening.  Half  of  the  panes  are  already  covered 
with  downy  hoar-frost,  and  there  is  a  thumping,  crackling 
sound  now  in  one  corner,  now  in  another.  Grandfather  is 


Digitized  by  Google 


Nikol&y  Nikol&evich  Zlatovr&tski  4^9 


•itting  by  a  tallowdip^  hiifrsniig  to  mend  Ida  kaky  felt  boot 
with  a  piece  of  leather.  Mother  la  aolemiily  and  chantlngly 
reading  the  yersified  paraphrase  of  the  pealma,  distinctly 
pronotmcmg  the  wofda, — and  I  enjoy  the  harmonions  sound 
of  the  words,  though  I  ill  understand  their  meaning. 

Sister  and  I  are  snuggled  up  under  a  warm  sheepskin, 
and  we  silently  move  in  some  frivoiooa  lairy  world,  for  which 
there  is  no  time  and  no  space:  from  the  fantastic  coun- 
tries of  the  Eastern  Shaherezade  we  are  rapidly  transferred 
to  the  warm,  soft  shores  of  the  Jordan,  to  the  stem  kingdom 
of  the  Pharaohs,  or  suddenly  we  are  borne  in  the  whirl  of  a 
joyous,  bright  light,  amidst  a  sea  of  festive  sounds  of  music, 
to  the  splendour  of  a  new,  frivolous  world  of  European 
capitals,  whither  so  enticingly  beckon  and  call  us  all  those 
vigorous,  fresh  young  people,  who  had  managed  before  us  to 
escape  from  the  harsh  and  murky  habitations  of  the  manorial 

hamlets          Though  sister  and  I  are  not  saying  anything, 

yet  I  am  quite  convinced  that  her  thoughts  are  taking  her 
to  the  same  regions.  I  need  only  ask  her:  "  Do  you  remem- 
ber the  letter  mother  read  us  yesterday  from  Uncle  Sdsha  in 
St.  Petersburg  ?  "  in  order  to  be  sure  that  her  youthful  fancy 
will  immediately  carry  her,  as  it  has  carried  me,  far,  far  away 
from  these  dim  and  dusky,  though  warm,  walls  of  grand- 
fether's  cabin. 

Suddenly  a  heavy  creaking  is  heard  on  the  bridge;  the 
gate  ring  rattles;  someone  coughs  behind  the  door.  We 
all  listen  intently;  the  door  is  opened  timidly  and  with  in- 
decbion,  and  on  the  thiediold  appears  a  tall,  lean,  strange 
figure,  merged  in  steaming  frost:  he  has  on  a  long  sheep- 
akin  coat  that  is  covered  with  snow,  and  on  his  heed  is  a 
taU,  thidc,  cotton-filled  cap  and  in  Ua  handa  a  long  staff; 
over  his  shoulder  hanga  a  long  cslfiddn-oovmd  willet;  he 
has  a  long,  thin,  wet  fm,  with  sunken  cheeks,  thick  tufts 
of  a  greyish  beard,  and  timid,  black  eyes  under  long  brows. 

'*  Peace  and  blessing  be  t^on  your  housel "  distinctly 
enounces  the  stranger  on  the  threshold,  without  moving 
firom  the^ot 

"Thank  yon,"  says  grandfather.    "Whither  are  yon 


430         The  Nineteenth  Century 


bound?  Mdsha,  get  a  slice  of  bread  from  gtandmother,  aay 
it  *8  for  a  pilgrim." 

*'  Don't  you  recognise  me,  father  ?  "  in  the  meantime  aaka 
the  pilgrim,  without  leaving  the  threshold. 

"  No,  no  Or  are  we  acquaintances?  "  sasrs  grand- 
father, as  he  is  looking  for  his  glasses.    ' '  Who  are  you  ?  " 

The  pilgrim  timidly  surveys  the  room  with  his  penetrating 
black  eyes,  and  softly  says: 

"  A  despised  servant  of  the  Lord,  a  slave  of  men — ^the 
manorial  servant  Aleksdndr — ^the  wandering  Jew,  the  ac- 
cursed Ahasuerus  *' 

**  O  Aleksdndr!  I  do  recognise  you,  I  do,"  says  grand- 
father.   "  You  want  to  warm  yourself  and  stay  over  night; 

you  are  tired,  no  doubt.    We  will  find  a  place!   Sit 

down,  Aleksdndr,  pilgrim  of  the  Lord!  ** 

"  Will  you  let  me,  father  ?  "  the  pilgrim  asks  again,  still 
timidly  surveying  all  around  him. 

' '  Have  no  fear,  no  fear !  The  Lord  be  with  you,  come  in, 
make  yourself  at  home ! ' ' 

The  pilgrim  slowly  aud  with  indmsion  takes  off  his 
wallet,  and  seats  himself  on  the  bench  with  a  heavy 
sigh. 

"  Well,  Aleksdndr,  have  yon  not  iret  found  rest  lor  your 
soul  ?  "  asks  grandfather. 

But  the  pilgrim  sits  in  sQenoe,  and  lowers  his  hesd. 

Then  a  deep  sigh  is  heard  again  iasning  from  hishreast 
Then  he  begins  to  speak  dearly,  without  hunting,  lowering 
his  ores  all  the  time,  as  if  ashamed  to  look  at  us. 

"  I  have  crossed  all  the  boidera  have  been  evefywhepe 
—have  visited  all  the  holy  places  I  have  been  in  the 
countries  of  the  midday  sun  and  of  midnight— on  anltxy 
Athon  and  in  the  cold  Solov6tsk  cdb  Hveiywhere, 

father         I  have  continually  looked  for  the  eternal  city, 

and  there  is  no  reittge  for  the  despised  slave!         Father^  I 

have  suffered  hunger  and  cold         In  summer  and  in 

winter  I,  as  a  tliief,  hide  from  the  light,  and  wander  at 

night-time         I  come  into  dties,  and  they  drive  me  out, 

I  knock  at  the  odls,  and  they  do  not  receive  the  outcast  


Digitized  by  Google 


NikoUy  Nikolievich  Zlatovr&tski  431 


I  see  neither  my  kin,  nor  my  relations*  neither  wife,  nor 

children,  who  abide  in  servitude         Be  accursed,  despised 

dsve,  lor  having  thought  of  liberty,  abandoning  your  ioo( 
and  departing  fiom  your  kinl   If  I  should  wish  to  re- 
tain to  the  house  of  my  master,  my  children  and  my  kin 
would  deny  me,  for  the  fear  of  the  Jews,  and  my  master 

would  turn  me  over  to  mockery  and  to  outrage          I  am 

afraid  to  return  to  slavery,  and  I  shall  wander  about,  as  a 
thief,  and  my  refuge  shall  be  the  lair  of  beasts  '  * 

And  suddenly  the  pilgrim  falls  upon  his  knees  with  a  dull 
sound,  and  begins  to  pray.  For  a  long  time  are  heard, 
amidst  a  complete  silence,  the  deep  sighs  of  the  pilgrim  and 
now  and  then  a  moan  of  my  grandfather. 

My  mother,  and  sister,  and  I  look  with  fixed  attention  at 
that  lean,  bony  face,  which  is  as  swarthy  as  if  cast  of 
bronze,  and  on  which  lie  the  clear  traces  of  his  endless 
wanderings  and  immeasurable  sorrow. 

The  pilgrim  rises,  straightens  himself  up,  and  still  keeps 
his  eyes  on  the  holy  image.  Large  tears  course  down  his 
cheeks,  while  his  black  eyes  sparkle  at  the  same  time  evil 
despair  and  stem  faith. 

"  Father  I "  he  suddenly  speaks,  raising  his  hand  to  the 

image.  *' Theie— there  let  na  eeek  the  etemai  dty!  

Only  there         There  they  will  not  cast  you  off  *' 

"  Bat  do  not  despair,  Alekstfndrl  God  will  uplift  you," 
says  grandfather.  **  There  ia  not  a  tear,  Aleks^bdr,  that 
floweth  in  vain,  and  ia  not  heard  at  the  throne  of  the 

Almighty!  Not  a  hair  of  yoar  head  shall  perish   Seek, 

and  yoa  shall  always  findl  Knock,  and  the  gates  of  truth 

shall  he  opened  unto  you  I         Sit  down,  Aleksindr,  and 

strengthen  yourself  with  what  God  hath  sent." 

The  pilgrim  is,  it  seems,  quieted  down,  and  he  seats  him- 
self on  the  bench  again;  but  now  his  head  is  raised,  and  his 
gleaming  eyes  look  somewhere  into  the  distance,  as  if  they 
pierced  the  walls  of  our  cabin,  and  a  stiaage  struggle  shines 
in  them,  as  if  they  did  not  yet  know  on  what  to  rest  their 
choice:  on  heaven  or  on  earth. 

"  Well,  Aleks^hidr,  tell  us  something  about  God*s  world. 


Digitized  by  Google 


43^         The  Nineteenth  Century 


Many  tliinga  are  revealed  to  yoa  fnlgrima.  Conie^  ait  down 

here!" 

The  i^grim  aeats  himself  at  the  tahk,  and  I  see  nqr 
mother,  her  eyes  burniag  with  some  niyaterioiia  ctinosity, 
moving  up  towards  him,  placing  her  arms  on  the  tables 
leaning  her  head  upon  them,  and  fixing  her  dreamy  eyes 
upon  the  pilgrim's  face. 

And  the  pilgrim  begins  to  speak.  But  my  childish  im- 
agination is  only  impressed  by  his  stem,  misty  form,  and  has 
preserved  nothing  else,  and  I  recall  his  speeches  only  as  the 
din  of  a  turbid  torrent  that  nins  across  the  endless  steppes. 
And  over  these  steppes  rapidly  marches,  driven  by  the  wind, 
the  tall,  stern  figure  that  is  in  vain  seeking  a  place  where 
the  son  of  man  may  lay  down  his  head. 

And  the  pilgrim  has  not  yet  ended  his  stories,  which,  it 
seems,  are  so  long  that  they  last  a  whole  night,  and  a  day, 
and  again  a  night,  when  there  appears  in  the  door  of  our  cabin 
a  new  strange  being  that  strikes  our  childish  imagination. 

At  first  we  see  only  an  immense  old  rough  sheepskin  coat 
that  is  held  together  by  a  belt,  and  large  old  felt  boots,  but 
it  is  quite  impossible  to  define  the  sex,  the  age,  or  the  oocn- 
pation  of  the  person  that  la  hidden  In  the  rccemei  of  that 
huge  coat,  above  which  Is  hardy  aeen  the  head  ao  tightly 
wrapped  in  a  fimted  ahawl  that  even  the  cyea  cannot  be 
discerned.  Tlie  strange  coat  nervoody  and  rapidly  makes 
three  deep  indinatkms  before  the  holy  image,  and  then  to 
the  comeri  of  the  room,  and  jnat  aa  npidly  begins  to  nn« 
revel  the  ahawl,  and  by  d^reea  appears^  at  first,  a  thin, 
grey  beard,  then  a  thin,  long  nose,  small,  monae-like,  grey 
eyes,  and  finally  an  immense  bald  head  is  freed  from  a  ahecp* 
skin  cap,  here  and  there  feathered  with  dishevelled  tnfts  of 
greyish  red  hair.  And  when  the  coat  suddenly  and  nnex- 
pectedly  falla  ofif  in  the  corner, — there  stands  before  us  one 
of  the  commonest,  the  most  "  insignificant"  of  the  '*  worth- 
less lot "  who,  in  the  opinion  of  my  grandmother,  live  in  this 
world:  it  is  an  old  serf,  in  a  patched  and  torn  gabardine. 
No  sooner  does  the  peasant  feel  himself  freed  from  the 
weight  of  the  hnge  sheepskin  that  has  oppressed  him,  than 


Digitized  by  Google 


Nikol&y  Nikol&evich  Zlatovr&tski  433 


lie  becomes  nervooaly  alive,  sweetly  smiles  npon  us  all,  bows 
again  and  again  into  both  conieni»  and,  rapidly  twitdiing 
his  feet  befoie  gxandfathcr,  cries  out  in  an  entreating  voice: 
"Most  worahipltil  ooel  Patberl  Give  me  a  lodging! 
Re&eah  me!  Qive  me  hope! " 

*'Ah,  Filim6n,  Filim6nl  Is  it  yon  again?*'  says  my 
"  little  giand&ther"  in  evident  agitation,  tiying  to  find  bis 
snuff-box. 

'*  Yes,  I,  worshipful  man.  Do  not  misjudge  me,*'  mjB 
the  peasant  so  softly  that  you  would  think  he  was  afraid  of 

his  own  voice. 

"Ah,  Filim6Ql "  says  grandfather,  for  some  reason  shak- 
ing his  head  in  anguish  and  trying  to  console  himself  with 
a  pinch  of  snuff.  ' '  When  will  you  come  to  rest  ?  Friend, 
is  there  a  living  spot  in  you  ?  " 

It  appears  to  us,  indeed,  that  there  is  not  a  living  spot  in 
the  peasant :  neither  mua:les,  nor  flesh,  nor  blood, — nothing 
but  strong,  indestructible  bones  enclosed  in  a  dark-brown 
skin. 

The  peasant,  after  grandfather's  words,  smiles  even  more 
entreatingly ;  his  grey,  little  eyes  apparently  become  even 
smaller, — and  he  suddenly  grows  once  more  enlivened  and 
agitated;  all  his  bony  members  are  in  motion,  and,  as  if 
seized  by  some  unusual  care,  he  begins  to  rummage  in  the 
breast  of  his  torn  outer  garment. 

He  finall}'  brings  to  light  something  that  is  wrapped  in 
a  dark  kerchief.  He  cautiously  opens  it  with  his  trembling 
fingers  and,  timidly  turning  to  both  sides,  with  a  careworn 
glance  places  before  grandfather  some  old,  stained  papers, 
and  again  makes  a  low  bow  before  him. 

Wonshipfnl  one !  I  have  a  request  to  make." 

"  Ah,  Filim6n!  Ah,  Filim6n! "  sighs  grand&ther,  agam 
dmking  his  head  in  anguish:  *'  Why  do  you  tempt  God  our 
Lofd?  If  you  do  not  care  for  youradf,  think  of  your  kin. 
Padfy  your  spirit  I  It  is  enough!  Bnough,  Pilim6n!  You 
have  chastised  yourself  enough,  my  friend!  The  Lord 
seeth,  the  Lord  hath  weighed  and  measured.  He  demand- 
eth  not  complete  exhaustion.  Do  not  tempt  fate! " 


434         The  Nineteenth  Century 


"MoBtwoniixpfnliiuuil  I  am  going!  I  have  to  cm  ftr 
peoptel  Imtifltgor* 

"Whither  axe  you  going,  senseless  man?  Takeabiealh. 
At  kaat  heal  yam  old  wounds.   Take  your  eaae !  '* 

"  Father,  they  ire  healed!  Do  not  miijodgemel  I  am 
going — to  the  higher  realmsl " 

And  the  peasant  onoe  more  loolcs  entreatingly  into  grand- 
father's face,  and  it  seems  to  us  that  grandfather  Is  onable 
to  withstand  that  entreating  glance. 

And  grandfather  rises,  his  glance  becomes  stem  and  seri- 
ous, and  he  says  with  severity: 

"Filimou!  Have  pity  on  me  1  God  will  punish  me,  your 
councillor  and  abettor,  for  you!  " 

"Father,  do  not  deny  me!     I  will  knock  once  more: 

knock,  knock,  knock !    Maybe  the  Lord  will  grant  me  

Just  this  way,  lightly,  father:  knock,  knock,  knock!  '  Who 
is  there?'  they  will  ask.  *  'T  is  1/  says  I,  as  before. 
•*TisI.*" 

"  How  many  times  have  you  gone  to  knock  ?  " 

"  'T  is  the  eighth  time,  father.  'T  is  the  eighth  for  the 
higher  realms.  I  was  driven  off  six  times.  Six  times  they 
flayed  me  •* 

"Dear  Filimdn,  how  mnch  will  there  be  left  of  ycnf 
Take  pity  on  youndf.  Pity  me,  I  pray,  pity  my  aonL 
Why  shoold  I  idd  in  your  snfiiering  and  deatmction  ?  *' 

The  peasant  once  more  smiles  entreatingly  into  grand* 
father's  &oe,  and  suddenly  f slls  down  before  his  feet 

"  Most  worshipful  onel  Do  not  begrudge  me! " 

And  rifling  to  his  feet  jnst  as  swiftly,  he  nervooaly  and 
excitedly  flourishes  his  dry,  bony  hands*  lets  his  moose-like 
eyes  roam  timidly  in  the  eomen,  and  bq^ins  to  speak,  with- 
ont  cessation,  as  if  everything  is  to  oome  down  in  a  lain, 
everything  he  has  been  canying  hither  with  the  greatest  care 

for  days  and  miles         It  isone endless^  intent  mnmmr,  like 

the  distant  din  of  the  mill  water,  interrupted  by  some  sudden 
exclamations  that  make  our  diildish  hearts  tremble  with 
fesr. 

I  remember  how  that  intent  mnrmnr  of  the  bony  peasant 


Digitized  by  Google 


Nikolay  Nikolaevich  Zlatovratski  435 

made  my  head  feel  as  though  compressed  in  a  vise,  how 
terribly  my  blood  beat  in  ray  temples,  so  that  I  was  ready  to 
burst  out  into  sobs  and  run  away  from  the  cabin, — far,  far 
away  from  that  terrible  murmur,  in  spite  of  the  frost,  and  the 
deep  snowdrifts,  and  the  night  stonn  that  howtod  aimmd  our 
cabin.  And  if  tliat  dreadftil  mnxmnr  that  laciEAd  my  nerves 
had  lasted  one  mintite  longer,  I  should  have  come  oat  from 
under  my  wann  fhr,  and  should  have,  indeed,  run  away  as 
in  a  delirium.  But  the  "little  grand&ther"  stepped  up  to 
ns,  and  thoughtfully  stroked  our  heads.  Whydidhedoit? 
He»  evidently,  did  not  notice  it  himself.  Or,  maybe,  he 
nnoonscionflly  wanted  to  ask  our  consent  for  something. 
And,  interrupting  the  peasant,  he  said: 

"I^6nl  For  the  hwt  time,  absolntely.  I  fed  it,  it  is 
for  the  last  time.  Theresfaall  be  an  end !  It  can't  be  other- 
wise! There  must  be  an  end!  The  Lord  is  great  in  His 
long-suffering,  that  is  true,  but  also  terrible  in  His  anger!  ** 

The  peasant's  fiioe  beams  with  pleasure,  and  he  at  once 
breaks  off  his  murmur. 

"  What  shall  I  write  about      asks  grandfather. 

"  Father,  write  the  whole  truth.  Tell  straight  about 
everything.  Hide  nothing,  and  have  no  mercy  upon  us: 
crush  the  blood  of  Judas!  The  blood  of  Judas  has  begun  to 
oppress  the  people !  The  main  thing,  father,  tell  the  whole 
truth  about  everything." 

And  the  peasant  solemnly  raises  his  hands  to  heaven. 

"Write!  I  have  suffered,  and  I  can  suffer  more.  I  am 
afraid  of  no  new  prison,  and  of  no  new  chains.  Most  wor- 
shipful one,  have  no  mercy !    Write ! " 

And  for  a  long,  long  time,  through  the  speechless  quiet 
of  a  winter  night  and  through  our  disturbed  dreams,  we  see 
the  bony  little  peasant,  with  his  entreating  smile  and  a  cer- 
tain childishly  naive  decision  and  faith,  that  enlighten  his 
whole  little  face,  and  our  "  little  grandfather,"  who  has  sud- 
denly become  so  serious  and  stem  and  who  with  the  con- 
sdousneas  of  some  great  oUlgatioo  is  dowly  and  ddibenitely 
drawing  his  legible  semi-undsl  letters  on  the  paper. 

"Write,  write,  &therl  There  is  truthi  There  will  be 


Digitized  by  Google 


436         The  Nineteenth  Century 


trnthl "  we  again  hear  the  voice  of  the  bony  peasant,  and 
tlie  longer  he  watches  giandfatlier's  pen,  the  brighter,  it 
seems,  lus  iaoe  is  growing. 

We  are,  for  some  reason,  h^pj  for  the  pessant  and  fior 
grtndfatiier,  but  at  the  same  time  we  are  oppwsieid  Iqr  a 
mysterious  leeiing  of  terror  and  of  fear,  because  it  seems  to 
lis  that  our  stern  grandmother  will  soon  come  out  of  the 
living  rooms,  and  will  angrily  cast  her  snspidous  glance 
upon  all  of  ua  "useless"  and  "loafing"  people,  and  will 
cry: 

"Where  did  that  worthless  lot  come  from?  Whence 
does  God  carry  them  ?    Evidently  punishments  and  threats 

do  not  take  off  all  the  loafing  people   What  have 

you  found  in  each  other?  And  why  do  you  stick  to  each 
other,  like  flies  to  honey  ?  Well,  this  one  has  been  half- 
witted from  her  birth,"  grandmother  shakes  her  head  at  my 
mother,  "but  you,  old  man?  O  deacon!  Some  evil  will 
befall  you,  some  evil  will!  Make  a  note  of  my  worda.  You 
will  get  a  terrible  reward  for  all  these  people!  " 

But  the  "  loafing  people,"  who  at  first  are  really  g^eved 
and  intimidated  by  the  angry  words  of  my  stem  grand- 
mother, not  only  do  not  disappear,  but  grow  more  and  more. 

Vladlniir  Gnlnktidnovidi  Korol&ilKO.  (1853.-) 

Korol6nko  is  descended  on  his  £iitlie>*a  aide  from  the  Cossacks ; 
his  mother  wss  the  daughter  of  a  Polish  landed  proprietor.  He 
gmdoatcd  from  a  Real-Gymnssitun  in  the  Government  of  Zhitoo^, 

and  then,  under  untold  hardships,  stndied  in  the  Technological 
Institute  of  St.  Petersburg  and  Peter's  Academy  in  Moscow,  Here 
he  was  arrested  for  addressing  a  collective  petition  to  the  director  of 
the  school,  add  was  sent  to  the  Government  of  Vol6gda,  and  thence 
back  to  Krtestadt,  where  his  fiunOy  was  residing.  The  nest  year  he 
settled  in  St  Petersbnig  where  he  read  proof.  la  1879  lie  was  again 
arrested,  and  his  wanderings  through  all  parts  of  European  Russia 
and  Siberia  began.  His  first  stories  were  published  in  1879,  but  the 
first  to  attract  the  attention  of  the  public  was  his  Makdr's  Dream, 
which  deals  with  the  semi-savages  of  the  Siberian  Tayga.  The 
artislie  perfedioa  of  his  style,  the  hamioaimMBess  of  Us  diction, 
and  the  completeness  of  his  stories  are  rare  qualities  among  modem 
Russian  anthoca.  The  sadness  of  his  stories  is  not  of  the  hearts 


Digitized  by  Google 


Vladimir  Galakti6novich  Korol^nko  437 


rending,  cheerless  kind,  and  rather  invites  a  rereading.  Among  his 
Iwft  known  books  snd  sepsmte  sketebes  ore  7TU  BHud  MmUUm^ 
The  Forest  MmUes,  The  Old  SelMngert  In  Bad  Sotuiy. 

Many  of  Korol^nko's  stories  have  been  well  translated  into  Eng- 
lish :  The  Vagrant  and  Other  Tales  (containing  The  Old  Bell- 
ringer,  The  Forest  Roughs,  Easier  Night,  A  Saghalinian,  Sketches 
of  a  Siberian  Tourist) ,  translated  by  Mrs.  A.  Delano,  New  York  and 
Boston,  1887  (9d  ed.  1896) ;  TV  BHmd  Mmiiciam,  tfsaskted  by  lbs. 
A.  Ddsno^  iridi  sn  intradndion  by  Ow  Kennsa,  Boston,  1890 ;  tbe 
same,  translated  by  W.  Westall  and  S.  Stepniak  (Lsteroational 
Series,  No.  100),  New  York,  1890  (2d  ed.  1893) ;  the  same  (Seaside 
Library,  No.  1515),  New  York,  1890;  Makar's  Dream,  in  Cosmo- 
politan, vol.  vi. ;  A  Queer  Cirl^  in  Free  Russia,  vol.  iL,  Nos.  9  and 
xOtUaAIniktBiamine  Year,  y6L  z.,  Na  a;  A  Saghalien  Co»vid^ 
BKodooyni  libctry);  In  Tk/o  Moods  (and  In  Bad  Soeielji^  tosns- 
lated  by  S.  Stepniak  and  W.  Westall  (Lovell's  International  Series, 
No.  178),  New  York,  1891,  and  (Seaside  Library,  No.  1943)  New 
York,  1892  ;  The  Old  Bell-ringer,  translated  by  M.  P.  de  Schatokhin, 
in  The  Anglo-Russian  Literary  Society,  No.  8 ;  Ah  luvoluHiafy 
JUmdenft  tisnslsted  by  Jessie  Ifsckensie^  In  Gsntlaian's  Msgssine^ 
18^ 

THE  OJUD  BELL-RINGER 

A  SPRING  IDYLL 

It  grows  dark.  Over  the  black,  crenelated  line  of  the 
dense  forest  stands  the  full  moon;  it  stands,  but  does  not 

shine          A  small  settlement  that  nestles  over  the  distant 

brook,  in  the  pine  forest,  is  merged  in  that  peculiar  twilight, 
so  common  to  spring  nights,  when  the  moon  stands  pensively 
over  the  horizon,  shrouded  by  a  smoky  veil.  The  mist,  ris- 
ing from  the  earth,  thickens  the  long  shadows  of  the  woods 

and  covers  the  open  places  with  a  silvery  azure  glamour  

All  is  quiet,  penave,  melancholy. 

The  village  slumbers  quietly. 

The  humble  cabins  barely  stand  out  in  their  dark  con- 
tours; here  and  there  glimmer  fires;  now  and  then  a  gate 
creaks,  a  watchful  dog  barks,  and  all  is  silent  again.  At 
times  there  issue  from  the  dark  mass  of  the  softly  rustling 
forest  the  figures  of  pedestrians,  there  passes  by  a  rider, 
creaks  a  vehicle.   These  are  the  inhabitants  of  lonely  forest 


438 


The  Nineteenth  Centiuy 


luunkts  who  are  going  to  fhdr  chuch  to  meet  the  spring 
holiday. 

The  chmch  stands  on  a  numnd,  in  the  centre  of  the  tU- 
hige.  Its  windows  are  bright  with  lights.  The  tall,  murky, 
old  bdfry  is  lost  with  its  spire  in  the  azore. 

The  steps  of  the  staircase  are  creaking        The  old  bell- 

ringer  Mikhy^ich  is  ascending  the  bell  tower,  and  soon  his 
little  lantern  wHl  be  suspended  in  nild-air»  like  a  shooting 

star  in  space  

It  is  hard  for  the  old  man  to  climb  the  steep  staircase. 
His  old  legs  do  not  serve  him  well,  he  is  worn  out,  and  hin 

eyes  see  but  dimly          'T  is  time,  it  has  long  been  time, 

that  the  old  man  ^ould  take  his  rest,  but  God  does  not  send 
him  death.  He  has  buried  his  sons,  has  buried  his  grand- 
children, has  accompanied  old  men  to  their  celestial  dwell- 
ing, has  accompanied  young  men,  but  he  is  still  alive.    'T  is 

hard   Many  is  the  time  he  has  met  the  spring  holiday, 

and  he  has  lost  the  count  of  how  often  he  has  waited  for  the 
appointed  time  on  that  very  bell  tower.   And  there  God  has 

again  decreed  

The  old  man  walks  to  the  opening  in  the  tower  and  leans 
over  the  banister.  Below,  around  the  church,  the  graves  of 
the  village  cemetery  dot  the  darkne^;  the  old  crosses  look 
as  though  they  protected  them  with  their  outstretched  arms. 

Here  and  there  leafless  birches  bend  over  them   From 

there,  below,  is  wafted  to  Mikhy^ich  the  aromatic  odour  of 
young  buds  and  reminds  him  of  the  melancholy  silence  of  the 

eternal  sleep  

What  will  become  of  him  in  a  year  ?  Will  he  again  dimb 
to  this  top,  under  the  brass  bell,  in  order  to  awaken  light- 
Sleeping  night  by  its  metallic  din,  or  will  he  lie  down  there* 
In  the  dark  comer  of  the  cemeteiy»  under  a  cross?  Ood 

knows         He  is  prepared:  In  the  meanwhile  may  Ood 

grant  him  to  meet  the  holiday  once  more.  "  Oloiy  to  Thee^ 
Lofdl "  his  old  lips  mutter  the  customary  fionntda  and  he 
looks  upwards*  at  the  starred  heaven  that  glows  with  a  mil- 
lion lights,  and  he  makes  the  sign  of  the  cross  

Mikhy^ich,  oh,  Hikhyadi!"  calls  out  to  him  from  be- 


« 


Digitized  by  Google 


Vladimir  Galakti6novich  Korol^nko  439 


low  the  tremttlous  voice  of  an  old  tmui.  Tlie  aged  aeKtoa 
looks  up  at  the  belfry,  shades  his  misteady  and  teaifhl  cgres 
with  his  open  hand,  but  he  does  not  see  lifikhyfich. 

"  What  do  yon  want?  Here  I  am! "  answeis  fhe  bell- 
ringer,  as  he  leans  over  the  banister.  "Can't  yon  see 
me?" 

*'Ko,Icsn*t.  Say,  is  it  not  time  to  ling?  What  do  you 
think?" 

Both  look  at  the  stars.  Thoosands  of  God's  fires  twinkle 
down  to  them  &om  on  high.   The  fiery  *'  Wain  "  has  risen 

way  above  them         Mikhy6ich  is  making  his  calcnlation. 

"  No,  not  yet,  wait  a  bit          I  know  when  *' 

He  does  know.  He  needa  no  watch:  God's  stars  will  tell 
him  when  the  time  has  come.  Heaven  and  earth,  and  the 
white  cloud  that  gently  swims  in  the  azure,  and  the  murky 
forest  that  indistinctly  whispers  below,  and  the  plash  of  the 
brook  lost  in  the  darkness, — all  that  is  familiar  to  him,  all 

that  is  his  own         Not  in  vain  has  he  passed  his  whole 

life  here  

The  distant  past  arises  before  him          He  recollects  how 

he  for  the  first  time  climbed  this  bell  tower  with  his  father. 
Lord,  how  long  ago  that  is — and  yet  how  recent!  He 
sees  himself  a  blonde  boy;  his  eyes  are  aflame;  the  wind — 
not  the  wind  that  raises  the  dust  in  the  streets,  but  some 
special  kind  of  wind  that  flaps  its  noiseless  wings  way  above 

the  earth — dishevels  his  hair          Below,  way,  way  down, 

walk  tiny  people,  and  the  huts  of  the  village  are  tiny  too, 
and  the  forest  has  receded,  and  the  round  clearing  in  which 
the  village  is  ^tuated  looks  so  enormous,  so  endless  

"  Oh,  there  it  is,  all  of  it  there!  "  the  grey -haired  old  man 
amiles  as  he  looks  down  at  the  small  clearing. 

That  is  the  way  with  life.  In  your  youth  you  can't  see 
the  end  of  it,  and  there  itis,allofit,asifinthe  palm  of 
yonr  hand,  firam  the  beginning  to  that  very  little  grave  that 
he  has  taken  a  fimcy  to  for  himself  in  tiie  comer  of  the 
cemetery.  Well,  glory  to  Thee,  Lord!  't  is  time  for  rest 
The  hard  road  hss  been  passed  honounbly,  and  the  damp 
earth  is  his  mother         Soon,  yes,  very  soon!  


440         The  Nineteenth  Century 


But,  it  mtift  be  titaet  He  looks  once  more  el  the  stais. 
rifles^  takes  off  his  cap,  makes  the  sign  of  the  crass,  grasps 
the  bdl  rapes  A  minute  later  the  night  air  ravecbeiates 
from  the  hollow  strake— another,  a  third,  a  fourth — one  after 
the  other,  filling  the  light-sleeping  night  of  the  holiday's 
eve,  there  flow  the  mighty,  drawn-out  sonorous  singing 

The  tinging  stops.  In  the  church  begins  the  service. 
In  fonner  yesjs  Mikhy^b  used  to  go  down  the  staircase 
and  stand  in  the  coiner,  at  the  door,  in  order  to  pray  and 
hear  the  singing.  But  this  time  he  stays  in  his  belfry.  It 
is  hard  for  him  to  dimb  the  stairs,  and  besides,  he  feels 
rather  tired.  He  seats  himself  on  the  bench  and,  hearing 
the  dying  din  of  the  rocking  brass,  falls  into  deep  musing. 
About  what?  He  is  hardly  able  to  answer  that  himself. 
The  tower  is  dimly  illumined  by  the  lantern.  The  dull- 
sounding  bells  are  merged  in  darkness;  below,  from  the 
church,  the  singing  reaches  him  from  time  to  time  as  a  weak 
murmur,  and  the  night  wind  agitates  the  ropes  that  are 
attached  to  the  iron  hearts  of  the  bells. 

The  old  man  bends  on  his  breast  his  grey  head  that  is 
disturbed  by  disconnected  pictures.  "  They  are  singing  the 
troparion!"  he  thinks  to  himself,  and  sees  himself  in  the 
church.  In  the  chancel  dozens  of  children's  voices  flow 
together;  the  aged  priest,  Father  Nadm  of  blessed  memory, 
reads  the  litany  with  a  quivering  voice;  hundreds  of  peas- 
ants' heads  bow  down  and  rise  again,  like  the  ripe  ears  when 
the  wind  blows  through  them.  The  peasants  make  the  sign 
of  the  cross.  They  are  all  familiar  faces,  and  all  of  them 
now  dead.  There  is  the  stern  face  of  his  father;  there  his 
elder  brother  is  with  fervour  making  the  sign  of  the  cross, 
and  sighing,  as  he  is  stsnding  t>y  the  side  of  his  father. 
There  he  is  himself,  abloom  with  health  and  strength, 
foil  of  unconscious  hope  of  fiitnre  happiness  and  joys  of 
life   Where  is  that  happiness  ?  TbA  old  man's  mem- 
ory flaahes  like  a  djring  flame  and  a  bright  beam,  glid- 
ing through  his  consciousness,  for  a  moment  illumines  all 
the  nooks  of  his  past  life.  He  sees  work  above  endtuaaoe^ 


Digitized  by  Google 


Vladimir  Galakti6novich  Korolenko  44  ^ 


sorrow,  care.  Where  is  that  happiness?  A  hard  lot  will 
make  furrows  on  his  young  brow,  will  bend  his  powerful 
spine,  will  teach  him  to  sigh,  like  his  elder  brother. 

There,  at  the  left,  among  the  village  women,  stands  his 
yotmg  wife,  modestly  bending  her  head.  She  has  been  a 
good  woman,  may  she  come  to  the  kingdom  of  heaven! 
She  has  suffered  so  much,  the  dear  woman.  Want  and 
work,  and  a  woman's  inevitable  sorrow  will  dry  up  her 
beauty;  her  eyes  will  grow  dim,  and  an  expression  of  an 
eternal,  dnU  ter  of  sudden  calamities  will  take  the  place  of 
ierenity  in  her  fiice.  Yes,  where  Is  her  happtness  ?  One 
mm  Is  left  to  them,  their  hope  and  joy,  and  homan  injustice 
has  overpowered  him. 

There  is  also  that  rich  fiend;  he  makes  low  obeisances, 
asking  forgiveness  lor  the  bloody  tears  of  orphans.  He  fer- 
vently crosses  himself  and  falls  upon  his  knees,  and  strikes 
his  brow  against  the  floor.  And  Mikhy^ch*s  heart  boils 
furiously,  and  the  dusky  iaoes  of  the  images  look  down  from 
the  walls  upon  hmnan  misery  and  human  injustice. 

All  that  is  past,  all  that  is  behind  him.  Now  his  whole 
world  is  here  in  the  dark  tower,  where  the  wind  moans  in 
the  night  and  swings  the  bell-ropes.  "  God  be  your  judge, 
Ood  be  your  judge!"  mutters  the  old  man  and  bends  his 
grey  head,  and  tears  gently  roll  down  the  old  cheeks  of  the 
bell-ringer. 

"  Mikhy^ich,  oh,  Mikhytichl  Oh  there,  have  you  fallen 
asleep  ?  "  they  shout  below. 

"  What  ?  "  the  old  man  cries  out  and  jumps  to  his  feet. 
' '  Lord !   Have  I  really  fallen  asleep  ?  Never  before  have  I 

so  disgraced  myself!  " 

Mikhy^ich  hastens  to  lay  his  hands  on  the  ropes.  Below 
him  the  peasant  crowd  moves  about  like  an  ant-hill ;  banners 
wave  in  the  air  and  glimmer  with  their  gilt  brocade.  The 
procession  of  the  cross  has  made  the  round  of  the  church, 
and  the  joyous  call  reaches  Mikhy Mich's  ears: 

"  Christ  is  risen  from  the  dead! " 

And  this  call  stirs  a  wave  in  the  old  man's  heart.  It 
seems  to  him  that  the  flames  of  the  wax  tapers  have  burnt 


442         The  Nineteenth  Centuiy 


up  mote  brightly  in  tlie  darktic«>  and  tlie  crowd  is  mm 
agitated,  and  the  faannezs  flutter,  and  the  wakened  wind 
•eixes  the  waves  of  sound  and  with  broad  pinions  carries  them 
up,  to  run  together  with  the  loud,  solemn  tones  of  the  bells. 

Old  Mikhy^ich  rings  as  he  has  never  rung  before. 

It  seems  ss  though  the  old  man's  full  heart  has  passed 
into  the  dead  brass,  and  the  tones  sing  and  waver,  laugh 
and  weep^  and  interweaving  in  a  mighty  stream  are  borne 
upwards,  to  the  starry  heaven.  And  the  stars  flash  mote 
brightly  and  bum,  and  the  tones  tremble  and  pour  down 
and  fall  to  the  earth  with  loving  grace. 

A  deep  bass  cries  out  loud  in  mighty  tones  that  announces 
to  heaven  and  earth :  ' '  Christ  is  risen ! ' ' 

And  two  tenors,  trembling  with  the  alternate  beats  of  their 
iron  hearts,  respond  merrily  and  daogoroualy:  "  Christ  is 
risen! " 

And  two  soft  sopranos,  seemingly  hastening  not  to  be 
behindhand,  push  themselves  in  between  the  larger  ones, 
and  joyfully,  like  little  children,  sing  out  rapidly:  "  Christ 
is  risen! " 

And  it  seems  as  though  the  old  tower  were  trembling 
and  shaking,  and  as  though  the  wind  that  blows  around  the 
face  of  the  bell-ringer  flapped  its  mighty  pinions  and  re- 
peated: *'  Christ  is  risen!  " 

The  old  heart  forgets  life  that  is  full  of  cares  and  injury. 
The  old  bell-ringer  forgets  that  his  life  is  confined  to  the 
grim  narrow  space  in  the  bell-tower,  that  he  is  alone  in  the 
world,  like  a  lonely  trunk  that  the  storms  have  broken.  He 
hears  those  singing  and  weeping  sounds  that  rise  to  the 
heaven  on  high  and  iall  down  to  poor  earth,  and  it  seems  to 
him  that  he  is  surrounded  by  his  sons  and  grandchildren, 
that  he  hears  their  joyful  voices;  the  voices  of  the  6Id  and 
jroung  are  combined  into  a  chorus,  and  they  sing  to  him  of 
happiness  and  joy,  which  he  has  not  known  in  his  life.  The 
old  bell-ringer  jerks  the  ropes,  tears  roll  down  his  face,  and 
his  heart  beats  violently  with  the  illusion  of  happiness^ 

Down  below  people  listen  and  say  to  each  other  that  never 
before  has  dd  Mikhy^ch  rung  the  bdls  so  wonderfully* 


Digitized  by  Google 


Vsivplod  Mikh&ylovich  Garshin  443 


Suddenly  the  great  bell  utters  an  nnoertaln  tone,  and 
grows  dnmb.  Tlie  disturbed  smaller  bells  ring  out  with  an 
unfinished  trill,  cutting  it  short,  as  if  to  listen  to  the  sad 
hollow  note  which  trembles  and  flows  snd  weeps,  gradually 
dying  upon  the  air.  The  dd  bdl-ringer  drops  down  upon 
the  bench  in  utter  exhaustion,  and  two  last  tears  softly  roll 
over  his  pale  cheeks  

"Ho  there,  send  up  a  change;  the  old  bcU-ringer  has  done 
his  ringing  ^" 

Vs^TOlod  Iffikh&ylavich  Garshfn.  (1855-1888.) 

Garshfn  was  born  in  the  Government  of  Ekaterinosldv,  where  hiB 
father  was  a  small  landed  proprietor.  In  bis  early  childhood  he 
travelled  a  great  deal  oner  Rtunia,  as  hit  father  was  in  the  military 
uanHct.  He  was  placed  in  the  Gymnasittm  at  St.  PetoBtNU]^  and 
there  he  excelled  as  a  student^  but  in  1872  he  had  the  first  attacks  of 
insanity  which  afterwards  returned  periodically  and  finally  caused 
bim  to  commit  suicide  by  throwing  himself  headlong  from  an  upper 
story.  He  took  part  in  the  Tnrko-Russian  War  as  a  common  soldier, 
and  while  in  the  fidd  compoaed  bit  lint  atocy,  Fbmrlk^t  in  wUch 
lie  described  the  aufiering  of  a  wounded  comrade  of  his.  Upon  his 
retnm  lie  wrote,  in  his  lucid  intervals,  a  series  of  wonderfully 
realistic  stories,  many  of  which  deal  with  painful  situations.  Among 
his  best  are  The  Coward,  The  Artists^  The  Red  Flower^  AtiaUa 
Prinups^  and  ThcU  Which  Was  Not, 

In  Bos^iah  tianalatioo  are:  FourPa^^  tfandated  by  N.  H.  Dole, 
in  Foet  Lore,  vol.  iii. ;  Mad  Love,  or.  An  ArtisPs  Dream,  London, 
1890^  and  •Startcf^  tranalated  bj  B.  L.  Vojrnlcb,  London,  1893. 

THAT  WHICH  WAS  NOT 

One  beautiful  June  day— it  was  beautiful  because  it  wss 
twenty-eight  degrees  R^umur— one  beautiful  June  day  it 
was  warm  everywhere,  but  it  was  even  warmer  in  the  dear* 
ing  in  the  garden,  where  stood  some  rides  of  newly  mown 
hay,  because  the  plsoe  was  protected  from  the  wind  by  a 
thick,  impenetrable,  cherry  grove.  Nearly  everything  was 
asleep:  people  had  had  thdr  fill  and  were  devoting  them- 
selves to  post-prandial  lateral  occupations;  the  birds  were 


Digitized  by  Google 


444         The  Nineteenth  Century 


silent;  and  even  many  insects  had  aoqght  shelter  from  the 

heat. 

That  was  even  moie  true  el  the  domestic  animals:  the 

cattle  took  refuge  tinder  some  noi;  the  dog  lay  in  a  hole 
that  he  had  dug  out  under  the  bam  and,  with  eyes  half  open, 
breathed  intermittently,  while  sticking  out  his  tongue  for 
almost  more  than  a  foot;  at  times  he  so  yawned,  evidently 
from  ennui  sup)erinduced  by  the  deadly  heat,  that  one  could 
hear  a  falsetto  whine;  the  pigs,  mother  and  her  thirteen 
young  ones,  went  down  to  the  river  bank  and  there  lay  down 
in  the  black,  thick  mud  whence  issued  only  their  panting 
and  snoring  pig  coins  with  two  holes  in  them,  their  oblong, 
mud-washed  spines,  and  enormous  pendent  ears.  Only  the 
hens  were  not  afraid  of  the  heat  and  managed  to  kill  time 
by  scratching  up  the  dry  earth  opposite  the  kitchen  entry, 
though  they  knew  full  well  that  there  was  not  a  kernel  to 
be  found  there.  The  cock,  evidently,  was  not  feeling  very 
well,  for  now  and  then  he  assumed  a  stupid  attitude  and 
cried  amain:  "  What  a  scandal! " 

There,  we  have  walked  away  from  the  clearing  where  it 
was  wanner  than  elsewhere,and  yet  a  whole  wakeful  company 
was  sitting  there.  That  is,  they  were  not  all  sitting.  For 
example,  the  old  bay,  that  was  rummaging  a  hayrick  at 
the  danger  of  feeling  the  whip  of  coachman  Ant6n,  oould 
not  sit  at  all,  being  a  horse;  ^e  caterirfUar  was  not  sitting 
either,  but  rather  lying  on  its  belly;  bnt  we  need  not  be  so 
particnlar  about  words.  A  small  but  very  serious  com- 
pany was  gathered  under  a  cheny  tree:  a  snailt  a  dung 
beetle,  a  lizard,  and  the  above-mentioned  cateipiUar;  then 
a  grasshopper  hopped  up  to  them.  Nearby  stood  the  old 
bay,  listening  to  their  conversation  with  one  of  his  bay  ean^ 
on  the  inside  of  which  could  be  seen  dark  grey  hairs.  On 
the  bay  sat  two  flies. 

The  company  discussed  things  politdy,  but  with  sufficient 
animation,  and,  as  is  proper  in  such  cases,  nobody  agreed 
with  his  neighbour,  for  they  all  valued  the  independence 
of  their  opinions  and  characters. 

"  In  my  opinion,"  said  the  Dung  Beetle,   a  decent  animal 


Vsivoiod  Mikh&yiovich  Garshin  445 


must  above  all  caie  for  his  posterity.  Ufe  is  a  labour  for 
the  next  generation.  He  who  ootudentionflly  fulfils  the 
obligaticMis  which  Nature  imposes  upon  him  stands  on  a 
firm  foundation.  He  knows  what  he  has  to  do^  and  no 
matter  what  may  happen,  he  is  not  responsible.  Look  at 
me:  who  works  more  than  I  ?  Who  for  whole  days  at  a 
time  rolls  soch  a  heavy  ball,  a  ball  that  I  have  made  with 
great  art  ont  ol  dung,  with  the  great  purpose  in  view  of 
giving  the  opportunity  to  new  dung  beetles  like  myself  to 
grow  up  ?  But  then,  I  do  not  think  there  is  anybody  who 
has  such  a  calm  conscience,  or  could  with  such  a  pure  heart 
say:  '  Yes,  I  have  done  all  I  can  and  all  I  ought  to  do,*  as 
I  will  say  when  these  new  dung  beetles  will  see  daylight. 
That 's  what  I  call  labour!  " 

'*  Don't  mention  your  labour,  friend! "  said  an  Ant  that 
during  the  Dung  Beetle's  speech  had  dragged  up  an  immense 
piece  of  a  dry  stalk.  He  stopped  for  a  moment,  sat  down 
on  his  four  hind  legs,  and  with  his  two  front  legs  wiped  oflF 
the  sweat  from  his  tired-out  face.  "  I  work  myself,  and 
much  harder  than  you!  But  you  work  for  yourself,  or, 
what  is  the  same,  for  your  baby  beetles;  not  everybody  is 
so  fortunate  as  that.  Just  try  dragging  logs  for  the  com- 
monwealth's stores,  as  I  do!  I  do  not  know  myself  what  it 
is  that  makes  me  work  so  hard,  even  in  such  hot  weather. 
Nobody  will  say  '  thanks! '  to  me  for  it  We,  unlucky  work- 
ing ants,  all  work,  and  what  good  do  we  get  out  of  it  ?  It 's 
just  our  fate!" 

"  You,  Dung  Beetle,  look  at  life  too  dryly,  and  you,  Ant, 
too  i^oomily,"  protested  the  Grasshopper.  "  No^  Beetle,  I 
do  like  to  chirrup  and  leap  about  a  little,  and,  really,  I  have 
no  scruples  about  Itl  BesideSi  you  have  not  toudied  the 
question  that  Madam  Lizard  has  put  Shea^ked:  'What  is 
the  world?'  and  you  are  talldt^  about  your  dung  ball. 
Why,  that  is  not  even  decent  The  world  is,  in  my  opinion, 
a  very  good  thing,  if  for  nothing  else,  because  we  find  in  it 
juicy  grass,  the  sun,  and  the  breeze.  And  it  is  so  big! 
Living  under  these  trees,  you  can't  have  the  slightest  con- 
ception how  big  it  is.  When  I  am  in  the  field,  I  sometimes 


Digitized  by  Google 


446         The  Nineteenth  Century 


jump  up  as  high  as  I  can,  and  I  aaraxe  yon  I  readi  an  enor- 
mous height,   laeefirom  way  up  there  that  there  is  no  end 

to  the  world." 

"  That 's  right,"  thoughtfully  assented  the  Bay.  "  But 
all  the  same  none  of  you  will  ever  see  one  hundredth  part  of 
what  I  have  seen  in  my  lifetime.  What  a  pity,  you  can't 
understand  what  a  verst  is!  A  verst  from  here  is  the  village 
Lupdrevka:  I  go  there  every  day  with  a  barrel  for  water. 
But  they  never  feed  me  there.  On  the  other  side  is  Eu- 
movka  and  Kislydkovka;  in  the  latter  there  is  a  church  with 
a  belfry.  And  then  comes  Svydto-Tr6itskoe,  and  then  Bo- 
goydvlensk.  In  Bogoydvlensk  they  always  give  me  some 
hay,  but  the  hay  is  not  good  there.  And  then  there  is 
Nikoldevsk, — that 's  a  town,  twenty-eight  versts  from  here, 
— there  the  hay  is  better,  and  I  get  oats  there;  but  I  do 
not  like  to  go  to  Nikoldevsk:  our  master  generally  drives 
there,  and  he  tells  the  coachman  to  drive  fast,  and  the 
coachman  lays  the  whip  on  us  dreadfully.  And  there  are 
also  Aleks4ndrovka,  Byel6zerka,  Kherson, — that 's  a  town 
too  But  how  can  you  grasp  that  all!  That  is  the 
world ;  I  must  say,  not  the  whole  world,  but  yet  a  consider- 
able part  of  it.'* 

The  Bay  grew  silent,  but  his  lower  lip  was  quivering  as  if 
wlilspering  aomefhing.  That  was  bom  oM  age:  lie  was 
seventeen  years  dd,  and  for  a  horse  that  is  as  mncfa  as 
seventy-seven  for  a  nan* 

"  I  do  not  nnderstand  your  wise  equine  words,  and,  I  con- 
ftss,  I  am  not  trpng  tocatdi  theirmeanlng,"  said  the  SnaiL 
"  All  I  want  is  a  bcudodc:  it  is  now  four  days  I  have  been 
cnwling  over  one,  and  it  is  not  yet  all  ended.  Bqrood 
this  bnidock  there  is  another  bordodc,  and  in  that  boxdock 
there  is,  no  donbt,  another  snail.  There  yon  have  it  all. 
There  is  no  need  in  leaping  abont,— that 's  all  empty  talk 
and  bosh;  stay  where  you  are,  and  eat  the  leaf  on  which 
yon  are  sitting.  If  it  were  not  for  my  lasbess^  I  should 
have  long  ago  crawled  away  from  you  and  all  yoor  talk:  it 
gives  me  only  a  headache,  that 's  all." 

Now,  I  beg  yonr  pardon,  I  don't  see  why  ?.'*  broke  in 


Digitized  by  Google 


Vs^volod  Mikh&ylovich  Garshin  447 


Hnt  OfUBhopper.  "  It  k  quite  enjojyable  to  chirrup,  particu- 
larly aboat  pleaaant  matters,  like  infinity  and  ao  forth.  Of 
ootuae,  theie  are  practical  natures  who  only  think  of  filling 
tlieir  bellies,  like  you,  or  that  charming  Caterpillar—^" 

**  Oh,  no,lea¥emea]ooe,  I  pray,  leave  me  alone,  don't  touch 
me! "  ezdahned  the  Caterpillar  pitifully.  "  I  am  doing  it 
all  for  the  future  lift^  only  for  the  foture  life." 

"Whatfbtnrelifeareyontalking  about?"  asked  the  Bay. 

*'  Don't  you  know  that  after  death  I  shall  be  turned  into 
a  butterfly  with  colored  wings  ?  " 

The  Bay,  the  lizard,  and  the  Snail  did  not  know  it,  but  the 
insects  had  some  notion  of  it  And  they  all  kept  silent  for 
a  moment,  for  none  of  them  could  say  anjrthing  sensible 
about  the  future  life. 

We  ought  to  bow  respectfully  to  solid  convictions," 
chirruped  the  Grasshopper.  Is  there  nobody  else  who 
wants  to  say  anything?  Maybe  you  ?  "  he  turned  to  the  Flies. 

And  the  older  one  answered : 

**  We  can't  complain.  We  have  just  come  out  of  the 
rooms;  the  lady  had  put  out  some  fresh  jam  in  some  dishes, 
and  we  crawled  in  under  the  covers,  and  had  lots  to  eat. 
We  are  satisfied.  Dear  mama  stuck  fast  in  the  jam,  but 
what  's  to  be  done  ?  She  has  lived  long  enough  in  this 
world.    But  we  are  satisfied." 

**  Gentlemen,"  said  the  Lizard,  "  I  think  that  you  are  all 
absolutely  right!    But,  on  the  other  hand  " 

The  Lizard  did  not  finish  saying  what  there  was  on  the 
other  hand,  because  she  felt  that  something  was  jamming 
her  tail  to  the  ground. 

It  was  coachman  Ant6n  who  had  just  awakened  and  had 
come  to  fetch  the  Bay.  He  accidentally  stepped  with  his 
monstrous  boot  on  the  whole  company  and  smashed  it. 
Only  the  flies  flew  away  to  lick  off  tiidr  dead,  sugared 
mama,  and  the  Lizard  got  away  with  part  of  her  taiL  Ant&a 
took  the  Bay  by  the  fordode  and  led  him  out  of  the  garden 
to  hitch  him  to  the  barrel,  in  order  to  fetch  some  water,  and 
he  kept  saying:  "Get  up  there,  ahagtaill"  to  which  the 
Bay  answered  only  with  a  lisp. 


Digitized  by  Gopgle 


44^         The  Nineteenth  Century 


The  Lizaxd  was  left  without  a  tail.  'T  is  true,  after  a 
time  it  grew  out  again,  but  it  always  remained  rather 
stumpy  and  blackish.  When  the  Lizard  was  asked  how  she 
came  to  injure  her  tail  in  that  way,  she  modestly  answered: 

"  They  tore  it  off,  because  X  had  made  up  my  mind  to  ex- 
press my  convictions." 

And  she  was  absolately  right. 

Xgn4ti  Nikol&eTich  Pot4peiika  (Z856-.) 

Potipcnko  was  born  in  the  Government  of  Kherson,  where  hit 
father  was  a  priest.  He  himself  was  edncated  for  the  priesthood  in 
KbdrsoD  and  Odessa,  but  be  left  the  Seminary  for  the  university, 
and  the  nnivenity  again  for  the  Conaervatory  of  Mnsic,  from  which 
ht  ftiudly  gndnated  in  ifaigiag.  Fotipenko  wrote  his  tot  sketch  In 
1881,  and  became  known  as  an  author  through  hit  novel,  /fafy  Art, 
in  which  he  depicted  the  literary  Bohemia  of  St.  Petersburg.  His 
reputation  was  still  more  confirmed  by  his  later  novels.  In  Active 
ServUe^  Common  Sense,  and  //is  ExuUencys  Secretary.  His  pro- 
dnctiona  are  characteriied  by  a  healthy  optimiam  and  an  ezqniaite 
hnmoor,  which  make  than  wy  ^icaiant  leading. 

Fotipenko  has  been  translated  into  English  by  W.  Ganasen,  A 
Russian  /^est  (Sunshine  Series,  No.  86,  and  Pseudonym  Library, 
No.  7),  London,  1891  ;  The  GeneraCs  Daughter  (Sunshine  Series, 
No.  126,  extra),  London  and  New  York,  1893 ;  Father  of  Six,  also 
Oceasiomai  Holiday  (Unknown  library,  No.  a6),  London,  1893 ;  Tke 
Oine  ^  Tltte»i,iA  Mtmoriats  ^  a  Short  Life,  London,  1895. 

A  THOUSAND  TAI3NTS 

Ye8»  my  friend,  I  have  a  great  mass  of  taleDts»  only  no- 
thing sensible  oomes  of  them.  Yes»  that  *•  so.  That  is 

quite  correct?  *' 

*'  WeU,  well,  don't  say  that! " 

"  Not  say  it?    Why,  but  I  tell  yon,  it  is  the  real 

truth!"  

"But  how?   And  why?" 

"  Why  ?  That  is  the  question         That  is»  xeally,  the 

question! " 

The  man  who  was  possessed  of  such  an  immense  mass  of 
talents  was  sitting  in  a  soft  armchair,  leaning  with  the  whole 


Digitized  by  Google 


Ign&ti  NikoUevich  Potiipenko  449 


weight  of  his  body  against  its  broad,  inclined  back.  He  had 
a  remarkably  happy  exterior.  He  was  neither  handsome^ 
nor  stately,  nor  dcgant,  nor  brilliant,— no,  his  exterior  can- 
not be  defined  by  any  other  word  than  "  happy."  There 
weie  even  half  a  dozen  jdts  on  his  f aoe,-^traoes  of  former 
smallpox;  his  nose,  which  had  at  first  been  straight  and 
even,  unexpectedly  began  to  turn  up  at  the  point;  there  was 
not  the  slightest  order  in  his  russet  beard  and  moostaches; 
bis  brow  looked  too  large;  and  he  was  all  as  white  as  milk, 
while  his  fiaoe  had  a  shade  of  copper.  At  last,  his  common, 
grey  eyes  were  not  out  of  the  ordinary,  bnt  eversrthing 
taken  together,  his  whole  face,  breathed  a  serene,  frank 
sincerity.  There  are  such  faces:  you  look  at  them,  and  you 
want  to  be  open  with  them,  and  to  confide  some  secret,  to 
unburden  your  heart  to  them.  He  was  awkwardly  put  to- 
gether, his  movements  were  halting,  and  his  voice  was  a  little 
shrill,  but  even  thus  he  was  sympathetic.  In  short,  he  had 
a  happy  exterior.    His  name  was  Nikoldy  Petr6vich  Bobr6v. 

His  interlocutor  was  simply  a  respectable  gentleman,  an 
attorney  in  important  civil  cases,  the  owner  of  large  apart- 
ments, among  which  was  a  study,  in  which  they  were  seated, 
with  soft,  heavy  furniture  and  with  bookshelves  filled  with 
a  mass  of  learned  and  instructive  books.  That  was  Kur- 
azhev,  Sergy^y  Aleksy^evich,  a  well-known  and  esteemed 
person  in  the  city.  He  had  but  lately  made  Bobr6v's 
acquaintance,  having  met  him  two  or  three  times,  but  he 
was  already  in  the  power  of  his  exterior.  Bobidv  had  this 
day  called  upon  him  for  the  first  time,  and  a  convemtion 
ensued.  Kurdzhev  outside  of  his  practice  busied  himself 
with  *'  sodal  questions,"  as  he  called  them,  and  that  meant 
that  he  was  a  live,  responsive  man  who  was  interested  in 
life  and  people,  and  who  loved  to  psjrchologise,"  that  is, 
to  rummage  in  the  human  soul. 

"I'Utdlyouwhy,— because  I  am  a  Russian!  Yea,  that's 
it,"  said  Bobr6v,  this  time  not  awaiting  his  host's  question. 

''That  is  incomprehensiUe.  You  must  make  yoursdf 
dear!"  remarked  the  host,  looking  at  him  with  the  curi- 
osity of  a  professional  pqrdudogiat,  as  if  he  were  ready  to 

VOL.  II.— 39. 


450         The  Nineteenth  Century 


take  tbe  knife,  In  order  to  cat  open  his  breart,  and  take  n 

look  inside  kla  aooL 

"  Make  myadf  dear  ?  Well,  I  can  make  myself  dear.  I 
can  and  I  am  prepared  to  make  myadf  dear,  only  I  diatt 

have  to  go  way  back  '  * 

"  That  is  all  right.   I  am  ready  to  follow  yon  into  the 

depths  of  time." 

"  Well,  it  is  not  exacUy  the  depths  of  time,  bat  I  shall 
have  to  mention  my  deceased  progenitor,  and  maybe  my 

grandmother  too.'* 

"Or  your  great-grandfather,  if  you  want  to.  Youhave 
interested  me  with  your  strange  statement  ** 

"  My  statement  is  not  so  strange,  if  you  look  at  it  closely. 
I  afiBrm  that  Russians  suffer  from  their  talented  natures. 
Yes,  that  's  it.  It  ought  not  to  be  so.  They  always  are 
possessed  of  a  huge  number  of  talents,  and  that  is  why  they 
never  amount  to  anything.    Yes,  I  beg  your  pardon,  you 

will  o>ntradict  me  later,  but  now  let  me          I  have  struck 

a  good  argument,  so  I  can  talk  clearly  and  to  the  point. 
One  does  not  always  succeed  in  that.  Let  us  take  the  sim- 
plest kind  of  an  example.  I  had  a  cook, — by  the  way,  she 
is  still  in  evidence, — and  she  had  a  husband, — he  is  at  your 
service,  too,  and  his  name  is  Iv&n.  By  the  way,  you  might 
have  guessed  a  priori  that  all  cooks  have  husbands  by  the 
name  of  Ivdn.  Now  I  most  tdl  you  how  that  Ivdn  has  sur- 
prised me,  simply  stunned  me,  yes,  sir!  We  lured  liia  wife 
by  hendf,  and  he  came  to  her  a  week  later.  He  stayed  m 
while,  ate  some  pumpkin  aeeds^  and  went  away:  that  was 
noble! 

'*  Some  three  days  later  he  made  his  appearance  once  moie, 
bat  this  time  it  waa  in  the  morning.  He  ate  his  breakfast 
with  her,  washed  the  dishes,  remained  for  dinner,— all  in 
proper  ahape.  We  took  a  liking  to  him;  we  sent  him  on 
some  errand,  I  think  to  the  apothecary's^— he  started  on  a 
ran.  Wdl,  in  short,  to  be  done  with  it,  two  weeks  later  he 
settled  in  the  kitchen,  and  all  that  looked  so  simple  and 
dear  that  it  never  occurred  tons  to donbt  his  right  to  it,  snd 
to  send  him  off.  He  is  there  still,  bat  that  is  another  mat- 


Digitized  by  Google 


Ign&ti  Nikol^evich  Potapenko      45 1 


ter.  We  soon  noticed  that  he  never  went  oat  to  work,  but 
that  he  was  passing  all  the  time  in  the  kitchen,  washing 
dishes,  blackening  boots,  mnnlng  on  errands,  eating  and 
deeping.  I  once  asked  him: 

**  *  Say,  Ivdnl  Do  you  know  a  tfade? ' 

"  '  I  know  all  tradesl '  he  answered  me  with  the  greatest 
sdf-oon£denoe; 

"'Howso?  Yon  don't  mean  all  tiadesl* 

'*'A]l,Nik€ULyPetf6vichr  He  never  called  me  otherwise 
hnt  Nikoliy  Petr6vich. 

"  '  If  so^  why  aze  yon  not  doing  anything  ? ' 

*"Oh,  well,noworkhasttiniedttp—  I  reckon,  theie  is 
none  for  me  * 

'*  And  you  must  know  he  was  not  lying,  he  really  knew 
aU  inades.  My  dining  table  became  nnglned;  I  toild  tiiem  to 
send  for  a  joiner. 

*'  '  What 's  the  use  in  a  joiner  Nikoldy  Petr6vich  ?  I  will 
fix  it  for  you  in  first-class  shape! '  he  informed  me,  and,  in 
reality,  he  fussed  with  the  table  about  three  hours,  and 
brought  it  back  to  life.  It  is  true,  it  was  rather  coarse 
work:  the  glue  dried  up  in  lumps,  where  it  could  be  seen, 
and  the  heads  of  the  nails  somehow  stuck  sideways  in  the 
wood, — but  it  was  solid.  My  wife  was  about  to  have  the 
baby's  bathtub  fixed.  He  got  hold  of  it,  straightened  out 
the  indented  sides,  and  somehow  soldered  it,  and  in  addition 
painted  it  inside  and  outside  white.  Of  course,  I  must  say, 
it  was  not  a  particularly  neat  job,  but  passable  enough, — it 
could  be  used.  We  had  to  get  one  of  the  rooms  papered 
over, — he  again  proved  himself  a  master,  only  in  one  corner 
he  hung  a  strip  upside  down.  Finally,  when  spring  came, 
he  disappeared,  and  did  not  return  for  three  days.  When 
he  did  show  up,  he  was  all  smeared  with  day  and  lime. 

"  '  Where  have  you  been  ?  * 

'* '  I,  sir  ?  I  have  been  doing  some  masonry.' 

"'What?  Yon  are  a  mason,  too?' 

"'Why  not?  I  am  a  mason,  too        I  know  aU  trades!' 

"  To  make  an  end  with  Ivin,  I  will  tell  yon  that  he  proved 
to  be  a  tailor,  too,  and  with  his  own  hand  he  made  an  over- 


Digitized  by  Google 


452         The  Nineteenth  Century 


coat  for  himadf  .  Of  ooune,  it  was  a  wretdied  ooat»  but  it 
bdd  together  over  his  back.  He  finished  up  by  getting 
dmnk  and  beating  his  wife.  This  Ivdn  is  a  RiiSBian»  yts, 
aur.  It  Is  his  misfortune  to  have  too  much  ability*  and  a 
bent  for  too  many  things.  Thanks  to  that,  he  has  learned 
many  things,  but  nothing  properly,  and  he  cannot  stop,  ooo- 
oentrate,  and  perfect  himself  at  anything.  No  sooner  has . 
he  taken  up  caldniining,  than  the  mason  is  awakened  in  him ; 
he  takes  up  maaoniy,  and  he  is  at  once  drawn  to  the  tailor's 
trade,  and  so  on.  No  wonder  that  this  man  is  all  his  life 
snfiering  and  tearing  himself  asunder,  and  that  he,  from 
time  to  time,  balances  his  accounts  by  getting  drunk  and 
dealing  out  blows  to  his  wife.  And  now  it  is  clear  to  you 
that  the  misfortune  of  a  Russian  is  in  the  many-sidedness  of 
his  talents. 

'*  It  is  quite  different  with  the  other  nations.  Take,  for 
example,  a. German.  Of  course,  a  German  is  not  naturally 
stupid,  but  he  has  not  the  slightest  talent.  He  has  but  one 
talent, — patience,  and  just  see  what  wonders  he  performs  by 
the  aid  of  that  modest  companion  of  his.  By  the  aid  of 
this  patience  alone,  he  accomplishes  in  all  spheres  of  human 
activities  those  results  that  make  us  with  all  our  talents 
hold  up  our  hands  in  wonderment.  And  all  that  only  be- 
cause he  has  but  that  one  talent.  He  knows  that  himself, 
and  he  begins  to  develop  it  in  his  swaddling  clothes.  I 
have  heard  it  said  that  German  babies  rarely  cry.  That  is 
so  because  they  early  get  used  to  patience.  Now  let  us 
take  the  English.  No  doubt,  they  are  a  dever  nodoo,  but 
they  have  only  one  talent,  and  that  is  their  egotism  in  the 
broadest  sense  of  the  word,  namely  their  self-respect,  their 
worship  of  themselves^  their  contempt  for  everything  that  ia 
not  Englidi,  and  its  ei^loitation  in  their  fevour.  That  talent 
is  carried  out  by  them  with  the  strictest  consistency  in  every 
thing,— from  the  most  trifling  to  the  most  stupendous,— and 
makea  it  poasible  for  them  to  be  the  leaders  in  everything  in 
the  world.  Yes,  sir." 

"  But  you  have  deviated  a  little.  You  had  intended  to 
speak  of  yourself  I "  tlie  attorney  gently  interrupted  him. 


Digitized  by  Google 


Ign&ti  Nikol&evich  Pot&penko  453 


"  Ko,  I  did  not  deviate.  I  only  began  tliat  way  to  cone 
finally  to  my  caae.  Now  I  will  paaa  over  to  that  notable 
aubject  Yon  must  know  that  my  father  waa  not  of  high 
hirtii;  he  waa  of  the  gentry,  bat  of  thoie  who  are  greatly 
impoveriahed.  He  waa  the  manager  of  acme  connf  a  estate. 
He  had  received  no  education,  bat  had  aeen  and  heard 
mtich,  and  waa  a  man  of  pfactical  aenae.  At  eight  yeaxa  of 
age  I  lelt  a  hankering  for  the  violin.  Yea^  ah:,  for  the  violin. 
It  waa  not  the  caprice  of  a  spoilt  duld,  but  a  real  hankering. 
I  remember  how  my  heart  beat  at  the  thooght  of  my  father 
baying  me  a  violin.  Well,  he  bought  me  one.  The  leader 
of  the  church  choir  ahowed  me  the  first  stepa^  tanght  me  how 
to  hold  the  bow  and  the  fingers,  and  I  began  scraping.  I 
scraped  horribly,  but  something  came  of  it.  When  I  waa 
ten  years  old  I  was  taken  to  town  to  be  sent  to  the  Gym- 
nasium. Here  I  had  a  patented  teacher  whose  violin  was 
worth  three  hundred  roubles,  if  he  was  not  fibbing.  My 
father  paid  him  in  kind:  he  would  bring  him  cottage  cheese, 
or  a  keg  of  herrings,  or  pickling  cucumbers.  I  learned 
from  him  my  first  correct  steps,  and  what  do  you  suppose 
came  of  it  all  ?  Nothing.  Many  heard  me  and  cried:  '  Oh, 
what  talent ! '  And  really,  I  did  have  talent.  But  you 
understand  that  I  ought  to  have  played  do-re-mi-fa-sol,  and 
nothing  else,  when  my  aunt  visited  me. 

"  '  Give  me  a  tune,  my  darling,  and  I  will  give  you  a  silver 
rouble  for  it.' 

**  I  began  do-re-mi- fa-sol. 

"  '  Well,  what  is  that  ?  That  is  not  even  interesting.  And 
yet  they  told  me  that  you  had  some  talent.  What  kind  of 
talent  hi  t&at  ?  I  could  nnderrtand  if  you  played  aomething 
that  would  touch  my  aooL  Ko^  I  don't  tldnk  yoa  have  any 
talent!'— What,  I  have  no  talent?  Aonty  thinks  so. 
Wait,  I  '11  prove  you  difierently!— And  I  began  secretly 
from  the  teacher  to  lesm  As  I  go  alone  Mo  ike  sinei,  and 
I  played  it  before  my  aunt;  it  was  so  toodiing  that  she 
wiped  her  oreSi  and  ssid:  '  Now,  that'aa  diffierent  matter, — 
now  I  aee  that  yon  have  talent! ' 

"  Then  I  learned  The  hussar  kammg  om  kis  satre^  H  « 


Digitized  by  Google 


454         The  Nineteenth  Centuiy 


gloomy  autumn  evening,  and  finally,  to  cap  the  dimaz,  a 
quadrille  from  Fair  Helen.  Then  I  went  bade  to  the  vil* 
lagc, — eveiybody  was  delighted.  My  repertoire  was  popu- 
lar.  No  sooner  did  anyone  call  at  oar  honae,  than  fiUlier 

began  to  boast: 

YououghttohearhimplaythevioUnl  Well, K^knka, 

give  us  The  hussar! 

"  I  took  up  an  attitude  and  played  The  hussar,  and  by 
degrees  worked  up  to  Fair  Helen.  In  this  manner  I  gave 
concerts  all  summer,  and  I  forgot  everything  I  had  learned 
from  my  teacher,  but  above  all  I  began  to  despise  do-re-mi- 
fa-sol,  because  that  did  not  bring  me  any  fame.  And  thus, 
sir,  I  just  stuck  fast  at  the  Fair  Helen,  yes,  sir!  Then, 
suddenly,  a  passion  for  versifying  came  over  me.  Again  a 
hankering, — what  will  you  do  about  that  ?  I  began  writing 
verses  '  standing,  lying,  sitting,  walking.'  I  first  did  it 
secretly,  for  poetry  is  a  kind  of  love, — it  seeks  mystery  and 
solitude.  Here  again  my  accursed  vanity  ran  away  with  me. 
My  verses  were  not  bad.  I  showed  them  to  a  schoolmate  or 
two;  they  took  them  up  and  carried  them  around,  and  I  be> 
came  the  attested  school  poet  The  director  found  out  about 
it,  and  he  aiked  for  my  note-book,  and  approved  of  it:  'You 
have,  sir,  a  divine  gift! '  They  came  to  me  for  eveiy  solemn 
occasion;  '  Bobr6v,  write  a  poem! '  And  B6br6v  wrote  it 
and  solemnly  redted  it  You  understand  what  it  led  tOw 
Namdy  to  this:  Bobr6v  began  to  try  acrobatic  feata,  and  to 
write  in  bombastic  style,  to  imitate  DerihAvin,  and  his 
youthful  poetiy  became  flat  Consequently,  nothing  came 
of  that  By  that  time  I  waa  in  the  aeventli  foim,  and  my 
breast  was  filled  with  ecstades  of  a  different  sort  I  aban* 
dooed  poetry,  and  was  drawn  to  serious  and  clever  hooka. 
At  first  I  drank  deep  from  Byeliudd,  than  Dobrolyiibov.  and 
then  Pfsarev  fell  among  us.  I  graduated  fxm  the  Gym* 
nasium,  the  university  began  ^" 

Bobr6v  stopped,  rose  from  his  seat,  and  began  to  walk 
acrass  the  room,  holding  his  hands  behind  his  back. 

"Yes,  the  university!  I  had  brilliant  ability,  and  what 
came  of  it  all?  Do  you  know  what?  The  devil  knows 


Digitized  by  Google 


Ign&ti  Nikolievich  Potipenko  455 


wliat!  I  was  attnded  to  adenoe,  and  I  wanted  to  team  the 
history  of  the  hmnan  race,  and  its  creations^^so  I  became  a 
philologist,  and  began  to  swallow  book  after  hock.  One  of 
the  professors  directed  his  attention  to  me,  and  had  an  eye 
on  me, — ^bnt  it  ai^eaied  to  me  that  my  country  was  not  in 
need  of  snch  a  science;  so  I  turned  about,  and  began  study- 
ing Smith,  Mill,  and  Mane         A  year  later,  behold,  I  was 

studying tiielawl  Yes,sir!  Thelaw.  And  let  me tdl  you 
I  showed  ability  in  Smith-Mill-Marx  too.  I  do  not  know 
where  I  got  all  my  doquence^  my  indomitable  logic,  and  so 
forth.  I  found  mistakes  in  Mill,  so  I  would  say:  '  Here 
and  here  Mill  has  made  a  mistakel '  Yes»  sir!  We  natur- 
ally recognised  no  authorities,  except  our  own.  Mill  was  to 
us  not  a  source  of  wisdom,  but  only  an  excuse  for  showing 
the  depth  of  our  erudition  before  the  ladies  of  our  circle. 

"  There  were  some  good-looking  women  among  them,  let 
me  tell  you.  And  it  is  really  a  wonder  I  did  not  get  married 
then !  Upon  my  word,  it  is  a  wonder.  For  they  nearly  all 
of  them,  one  must  say,  paired  off,  and  not  just  one  way  or 
other,  but  in  legal  wedlock.  Then  half  of  them  went  off 
with  their  wives,  that  is  only  natural.  Though  we  had  all 
come  together  on  Mill's  platform,  yet,  everybody  knows, 
life  is  not  Mill.  Yes,  sir!  And  thus  I  came  out  hale.  I 
must  suppose  that  it  was  so  because  I  was  too  late.  The 
respected  fellow-members  had  picked  out  all  the  good-looking 
ones,  there  was  only  left  an  indifferent  lot,  while  I,  after  all, 
had  some  esthetic  taste.  It  did  not  take  us  long  to  crush 
Mill — that  's  it,  we  crushed  him.  It  suddenly  became  as 
evident  as  daylight  that  he  was  not  good  for  anything,  be- 
cause the  salvation  of  our  country  lay  not  at  all  in  political 
economy,  but  in  anatomy  and  physiology.  Well,  the  country 
had  to  be  saved  at  all  cost,  and  God  forbid  another  man  but 
myself  should  save  it, — that  would  have  been  a  personal 
insult. 

You  can  guess  that  the  result  of  it  was  my  going  over 
to  the  department  of  natural  sciences.  Just  think  of  it!  here 
I  again  found  myself  upon  the  summit  of  my  calling.  I  was 
glued  to  a  chair,  and  the  microscope  was  glued  to  my  nose. 


45^         The  Nineteenth  Centuiy 


I  mt  tfam  days  and  nig^hts  studying  and  ana]ydng»  and 
don't  imagine  that  it  was  withcmt  fesnlts.  Indeed  not  I  I 
even  made  a  discovery:  I  bfonght  to  light,  studied,  and  de- 
scribed some  peculiar  property  of  the  blood  oorpuscle,  ycs^ 
sirl  I  do  not  remember  what  property  that  was,  but  it  pro- 
duced an  impression,  and  they  even  printed  my  description 
of  it  in  some  periodical.  But  while  I  was  dissecting  the 
blood  corpuscle,  a  new  tendency  was  ripening  within  me. 
The  devil  take  it,  another  talent !  Nature  had  implanted  as 
many  of  them  within  me  as  I  could  hold,  and  each  one  of 
them  was  dying  to  show  itself,  and  would  not  yield  to  any 
other. 

**  I  was  drawn  from  time  to  time  to  the  paper.  I  used 
to  sit  by  a  kerosene  lamp  in  the  quiet  of  the  night,  and 
sketch  some  scene.  At  times  it  was  not  half  bad,  and  again 
it  was  quite  passable.  Yes,  sir!  Some  friend  of  mine  read 
it:  *  Oh,  but  you  have  literary  talent,  you  ought  to  write!* 
Well,  pictures  of  success,  reputation,  and  even  fame,  the 
deuce  take  it,  began  to  swarm  before  my  eyes.  Fame! 
Whose  head  would  it  not  turn  ?  What  affair  would  one  not 
throw  to  the  dogs  for  it!  And  so,  I  was  no  longer  sitting 
over  the  microscope,  but  passed  whole  nights  producing 
artistic  literary  pictures.  That  took  me  from  the  province 
to  St.  Petersburg,  whither  I  hastened  at  once  to  find  fame. 
My  first  experiment  was  a  success.  They  printed  it,  psaised 
it,  and  entered  it  in  tiie  column  of  the  '  promising.*  I  was 
in  a  hurry,  in  a  terrible  hurry,  I  wanted  to  pocket  all  fiune 
at  onoe,  and,  of  course,  I  only  made  botch  work  of  it,  and 
spoiled  matters.  My  later  works  did  not  csU  forth  any 
praise,  but  were  honoured  with  condescending  silence.  I  was 
beside  myself,  began  to  insist,  to  work  still  faster,  and  to 
spoil  more  and  more.  When  an  idea  flashed  thxoagh  my 
biain,  I,  instead  of  putting  it  away  in  a  quiet  oocner  of  my 
soul,  and  living  and  feeling  it  over,  used  to  sit  down  at  onoe 
and  work  it  out  on  paper.  Something  came  out,  but  not 
what  it  ought  to  have  been.  It  turned  out  to  be  something 
pale,  something  born  before  its  time.  Yes,  sir  1  They  would 
print  it,  but  more  as  ballast.  And  yet,  there  was  talent. 


Digitized  by  Gopgle 


Semin  Y&kovlevich  N&dson  457 


tbere  really  ms,— everybody  acknowledged  it  Bnt  it  was 
aomething  nnfinlahed,  like  a  pkraae  half  apokeo,  a  {ncttue 
half  painted,  farnitoie  nnpoliahed  and  unvarnished. 

"At  last,  one  mote  bent  I  My  old  talent  for  moaic  awoke 
in  me,  and  I  roahed  at  onoe  to  a  musical  school.  I,  the 
fntoxe  oompoaer,  was  studying  harmony  and  counterpoint, 
and  again  everybody  found  that  I  had  talent.  The  world 
of  sounds  swallowed  me.  I  wanted  to  produce  and  create, 
and  before  I  had  reached  a  fugue,  I  was  writing  little  songs 

and  publisbing  them         Ah,  I  did  not  finish  here  either. 

My  two  songs  had  success,  they  were  sung  at  concerts,  yes, 
air,  and  I  decided  I  could  write  an  opera.  What  is  the  use 
learning  when  you  have  talent  ?  That  ia  a  good  Russian 
reason  

"And  do  you  know  what  I  am  now  ?  I  am  a  man  without 
any  definite  specialty.  I  am  a  Russian  who  has  a  thousand 
talents  and  who  is  unfit  for  any  definite  business.  I  can 
play  on  the  violin  a  quadrille  from  Fair  Helen,  I  can  write 
a  sonnet,  I  can  discuss  Russian  literature  and  history,  I 
know  a  few  things  about  Smith,  Mill,  and  Marx,  I  have  some 
ideas  about  the  blood  corpuscle,  I  possess  a  literary  style, 
can  compose  a  song, — and  to  sum  all  up,  I  am  head-scribe 
in  a  bureau,  of  course,  through  protection.  Am  I  not  the 
same  Ivdn  ?  We  are  both  Russians.  Both  he  and  I  can  do 
everything,  and  yet  are  good  for  nothing.  Both  of  us  have 
a  thousand  talents  apiece.  Well?  He  is  the  husband  of 
my  cook,  and  I — am  head-scribe!  The  positions  are  differ- 
ent, but  the  sense  of  them  is  the  same         Yes,  air!  '* 

Here  Bobrdv  rolled  up  a  fat  cigarette,  gave  a  few  pufb  at 
it,  took  hia  cap,  and  bid  his  host  fiueweU. 

Sem6n  Y^kovievich  N&dson.  (1862-1887.) 

NAdsoo's  grandfather  was  a  Jew.  His  father,  who  had  been  a 
good  musician,  died  when  he  was  but  two  years  old,  and  he  also 
lost  his  mother  and  brothers  early  in  youth.  He  was  taken  care  of 
by  relatives  of  his,  and  was  sent  to  the  Gymoasiam,  where  he  de- 
bited hhnielf  to  literetnre  and  miMie.  His  fitst  pihited  poem  ap- 
peared whea  be  was  bnt  fifteen  Teen  old.  8000  after  began  to  ibow 


Digitized  by  Googlc 


45^         The  Nineteenth  Century 


themselves  the  sjniptoins  of  consumption  to  which  he  finally  suc- 
cumbed. He  went  to  the  Caucasus,  and  was  later  sent  to  the  south 
of  France.  Yet,  under  the  most  adverse  conditions,  he  produced  a 
•eries  of  poems  of  exquisite  bcanty,  and  gave  promise  of  fivdUag  flie 
beet  RoBsiao  poets.  Shortly  befoie  his  death  he  was  ewanled  the 
Pushkin  prize  of  five  hnadred  roubles. 

Piiy  the  stately  cypress  trees  is  given  in  John  Pollen's  Rhymes 
JrofH  the  Russian,  and  a  few  shorter  poems,  by  Mis.  M.  S.  Walker, 
in  Free  Russia,  vol.  xiit.,  No.  5. 

MY  FRIEND,  MY  BROTHBRt 

My  friend,  my  tirotiier,  wesiy,  iii£feiitig^  toodier,  ulioever 
y<m  be,  be  not  discotiraged:  let  untruth  and  evil  have  foU 
sway  141011  earth  that  is  watered  with  tears,  let  the  aacfed 
ideal  be  crushed  and  de£Euned,  let  them  shed  the  innocent 
blood: — believe  me,  the  time  is  coming  when  Baal  will 
perish,  and  Love  will  return  upon  earthl 

Not  with  a  Grown  of  thorns,  nor  oppressed  with  chains, 
nor  with  a  cross  upon  his  bent  shoulders, — he  will  come  into 
the  world  in  his  strenprth  and  splendor,  in  his  hands  a  bright 
torch  of  glory.  There  will  be  in  the  world  neither  tears,  nor 
warring,  nor  crossless  graves,  nor  serfs,  nor  cheerless,  dead- 
ening want,  nor  the  sword,  nor  pillory. 

O  my  friend !  That  bright  vision  is  not  a  dream,  nor  an 
empty  hope:  look  about  you, — everywhere  evil  oppresses 
too  much,  everywhere  night  is  too  dark!  The  world  will 
grow  tired  of  torments,  will  drown  in  the  blood,  will  get 
weary  of  senseless  battles, — and  it  will  raise  to  Love,  to  un- 
hampered Love  its  eyes,  full  of  yearning  prayer— 

POETRY 

Many  years  ago  she  descended  from  the  quiet  shsdes  o£ 
Paradise  into  our  world,  in  a  garland  of  fragrant  roses,  with 
a  youthful  smile,  charming,  naked,  and  proud  of  her  inno- 
cent beauty.    She  brought  with  her  unknown  feelings,  the 

harmony  of  heaven,  and  loyalty  to  dreams, — and  her  law 
was  art  for  art's  sake,  and  her  command  was  to  ser\'e  beauty. 
But  at  her  first  steps  they  tore  and  trod  into  the  dust  her 


Digitized  by  Google 


Ant6n  P&vlovich  Chekhov  459 


superb  flowerSi— and  her  beautiM  virgia  features  were 
shrouded  in  a  dark  doad  of  doubts  and  sorrow;  and  her 
former  hymns  are  no  more!  The  storm's  breatfi  carried 
traddesdy  away  her  exultant  sounds,— and  her  song  breathes 
fire  of  her  soul's  anguish,  and  thorns  wound  her  divine  brow. 


Pity  the  stately  cypress  trees; 

How  fiKflhly  green  they  spring! 
Ah!  why  amidst  their  bnmches,  child, 

Have  you  put  up  your  swing  ? 
Break  not  a  single  fragrant  bough. 

Oh,  take  thy  swing  away 
To  heights  where  thick  acacias  Uoom; 

Mid  dusty  olives  play! 
Thence  you  can  see  the  ocean, 

And,  as  your  swing  ascends. 
Through  greening  boughs  a  sunny  glimpse 

The  sea  in  lai^hter  sends 
Of  white  sails  in  the  distance  dim. 

Of  white  gulls  far  away. 
Of  white  flakes  foaming  on  the  sands, 

A  fringe  of  snowy  spray. 

—From  J.  Pollen's  Rkjmes from  the  Russian, 

Antdn  P4vlovich  Cb^OT.  (i860-.) 

Ch^khorla  the aon  of  a  former  aerf.  He  w«  tiorn  In  the  dty  of 

Taganr6g,  where  he  went  through  the  Gymnasium.  He  then  at- 
tended the  Moscow  University,  where  he  graduated  from  the  Depart- 
ment of  Medicine  in  1884.  He  began  early  to  contribute  short  stories 
to  various  periodicals,  and  established  his  reputation  in  1887  upon 
theappeanmce  of  hit  fint  collected  volume.  Of  bis  longer  itoriea 
some  of  the  niott  eitiitic  ate  Tke  St^e,  FlmSt  Tkt  Mgrnoin  of  an 
Unknown  Man,  A  Wearisome  Story.  A  pessimistic  vein  rune 
through  all  his  productions,  and  all  his  characters  seem  to  be  fit  sub- 
jects for  the  psychiatrist ;  this  is  especially  the  case  in  two  of  his 
dramas,  The  Mew  and  Three  Sisters,  in  which  there  is  not  cue  re- 
deeming person,  and  where  the  very  language  of  the  dramatia 
peraome  ia  nothing  bnt  a  aeriea  of  aeni-aitkalated  hyatetical  ^acnlap 


4^         The  Nineteenth  Century 


lions.  He  is  a  great  favourite  with  the  Rusdan  reading  public,  but 
the  foreigner  will  lay  aside  his  books  with  great  admiration  for  his 
talent  and  with  a  ahodder  at  the  hopeless  condition  of  Roasian 
society. 

In  Bngliah  liat  appeared  but  Pkilosophy  at  Hornet  in  Short  Stories* 
October,  1891. 

IN  THB  COURT.ROOM 

In  the  cinnamon-coloured  governmental  building  of  the 
county  seat  of  N.,  in  which  the  meetings  of  the  Agronomic 
Council  alternate  with  those  of  the  Justices  of  the  Peace,  of 
the  Departments  of  Peasant  Affairs,  of  the  Sale  of  Liquor, 
of  Military  Conscription,  and  of  many  more,  a  division  of 
the  Circuit  Court  was  one  gloomy  autumn  day  assembled  to 
take  up  its  cases.  A  local  administrator  had  made  a  pun  in 
T^^rd  to  this  cinnamon-coloured  building: 

"  Here  is  Miss  Justice,  here  is  Police,  here  is  Milioe, — n 
'regular  Institute  for  Noble  Young  Ladies." 

But,  no  doubt  to  justify  the  proverb  that  with  seven  nurses 
a  child  generally  loses  an  eye,  this  building  produces  a 
heavy,  oppressive  sensation  in  a  man  who  is  neither  officially 
xronnected  nor  familiar  with  it,  by  its  melancholy,  barrack- 
like appearance,  by  its  age,  and  by  the  complete  absence  of 
any  and  all  comforts,  either  within  or  without.  Even  in 
bright  spring  days  it  looks  as  if  it  were  covered  by  a  dense 
shade,  and  on  dear*  moonlit  nights,  when  the  trees  and  the 
houses  of  the  citizens  are  welded  into  one  continoons  shadow 
and  are  merged  in  a  quiet  sleep,  it  alone  rises  awkwardly 
and  out  of  place,  like  a  cmahing  rock,  over  the  modest  land- 
scape, flpoils  the  general  harmony,  and  stays  awake,  as 
though  it  could  not  rid  itself  of  the  grievous  memory  of 
past,  nnfiorgiven  dns.  Within,  everything  is  bam-like  and 
exceedingly  unattractive.  It  is  cntious  to  see  how  easily  aU 
these  elegant  prosecntora,  members,  leaders,  who  at  home 
will  raise  a  row  at  the  slightest  sign  of  eacafttng  coal  gas  or 
a  mere  qieck  on  the  floor,  get  used  to  the  bussing  ventilators, 
the  nauseating  smell  of  smoking  candles,  and  the  dirty, 
eternally  sweating  walls. 


Digitized  by  Google 


Ant6n  F&vlovich  Chekhov  461 


Tht  mmlm  of  the  Cltoiit  Court  began  at  ten  o'dodc 
They  at  onoe  took  up  the  docket,  being  evidently  in  a  hnrry. 
The  cases  were  disposed  of  one  after  the  other,  taking  up 
no  more  time  than  a  "mass  without  the  singing,"  so  that  no 
sensible  being  oonld  have  fi»med  a  complete,  oonoeptnal 
pktnre  of  that  variegated  crowd  that  moved  about  like  a 
freshet,  of  aU  the  motions,  yeeches,  misfortunes,  truth, 
lies   By  two  o'clock  much  was  accomplished:  two  peo- 
ple were  sentenced  to  perpetual  imprisonment ;  one  privileged 
penon  was  deprived  of  all  his  rights  and  sentenced  to  im- 
prisonment in  the  jail;  one  man  was  found  innocent,  and 
one  case  was  postponed. 

Precisely  at  two  o'clock  the  presiding  judge  announced 
tliat  now  was  to  be  taken  up  the  case  of  "  the  indictment 
found  against  the  peasant  Nikoldy  Kharldmov  for  the  mur- 
der of  his  wife."  The  composition  of  the  court  remained 
the  same  as  in  the  previous  case,  only  the  defence  was  re- 
presented by  a  new  individual, — a  young,  beardless  candi' 
date  for  judicial  honours,  in  a  coat  with  bright  buttons. 

"  Bring  in  the  defendant! "  ordered  the  presiding  judge. 

But  the  defendant  was  prepared  ev^en  before,  and  he 
marched  toward  the  bench.  He  was  a  tall,  muscular  peas- 
ant, about  fifty-five  years  of  age,  jjpmpletely  bald,  with  a 
repulsive,  hirsute  face,  and  a  long  red  beard.  He  was 
foUowed  by  a  small  wizened  soldier  with  a  gun. 

When  almost  near  the  bench,  there  happened  a  slight 
accident  to  this  guard.  He  suddenly  stumbled  and  dropped 
his  gun»  bat  he  immediately  caught  it  in  its  fall,  giving  his 
knee  a  severe  knodc  with  the  butt.  Bither  from  pain  or, 
perhaps,  from  embarrassment  at  his  awkwardness  the  soldier 
blushed  crimson. 

After  the  customary  questions  to  the  defendant,  the  re- 
arrangement of  the  jury,  the  roll-call,  and  the  oath  of  the 
witnesses,— th^  began  the  reading  of  the  bill  of  the  indict- 
ment. A  narrow-chested,  pale-foced  secretary,  who  had 
grown  much  too  thin  for  his  uniform  and  had  a  plaster  on 
his  cheek,-^he  looked  like  a  walking  dime,— read  npidly, 
like  a  sezton,  in  a  subdued,  heavy  bass,  without  raising  or 


4^2         The  Nineteenth  Century 

lowering  his  voice,  m  if  afield  to  exert  his  lunge;  lie  was 
seconded  by  the  ventilator  that  kept  on  buzzing  behind  the 
judge's  chair,  andfiram  this  there  reanlted  a  sound  that  gave 
to  the  stillneas  of  the  room  a  soporific,  narcotic  character. 

The  pmidsng  judge*  who  was  not  an  old  man,  with  an 
exceedingly  tired  Uuet,  and  near-sighted,  was  sitting  in  bis 
chahr  without  stirring,  and  holding  the  palm  of  his  hand  oesr 
his  brow,  as  if  to  keep  the  sun  out  of  his  ^es.  During  the 
buzzing  of  the  ventilator  and  of  the  secretary  be  was  think- 
ing of  something.  When  the  secretary  stopped  for  a  second 
to  draw  breath  before  beginning  a  new  page,  he  suddenly 
started  and  looked  at  the  audience  with  his  blinking  eyes, 
then  he  leaned  over  the  ear  of  the  fellow-judge  by  his  ^de; 
and  asked  him  with  a  sigh: 

"  You,  Matvy6y  Petr6vich,  are  stopping  at  Demydnov's?" 

"Yes,  at  Demydnov'a,''  answered  the  member,  also 
startled. 

"  Next  time  I  think  I  shall  stop  there  myself.  I  declare, 
it  is  impossible  to  stop  at  Tipyak6v's.  There  is  such  a 
noise  there  all  night  long!  They  make  a  racket,  they  coogh, 
and  the  children  cr>'.    It 's  just  impossible  to  stand  it!  '* 

The  associate  prosecutor,  a  full-faced,  well-fed,  dark-com- 
plexioned man,  in  gol^  spectacles,  and  with  a  beautiful, 
well-groomed  beard,  sat  immovably,  like  a  statue,  and,  lean- 
ing his  cheek  on  his  closed  hand,  read  Byron's  Cam.  His 
eyes  were  full  of  ardent  attention,  and  his  brows  rose  admir- 
ingly higher  and  higher.  Now  and  then  he  threw  himself 
against  the  back  of  his  chair,  looked  for  a  momeut  indiffer- 
ently ahead  of  him,  and  then  was  once  more  lost  in  his 
reading. 

The  counsel  for  the  defence  moved  the  Uunt  end  of  his 
pencil  over  the  taUe  and,  bending  his  head  aside,  was  medi- 
tating something.  His  youthful  face  expressed  nothing  but 
unchangeable,  cold  ennui,  sndi  as  is  to  be  seen  in  the  faces 
of  sdioolboys  and  oflkials  who  are  obliged  to  sit  day  after 
day  in  one  and  the  same  place  and  to  see  all  the  time  the 
same  faces  and  the  same  walls.  The  forthcoming  speedi 
did  not  worry  him  in  the  least.  What  kind  of  a  speech  is 


Digitized  by  Google 


Ant6n  P&vlovich  Chikhov  463 


it  any  way  ?  By  order  of  tiie  autliorities  lie  will  deliver  it 
without  paiflion  or  fire  before  the  jury,  aoooiding  to  an  old 
stereotyped  fomi,  feeling  all  tlie  time  tiiat  it  ia  coloarlesa  and 
tiresome,  and  then  he  will  gallop  through  mnd  and  rain  to 
the  station,  then— to  the  capital,  to  get  aoon  another  order 
for  aome  other  county  seat,  where  he  will  make  another 
speech        It 'a  tiresome  1 

The  defendant  at  first  coughed  nervously  into  his  sleeve 
and  grew  pale,  then  the  quiet,  the  universal  monotony  and 
the  ennui  were  communicated  to  him  also.  He  looked  with 
a  dull  respect  at  the  uniforms  of  the  judges,  at  the  tired 
faces  of  the  jury,  and  calmly  blinked  with  bis  eyes.  The 
judicial  surroundings  and  procedure,  waiting  for  which  bis 
heart  had  been  pining  in  the  prison,  now  acted  upon  bim 
most  soothingly.  He  did  not  meet  here  at  all  what  he  could 
have  expected.  Over  him  hung  the  accusation  of  murder, 
and  yet  he  did  not  meet  here  any  threatening  faces,  nor 
scorning  glances,  nor  loud  phrases  of  revenge,  nor  any  sym- 
pathy for  his  unusual  fate;  not  one  of  those  who  were  going 
to  judge  him  had  turned  their  long,  inquiring  glances  upon 
bim.  The  murky  windows,  the  voice  of  the  secretary,  the 
pose  of  the  prosecutor, — all  that  was  imbued  with  chancery 
indifference  and  exhaled  a  cold  breath,  as  though  the  mur- 
derer were  a  simple  appurtenance  of  the  chancery,  or  as 
though  not  living  men  were  judging  him,  but  some  unseen 
machine  which  God  knows  who  bad  introduced. 

The  composed  peasant  did  not  know  that  they  were  here 
as  used  to  the  dramas  and  tragedies  of  life  as  one  gets  used 
to  deaths  in  a  hospital,  and  that  in  this  very  machine-like 
indifference  lay  the  whole  terror  and  the  wh<^  bopeleasness 
of  his  position.  I  am  aure  that  if  he  did  not  remain  silent, 
but  rose  and  began  to  plead  and  implore  for  mercy  with 
tears  in  hia  eyeSi  to  repent  with  fervour,  if  he  died  in  despair, 
— all  that  would  break  against  their  dull  nerves  and  habit 
like  a  billow  against  a  rock. 

'  When  the  aecretary  had  finished,  the  presiding  judge  for 
some  reason  rubbed  the  table,  for  a  long  time  blinked  at  the 
defendant,  and  then  asked  him,  lazily  moving  his  tongue: 


4^4         The  Nineteenth  Centuty 


"  Defendant,  do  you  plead  guilty  to  liaving  killed  yonr 
wife  on  the  night  of  June  9th  ?  " 

'*  By  no  means,'*  answered  tlie  defendant,  rifling  and  bold* 
ing  the  coat  over  his  bteasL 

After  that  the  oonrt  hurriedly  passed  over  to  the  examina- 
tion of  the  witnesses.  There  were  examined  two  wonen, 
five  peasants,  and  the  coroner  who  had  held  the  inquest 
All  of  them,  mud-bespattered  and  tired  from  their  march 
and  from  the  long  waiting  in  the  witness  room,  sad  and 
gloomy,  deposed  the  same  thing.  They  declared  that  Khar- 
Idmov  had  lived  "  well"  with  his  wife,  just  like  anybody 
else:  he  used  to  strike  her  only  when  he  was  intoxicated. 
On  the  9th  of  June,  about  sundown,  the  woman  was  found 
in  the  hall  with  her  skull  split  open;  an  axe  was  lying  near 
her  in  a  pool  of  blood.  When  they  tried  to  find  Nikoldy,  in 
order  to  tell  him  of  the  misfortune,  he  was  neither  in  the 
house,  nor  in  the  street.  They  began  to  run  up  and  down 
the  village  to  find  him,  they  went  to  all  the  taverns  and 
cabins,  but  be  could  not  be  found.  He  had  disappeared, 
and  two  days  later  he  came  himself  to  the  office,  pale,  tat- 
tered, and  trembling  in  his  whole  body.  He  was  bound 
with  ropes  and  placed  in  the  lockup. 

"Defendant,"  said  the  presiding  judge  to  Kharldmov, 
"can't  you  explain  to  the  court  where  you  k^t  yourself 
during  the  two  days  after  the  murder  ?  ** 

**  I  wandered  over  the  field,  without  eating  or  drinking." 

**  Why  did  you  hide  yourself,  if  you  did  not  kill  her  ?  " 

"  I  was  frightened.    I  was  afraid  I 'd  be  sentenced." 

"  Ah!    Ver>'  well,  take  your  seat!  " 

The  last  witness  was  the  county  physician  who  had  made 
the  autopsy  on  the  old  woman.  He  communicated  to  the 
court  everything  he  could  remember  fimn  his  notes  of  the 
autopsy  and  horn  what  he  had  managed  to  woilc  out  as  he 
was  walking  to  the  court  in  the  morning. 

The  preriding  judge  looked  with  half-dosed  eyes  at  his 
new  shining,  blade  suit,  at  his  dandyish  nedcde,  at  his  mov- 
ing lips,  and  in  his  brain  somehow  stirred  by  itself  the  Issy 
thought:  "  Eveiybody  wears  now  short  coats;  then  why  did 


Digitized  by  Google 


Ant6n  Pavlovich  Chekhov  465 


he  have  made  such  a  long  one  ?  Really,  why  a  long  one, 
and  not  a  short  one  ?  " 

Behind  the  presiding  judge  was  heard  the  cautious  creak 
of  boots.  It  was  the  associate  prosecutor  who  had  gone  to 
the  table  to  take  up  some  document. 

**  Mikhafl  Vladirairovich,"  he  leaned  down  to  the  ear  of 
the  presiding  judge,  "  that  Kor^yski  has  made  a  very  care- 
less inquest*  The  brother  was  not  examined,  the  elder  was 
not  esamiiiedy  and  yott  can't  make  anything  out  of  the  de- 
flcriptkm  of  the  room." 

'*  What  is  to  be  done,  what  is  to  be  doner'  ^hed  the 
presiding  jndge,  throwing  himself  back  into  the  chair: 
"  This  is  an  ^Mmm.  aandsdassl " 

"By  the  way,*'  the  associate  prosecutor  continued  to 
whisper,  "  just  Uxk,  down  the  audience,  in  the  fiont  bench, 
the  third  man  from  the  left,— an  actor's  phiz.  That  is  the 
local  financial  big-bug.  He  has  a  cash  capital  of  nearly  five 
hundred  thousand." 

"Yes?  His  face  does  n't  show  it  How  would  it  be^ 
firiend,  if  we  took  a  recess  now  ?  " 

"  I«et  us  end  this  case,  end  then  we  shall  " 

**  Veiy  well          Well  ?  **  the  presiding  judge  turned  his 

^yes  upon  the  phystdan.  "So  you  find  that  death  was  in* 
stantaneous?" 

"  Yes,  on  aoooont  of  a  oonsidenible  lesion  of  the  brain 
matter." 

When  the  physician  was  through,  the  presiding  judge 
looked  into  space,  between  the  prosecutor  and  tlie  counsel, 

and  he  proposed : 

"  Have  n't  you  anything  to  ask  ?  '* 

The  associate  prosecutor  did  not  turn  his  eyes  away  from 
Cain,  and  shook  his  head  negatively,  but  the  counsel  moved 
unexpectedly  and,  clearing  his  throat,  asked: 

**  Tell  me,  doctor,  is  it  possible  to  tell  the  mental  condition 
of  the  criminal  by  the  dimension  of  the  wound  ?  That  is,  I 
want  to  know  whether  the  amount  of  the  injury  gives  us  a 
right  to  presuppose  that  the  defendant  was  mentally  de- 
ranged." 


466         The  Nineteenth  Century 


The  presiding  judge  raised  his  sleepy,  indifferent  eyes 
upon  the  counsel.  The  prosecutor  tore  himself  away  from 
his  Cain,  and  looked  at  the  presiding  judge.  They  only 
looked,  but  neither  a  sniile,  nor  wonderment,  nor  perplexity, 
•—nothing  was  expressed  upon  their  faces. 

"  Of  course,"  hesitated  tht  physician,  "if  we  take  Into 
constdemtkm  the  power  ^th  whSdi— eh— eh  eh  the  criin- 

inal  itrikes  a  blow         However,  paxckm  me,  I  did  not 

quite  undentaiid  yonr  questSon." 

The  ootmael  did  not  get  any  answer  to  his  qnestiQii,  nor 
did  he  fed  any  need  of  it  It  was  quite  dear  to  him  that 
this  question  had  strayed  into  his  head  and  had  escaped 
from  his  tongue  only  under  the  influence  of  the  quiet,  the 
ennui,  and  the  buzdng  ventilator.  Having  dismissed  the 
physidan,  the  court  passed  to  the  examination  of  the  mateiid 
instruments  of  evidence.  First  they  examined  the  caftan, 
on  the  sleeve  of  whidi  there  was  a  dark  blood  spot  Being 
asked  of  the  origin  of  this  spot,  Kharldmov  declared: 

"  About  three  days  before  the  death  of  my  wife  Penkdv 
bled  his  horse.  I  was  there,  and  as  I  hdped  him,  I  naturally 
got  some  on  me." 

"  But  Penk6v  has  just  now  declared  that  he  does  not  re> 
member  your  being  present  at  the  bleeding." 

"  I  don't  understand  that! " 

••Sit  down!" 

They  passed  to  the  examination  of  the  axe  with  which  the 

woman  had  been  killed. 
•'  That  is  not  my  axe,"  declared  the  defendant 
•' Whose  then?" 
•*  I  don't  know.    I  had  no  axe." 

"  A  peasant  can't  get  on  a  single  day  without  an  axe. 
Your  neighbour  Ivdn  Timof6ich,  with  whom  you  fixed  the 
sleigh,  deposed  that  it  is  your  axe." 

"  I  don't  know,  only  I  swear  before  God," — Kharlimov 
stretched  his  hand  with  open  fingers  before  him, — "  I  swear 
by  the  true  Creator,  I  don't  remember  of  ever  having  had 
an  axe  of  my  own.  I  once  had  one  like  it,  only  a  little 
smaller,  but  my  son  Prokh6r  lost  it.   Two  years  before  his 


Aleksy^y  Maksimovich  I^eshk6v  467 


military  service  he  went  out  to  cut  some  wood,  but  he  was 
having  a  good  time  with  the  boys,  and  he  lost  it" 
"AU  right,  sit  down!" 

This  flystematic  suspicion  and  nnwUlingneai  to  ilrten  to 
bun  no  donbt  providced  and  offmded  KliarUbnov.  He 
winked,  and  on  his  cheeks  appealed  red  spots. 

*'  As  before  the  Lordl "  continaed  he,  stretching  oat  his 
neck,  "  If  yon  do  not  believe,  ask  my  son  Prokh6r.  Prok- 
li6r,  where  is  my  aze? **  he  suddenly  asked  with  a  ooarse 
voice,  abruptly  turning  to  the  guard.  * '  Where  ? '  * 

That  was  a  ahodcing  moment!  All  seemed  to  have  seated 

themselves  and  to  have  become  lower  in  stature  Through 

all  the  heads,  as  many  as  there  were  in  the  court-room,  there 
flashed  one  and  the  same  terrible,  impossible  thought,  the 
thought  of  the  probable  fatal  accident,  and  not  a  person 
risked  or  dared  to  look  at  the  face  of  the  soldier.  All  wished 
not  to  believe  their  thought  and  hoped  they  had  not  heard 
correctly. 

*'  Defendant,  it  is  not  permitted  to  speak  to  the  guard," 

the  judge  hastened  to  say. 

Nobody  saw  the  face  of  the  guard  and  terror  invisibly 
passed  through  the  court-room.   The  bailiff  softly  rose  from 

his  seat  and,  balancing  himself  with  his  arms,  walked  out  of 
the  room  on  tiptoes.  Half  a  minute  later  were  heard  hollow 
steps  and  sounds,  such  as  are  heard  during  the  change  of 

sentinels. 

Ever>'body  raised  his  head  and,  trying  to  look  as  if  no- 
thing had  happened,  they  continaed  the  case. 

Aldcsy^y  Maksimovich  Pyeshk6T  (pseud.  Maksim 
G6rki).  (1871-.) 

Born  as  the  soa  of  an  upholsterer,  G6rki,  by  which  name  Pyedl- 
k&r  it  tbeit  kncmn,  was  faroaght  up  by  hie  mother's  pwents.  He  had 
bardy  entered  school  when  his  gnadparents'  reverses  caosed  him  to 
be  apprenticed  to  a  shoemaker.  After  that  he  tried  himself  in  every 

possible  capacity — as  an  engraver,  painter  of  boly  images,  cook, 
bawker  of  apples,  and  so  forth.  In  the  meanwhile  he  had  an  oppor- 
tnoity  to  learn  to  read,  and  he  read  any  and  all  books  he  conld 


468         The  Nineteenth  Century 


procoic  WiuiUy  he  fen  ia  with  aUwytr  at  Nfiimi«NAfgow»d  iHiodid 
•  gtcftt  deal  foe  hb  awakening.  Then  he  once  more  started  oat  oa 
his  wanderings,  and  in  the  Cancasns  in  1893  wrote  his  first  story, 
entitled  Mak&r  Chudra,  for  a  local  paper.  The  next  year  he  relumed 
to  N(zhm-N6Tgorod,  and  here  he  met  the  author  Korol^nko,  under 
wlioie  fnidaim  Us  litcfMy  career  hegn.  Gteki  diane  Ut  iragi> 
boode  witfi  a  reeUna  that  enipeiigi  dl  {Mcvioa*  alteaipto  ia  that 
field.  Unlike  Usp^nski,  Zlatovr&tski,  and  the  other  writers  who 
have  treated  similar  subjects,  he  has  no  bias  in  any  direction  whatso- 
ever, but  depicts  elementary  passiot5s  at  full  play,  quite  unconcerned 
about  the  results  to  which  they  may  lead.  Not  less  characteristic 
are  lib  pklnrea  of  loatheni  aoeBCB.  of  tlie  ateppe,  tlie  aea,  aad  the 
noiiyqaaj. 

In  English  translation  have  appeared :  Orioff  Complex  translated  by 
Bmily  Jakowleff  and  Dora  B.  Montefiore,  London,  1901 ;  Orioff  and 
his  Wife,  translated  by  I.  F.  Hapgood,  New  York,  1902 ;  Fonn 
Gordyeeff,  translated  by  I.  F.  Hapgood,  New  York,  1901  ;  Foma 
Gordeyevt  traaalated  bj  H.  Beniateia,  New  York,  190Z ;  Twenfysix 
tmd Ome^  New  Yoilc,  1909;  Tk/mfy-Hx  Mem  tmd  «  Giwit  traaalated 
by  B.  Jakowleff  and  D.  B.  Montefiore,  LondoB,  I902 ;  TaUs  from 
Gorky,  translated  by  N.  H.  Bain,  New  York,  190a ;  The  Devil,  by 
L,  Wiener,  National  Magazine,  1901  ;  Makar  Chudra,  by  M.  Mojay- 
sky,  Monthly  Review,  1901 ;  Tchelkache,  by  Katherine  Wylde,  Fort- 
nightly Review,  aad  Ifiving  Age,  1901;  Song  of  ikg  FUam, 
Coatcmpocary  Review,  1908;  part  of  TIU  Awttkmiiiig  ^  m  Om- 
$eUn€it  bj  L»  Wleaer,  ia  Gametf a  UaivesMl  Aathologj. 

IN  THE  STEPPE 

STORY  OP  A  TRAMP 

We  left  Perek6p  in  the  worst  possible  mood, — we  were  as 
htingry  as  wolves  and  angry  with  the  whole  world.  For 
more  than  half  a  day  we  had  unsuccessfully  applied  all  oar 
talents  and  efforts  to  steal  or  earn  something,  and  when  we 
at  last  convinoed  ooxmIvm  that  we  would  liil  in  both  at- 
tempts, we  deddcd  to  move  on.  Whlfher?  That  was  a 
matter  of  indifference,  as  long  as  we  moved  on.  This  was 
our  nnanhtuMta  resolution,  as  we  had  fTprfaand  it  to  eadi 
other,  but  we  were  ready  to  proceed  in  every  reqiect  npon 
the  path  of  our  actlona  upon  which  we  had  been  tiavdling 


Digitized  by  Google 


Aleksydy  Maksimovich  Pyeshk6v  4^ 


quite  a  while, — that  had  been  silently  agreed  to  by  everyone 
of  us  and,  though  it  was  not  spoken  of  in  the  hearing  of  all, 
it  sparkled  clearly  in  the  grim  lustre  of  our  hungry  eyes. 

There  were  three  of  us;  we  had  but  lately  made  each 
other's  acquaintance,  having  met  at  Khdrson,  in  a  saloon 
on  the  bank  of  the  Dnieper. 

One  of  us  had  been  a  soldier  of  a  railroad  battalion,  later, 
as  he  professed,  a  roadmaster  with  one  of  the  Polish  rail- 
ways; he  was  a  red-haired,  muscular  man,  with  cold,  grey 
eyes;  he  could  speak  German,  and  possessed  a  very  detailed 
knowledge  of  prison  life. 

People  of  our  class  don't  like  to  talk  much  about  their 
past,  generally  having  more  or  less  good  reasons  for  not 
mentioning  it;  consequently  we  all  believed  each  other,  at 
least  outwardly,  for  inwardly  we  hardly  believed  onr- 

Wben  our  second  eompetilon,  a  small,  wizened  man  with 
tbin  tips,  that  were  all  the  time  skeptically  compfessed,  said 
of  himself  that  he  had  been  a  student  at  the  Moscow  Uni- 
Tenity,— the  soldier  and  I  accepted  this  assertiott  as  a  fact 
In  reatity,  it  was  absolntely  the  same  to  ns  whether  he  had 
ever  been  a  student,  a  detective,  or  one  of  the  "  Orleans," — 
the  only  important  point  was  that  at  the  time  of  our  ae- 
quaintancesfaip  he  was  our  equal:  he  was  starving,  he  en- 
ioytd  in  towns  the  especial  attention  of  the  police,  and  in 
the  country  the  suspidooa  attitude  of  the  peasants;  he  hated 
both  with  the  hatred  of  a  powerlessi  pemcnted,  and  hungry 
animal,  and  dreamt  of  a  universal  revenge  upon  everybody 
and  everything, — ^in  short,  by  his  position  amidst  the  kings 
of  Nature  and  the  potentates  of  life,  and  by  hia  inclinations^ 
he  was  a  bird  of  our  feather. 

Misfortune  is  the  beat  cement  to  unite  even  the  most  con- 
tradictory natures,  and  we  were  all  convinced  of  oitr  right 
to  regard  ourselves  as  unfortunates. 

I  was  the  third.  Out  of  modesty,  which  has  been  my 
characteristic  ever  since  my  nails  were  grown,  I  will  not  say 
a  word  about  my  worth,  and,  not  wishing  to  appear  naive  to 
you,  I  will  keep  silent  about  my  faults.   However,  to  fnmiah 


470         The  Nineteenth  Century 

you  material  for  my  characterisation,  I  will  say  that  I  always 
f^;arded  myself  better  than  others^  and  that  I  still  aoooeaB- 
fnlly  maintain  this  opinion. 

So  we  left  Pef«k6p  and  moved  on,  depending  for  that  day 
upon  the  shepherda,  whom  one  may  always  ask  for  a  piece  of 
bfead  and  who  never  lefnae  it  to  pedcrtrfana. 

I  walked  by  the  aide  of  the  soldier,  the  "atodent"  maidied 
behind  as.  Over  his  shonlders  hong  something  that  some- 
what itminded  of  a  frock-ooat;  on  his  sharp-pointed,  angular 
and  dean-shaven  head  rested  tiie  remnant  of  a  bioad-lirimmed 
hat;  grey  trowaers  with  many-ootoored  patches  fitted  tightly 
to  his  thin  legs,  and  to  the  soles  of  his  feet  he  had  fastened 
parts  of  a  bootleg,  which  he  had  pidced  up  on  his  way;  he 
held  them  in  place  by  means  of  ropes  which  he  had  wound 
out  of  the  lining  of  his  costume,  and  this  affidr  he  called 
sandals;  he  marched  silently,  raising  a  great  deal  of  doit 
and  blinking  with  his  small  greenish  eyes.  The  soldier  was 
dressed  in  a  red  fustian  shirt  which,  to  tise  hia  words,  he 
had  by  hia  own  hand  obtained  at  Kherson;  over  his  shirt 
there  was  a  warm  cotton  jacket,  and  his  head  was  adorned 
by  a  soldier's  cap  of  indefinite  colour,  which  was  poised,  ac- 
cording to  the  military  rule,  "  with  a  beud  of  the  upper  circle 
over  the  right  brow ' ' ;  about  his  legs  flapped  broad  Ukrainian 
carter's  pantaloons.    He  was  barefooted. 

I  was  similarly  dressed,  and  also  barefooted. 

We  marched  on,  and  all  about  us  extended  the  steppe  with 
a  heroic  sweep  and,  being  covered  with  the  blue,  burning 
cupola  of  a  cloudless  summer  sky,  lay  before  us  like  an  enor- 
mous black  dish.  The  grey,  dusty  road  cut  a  broad  swath 
across  it,  and  burned  our  feet.  Here  and  there  we  saw  bristly 
stretches  of  harvested  grainfields  that  bore  a  striking  re- 
semblance to  the  long-neglected  cheeks  of  the  soldier. 

The  soldier  walked  and  sang  with  a  hoarse  voice: 

"  And  we  sing  and  praise  Thy  holy  Sunday  

During  his  military  service  he  had  been  something  like  a 
sexton  in  the  battalion  church,  and  he  knew  an  endless 
number  of  hymns  and  chants,  which  knowledge  he  misused 
every  time  our  oonvenation  dhi  not  flow  exactly  right 


Digitized  by  Google 


Aleksydy  Maksfmovich  Fyeshk6v    47  < 


Ahead  of  on  the  horizon,  roee  some  fomu  of  soft  ooq*' 
toms  And  gentle  shades,  from  HUic  to  light  fdnk.  ' 

"  That  'a  eTidently  the  Cnmtaa  nuge^"  aaad  the  atndeut 
dryly. 

"Mountains?"  exclaimed  the  aoldier.  "It  'a  mighty 
early,  my  friend,  yon  aee  them.  Thoae  are  dotids»  jnat 
doods.  You  see  what  they  look  like?  Jnst  like  cnnberry 
aanoe  with  milk." 

I  remarked  that  it  would  be  exceedingly  agreeable  if  the 
doods  xeally  oonaisted  of  cranberry  sauce.  Thia  at  onoe 
xoused  our  hunger, — the  great  question  of  the  day. 

The  devill "  cnraed  the  aoldier,  and  sg^  out.      If  only 

a  single  living  soul  came  our  way!   Not  a  person   We'll 

have  to  lick  our  own  paws,  like  bears  in  winter." 

' '  I  said  we  ought  to  keep  near  inhabited  places^"  remarked 
the  '*  student,"  moralising. 

"You  said!"  said  the  soldier  angrily.  "That  's  why 
you  are  a  learned  man,  just  to  be  a-talking.  Where  do  you 
expect  to  find  inhabited  places  here?  The  devil  knows 
where  they  are!  '* 

The  "  student "  grew  silent  and  compressed  his  lips.  The 
sun  was  going  down,  and  the  clouds  in  the  horizon  displayed 
a  variety  of  intangible  colours.  The  air  smelled  of  land  and 
salt. 

This  dry  and  appetising  odour  only  increased  our  hunger. 

There  was  a  gnawing  sensation  in  our  stomachs.  It  was 
a  strange  and  disagreeable  sensation :  it  felt  as  though  the 
sap  were  flowing  out  of  all  the  muscles  of  the  body,  as  though 
it  evaporated,  and  the  muscles  lost  their  vital  flexibility. 
A  aensation  of  atinging  dryness  filled  the  cavity  of  the  month 
and  the  throat;  the  head  waa  dizzy,  and  dark  spots  arose 
and  flitted  before  the  eyea.  At  times  they  aasnmed  the  form 
of  steaming  pieces  of  meat,  of  big  alices  of  bread;  reminis- 
cenoe  furnished  these  "  visions  of  the  past,  silent  visions'* 
with  their  appropriate  aromas,  and  then  it  felt  as  though  a 
knife  were  turning  around  in  the  stomach. 

We  kept  on  marching,  communicating  to  each  other  the 
description  of  oar  sensations  and  bdng  on  a  sharp  lookout 


472         The  Nineteenth  Century 


on  both  sidea,^hopiDg  to  diioovcr  aomewbcte  ft  flock  of 
sheep,  or  to  hear  theaharp  creaking  of  a  Tartar'a  cart  taking 
fruit  to  an  Armenian  market. 

Bat  the  steppe  was  deserted  and  speechlew. 

Oq  the  pieviooa  day  we  had  eaten  between  ns  four  pounds 
of  rye  bread  and  some  five  melons,  after  having  marched 
about  forty  versts, — there  was  a  discrepancy  between  assets 
and  liabilities, — and,  having  fallen  asleep  on  the  «"arlr^ 
place  of  Perek6p,  we  awoke  from  hunger. 

The  "  student "  had  justly  advised  us  not  to  lie  down  to 
sleep,  but  to  go  to  work  in  the  night, — it  is  not  considered 
proper  iu  decent  society  to  speak  aloud  of  the  plans  for  tres- 
passing on  private  property,  and  so  I  shall  keep  silent.  I 
only  want  to  be  truthful,  and  not  vulgar,  as  regards  my  own 
interests.  I  know  that  people  are  getting  more  and  more 
kind-hearted  in  these  our  highly  cultured  days  and  that 
when  they  take  their  neighbour  by  the  throat  with  the  evi- 
dent purpose  of  choking  him,  they  try  to  do  so  with  the  ut- 
most politeness  and  with  the  observance  of  all  the  proprieties, 
suited  to  the  caae.  The  ezperienoe  of  my  own  throat  oom- 
pels  me  to  notice  this  progress  of  manners,  and  I  affirm 
with  a  pleasant  feeling  of  conviction  that  everything  in  this 
world  is  being  developed  and  perfected.  This  remarkable 
progress  is,  in  particnlar,  sufficiently  proved  hy  the  annual 
increase  in  prisonSp  saloons,  and  "  houses  of  toteration." 

So,  swallowing  our  hungry  spittle  and  attempting  by  a 
friendly  oooversatioo  to  suppress  the  pain  in  our 
we  marched  across  the  deserted  and  speeehless  steppe^ 
marched  in  the  blood-red  rays  of  the  declining  sun,  frill  of  a 
dim  hope  of  something.  In  front  of  us,  the  son  was  going 
down,  gently  descending  into  the  soft  doods,  whidi  were 
lavishly  painted  by  its  rays,  and  behind  us  and  at  our  sides 
a  bluish  mist«  rising  from  the  steppe  towards  heaven,  nar^ 
rowed  down  the  inhospitable  horizon  around  us. 

"  Friends,  collect  material  for  a  fire,"  said  the  soldier,  as 
he  lifted  a  stick  by  the  wayside.  '  *  We  will  have  to  sleep 
out  on  the  steppe,  and  there  is  dew  felling.  Pick  up  dung 
chips  and  all  kinds  of  dry  stalks! " 


Digitized  by  Google 


Aleksydy  Maksimovich  Pyeshk6v  473 


We  acattered  on  both  aides  of  the  toad  and  began  to  col- 
lect diy  weeds  and  everything  elae  that  wooldbnin.  Every 
time  I  had  to  bend  down,  a  powerfnl  desire  to  fall  domi 
noon  ♦'ho  srannd  took  noaaeaaion  of  mv  bodv.  a  deaiie  to  lie 
immovably  and  eat  the  xicii,  blade  earth,  to  eat  a  great  deal 
of  it,  to  ezhanation,  and  then  to  foil  adeep,  even  if  it  were 
to  lall  aaleep  for  ever,  as  long  as  there  would  be  something 
to  eat,  and  I  could  chew  and  foel  the  thick,  warm  maas 
slowly  passing  from  the  month  over  the  dried-upoeaophagns 
into  the  hungry  and  comprcaacd  atomach  that  waa  boning 
with  the  deaire  of  sucking  something  in. 

"  If  we  could  only  find  some  roota»"  aighed  the  soldier. 
"  There  are  some  edible  roots." 

But  there  were  no  roots  whatsoever  in  the  black,  ploughed- 
up  earth.  The  southern  night  came  upon  us  rapidly,  and 
the  last  sunbeam  had  not  yet  gone  out,  when  the  stars  began 
to  glisten  in  the  dark-blue  vault,  and  the  dark  shadows  grew 
thicker  around  us,  narrowing  down  the  endless  extent  of  the 
ateppe  that  held  us. 

"  Friends,"  said  the  "student"  half-aloud,  "  there  is  a 
man  lying  to  the  left  of  us." 

"A  man?"  doubted  the  soldier.  "  Why  should  he  be 
lying  there?  " 

"  Go  and  ask  him.  No  doubt,  he  has  some  bread,  or  he 
would  not  be  camping  out  in  the  steppe,"  explained  the 
''student."  The  soldier  looked  aside,  where  the  man  was 
lying,  and,  spitting  out  assertively,  he  said: 

"  Let  ns  go  to  him!" 

Only  the  "  student's*'  sharp  green  ^yes  coold  have  dis- 
covered that  the  dark  mass  that  rose  some  three  hundred  and 
fifty  feet  to  the  left  of  the  road  was  a  man.  We  atarted  in 
that  direction,  swiftly  striding  over  dods  of  earth,  and  we 
felt  the  pang  of  hunger  getting  more  acute  in  the  germinat- 
ing hope  of  finding  something  to  eat  We  were  near  the 
place,  but  the  man  did  not  move. 

**  Maybe  that  is  not  a  man,"  gloomily  said  the  soldier, 
giving  expression  to  our  common  thought. 

But  our  doubt  waa  immediately  diqieiaed,  ibr  the  maaa  on 


474         The  Nineteenth  Century 


the  grottad  moved,  raiaed  itself,  and  we  aaw  that  it  was  a 
real,  live  man  who  was  standing  on  his  knees  and  strfftrhing 
out  his  hands  towaids  as. 

He  spoke  to  us  with  a  dull  and  trembling  voice: 

'*  Not  a  step  nearer,  or  I  '11  shoot!  " 

A  dry,  short  diet  was  heard  in  the  murky  air. 

We  stopped  as  commanded  and  kept  silent  for  a  lew 
seconds,  being  dazed  by  such  an  inhospitable  reception. 

"  What  a  r- rascal!  "  muttered  the  soldier  deliberately. 

•*  Yes."  thoughtfully  said  the  "  student."  "  He  wanders 
about  with  a  revolver;  evidently,  the  fish  is  full  of  spawn." 

"  Oh  there!  "  called  out  the  soldier,  having  made  up  his 
mind  for  something. 

The  man  did  not  change  his  position  and  kept  silent. 

**  Oh  there!  We  will  not  touch  you.  Give  us  only  some 
bread,  if  you  have  any!  For  Christ's  sake,  give  us  some, 
friend!    Damn  you,  anathema!  " 

The  last  woids  the  soldier  spoke  under  his  breath. 

Tlie  man  kept  silent 

"  Do  yon  hear?"  again  spoke  fhe  soldier,  with  a  tremor 
of  anger  and  despafar.  "  Gi^  vs  some  Inead,  I  sqrl  We 
will  not  oome  near  yon.  Throw  some  to  nsl  ** 

**  All  right! "  said  fhe  man  abraptly. 

He  might  have  said  to  ns:  "  My  dear  bretfarenl"  and 
if  he  had  poured  all  his  holiest  and  purest  sentiments  into 
these  three  Christian  words,  they  would  not  have  roosed  ns 
so  and  would  not  have  made  us  so  human  as  this  doll  and 
short: 

"AUrigbtl'* 

'*  Don't  Ibar  us,  good  man!  '*  said  the  soldier  softly  and 
with  a  sweet  smile  upon  his  fiice,  though  the  man  could  not 
see  his  smile,  for  he  was  separated  ftom  oa  by  at  least  twenty 

paces. 

"  We  're  peaceable  people,  and  are  walking  from  Rusaa 
into  the  Kubdn  country;  we  have  spent  our  pennies  on  the 
way,  and  have  eaten  up  our  provisions,  and  have  n't  had  a 
bite  for  two  days." 

*'  Catch  it,"  said  the  good  man,  flourishing  something  in 


Digitized  by  Google 


Aleksydy  Maksbnovich  Pyeshk6v  475 


the  air.  A  black  piece  flashed  by  and  fell  not  far  from  as  on 
the  ploughed  field.  The  "atndent"  threw  himadftqkon  it. 

"Catcfaagainl  Once  morel  That 's  all  I  havel '* 

When  the  "attulent"  colkcted  tiiis  original  gift,  it 
peared  that  we  had  about  four  pounds  of  stale  wheat  bread. 
It  was  all  rolled  in  dirt  and  very  stale.  The  first  did  not  de- 
tain our  attention,  the  second  pleased  us  very  much.  Stale 
bread  is  more  nourishing  than  fresh  bread,  because  there  is 
leas  moisture  in  it 

**  Here,  and  here,  and  here! "  the  soldier  doled  out  the 
shares  with  concentrated  attention.  "  Hold  on,  the  pieces 
axe  n't  equal!  We  '11  have  to  pinch  off  a  piece  d  youn, 
learned  man,  or  he  will  have  too  little." 

The  "student"  submitted  without  grumbling  to  the 
diminntion  of  his  piece  of  bread  some  five  ounces;  I  took 
it  and  put  it  in  my  mouth. 

I  began  to  chew  it,  to  chew  it  slowlj%  barely  repressing 
the  cramp-like  motion  of  my  jaws  that  were  ready  to  crush 
stones.  It  gave  me  an  acute  pleasure  to  feel  the  palpitating 
cramps  of  my  alimentary  canal,  and  to  satisfy  it  slowly  and 
by  small  drops.  Swallow  after  swallow,  warm  and  inex- 
pressibly, incomprehensibly  appetising,  penetrated  into  the 
burning  stomach  and  seemed  immediately  to  be  transformed 
into  blood  and  brain.  Joy,  such  a  strange,  quiet,  and  vivi- 
fying joy,  warmed  my  heart  in  the  measure  as  my  stomach 
filled  up,  and  my  general  condition  was  not  unlike  a  half- 
sleeping.  I  forgot  those  accursed  days  of  my  chronic  hunger ; 
I  forgot  my  companions,  being  all  merged  in  the  enjoyment 
by  the  sensations  through  which  I  then  passed. 

But  when  I  threw  from  my  palm  the  last  crumbs  into  my 
month,  I  felt  that  I  was  deathly  hungry. 

"  That  accursed  oue  has  some  bacoo  or  some  meat  left,*' 
grumbled  the  soldier,  sitting  against  me  on  the  ground  and 
rubbing  his  bdly  with  his  hands. 

*'  No  doubt,  for  the  bread  smelled  of  meat.  Yea^  and  he 
may  have  some  bread  left,  too,"  said  the  "student"  and 
softly  added: 

If  it  were  not  for  the  revolver  " 


47^         The  Nineteenth  Century 


"  Wbo  is  be  anyway  ?  " 

"  Bvidently,  one  of  our  kind." 
A  dosl*' dedaxed  the  soldier. 

We  were  dtting  doady  together  and  kqpt  looSdng  aakaiioe 
at  the  plaoe  where  our  benefiictor  was  sitting  with  his  re- 
volver.  Not  a  sound,  nor  a  sign  of  life  proceeded  from  him. 

Night  was  gathering  around  ns  her  dark  powers.  Tliere 
was  a  dead  silence  in  the  steppe,  and  we  could  hear  each 
other's  breathing.  Now  and  then  the  melancholy  whistling 
of  a  giopher  reached  our  ears.  The  stars— living  flowers  of 
heaven — gleamed  above  us.   We  wanted  to  eat. 

I  say  it  proudly, — I  was  not  worse  nor  better  than  my 
casual  companions  in  that  somewhat  strange  night.  I  pro- 
posed to  them  that  we  should  get  up  and  make  for  that  man. 
We  would  not  touch  him,  but  we  would  eat  up  anything  he 
might  have.  He  would  shoot, — let  him!  He  could  hit  but 
one  of  us  three,  if  he  hit  us  at  all ;  and  even  if  he  did,  a  bul' 
let  from  a  revolver  would  hardly  kill. 

"  lyet  us  go!  "  said  the  soldier,  jumping  to  his  feet. 

The  "  student "  was  slower  in  rising. 

We  started,  we  almost  ran.  The  ' '  student ' '  kept  towards 
one  side,  and  behind  us. 

*'  Partner!  '*  cried  the  soldier  to  him  reproachfully. 

We  were  met  with  a  dull  grumbling  and  a  sharp  sound  of  a 
clicking  hammer.  There  was  a  flash  of  fire,  and  the  dry 
sound  of  a  shot  was  heard. 

*'  Missed!"  joyfully  exclaimed  the  soldier,  reaching  the 
man  with  one  bound.  **  Well,  devil,  I  '11  give  it  to  you 
now!" 

The^'stodant'*  made  a  rush  ibr  hit  wallet 

The  devil  fell  from  his  knees  upon  his  bad^  and,  stretdi- 
ing  oat  his  hands»  began  to  snore. 

"  Whatthedenoe! "  wondered  the  soldier,  who  had  already 
raised  his  loot  to  give  the  man  a  kick.  **  Is  it  possible  he 
has fiOed  himsdf  up  with  lead?  Oh,  tiiere,  get  np!  Say, 
did  yon  kiU  yonradi,  eh?  " 

'*  There  is  some  bread,  and  some  cakes,  and  bread— lots 
of  it,  £riendsl "  was  heard  the  jnbilant  vdoe  of  the  "stodent" 


Digitized  by  Google 


Aleksyiy  Maksimovich  Pyeshkdv  477 


"  Wdl,  the  deufie  take  you,  go  to!  I^et  ni  eat,  friends! " 
cried  tlie  soldier.  I  took  tke  xevolTer  oat  of  the  hands  of 
the  man,  who  had  stopped  snoring  and  lay  motiooleas.  One 

barrel  had  a  cartridge  in  it. 

We  ate  again,  and  we  ate  in  silenoe.  The  man  lay  silent, 
without  moving  a  limb.    We  paid  no  attention  to  him. 

Is  it  really  so,  my  friends,  that  yon  did  it  all  for  the 
bread  only  i"  suddenly  was  heard  a  hoarse  and  quivering 
voice. 

We  all  shuddered.   The  "  student ' '  even  started  up  and, 

bending  to  the  ground,  began  to  cough. 

The  soldier  finished  che\\ing  and  began  cursing. 

**  You,  soul  of  a  dog,  may  you  burst  like  a  dr>'  plank ! 
What  did  you  want  us  to  do  ?  Take  off  your  hide  ?  What 
good  would  it  do  us  ?  You  stupid  snout,  damned  soul !  I 
declare!  Carrying  arms,  and  shooting  at  people!  You 
anathema! " 

He  kept  on  cursing  and  eating,  which  latter  fact  much 
diminished  the  expressiveness  and  strength  of  his  curses. 

**  Just  wait,  when  we  are  through  eating,  we  '11  square  up 
with  you,"  ominously  threatened  the  "  student." 

Then  were  heard,  in  the  quiet  of  the  night,  howling  sobs 
that  frightened  us. 

"Friends,  how  could  I  know?  I  fired  because  I  was 
afiraid.  I  am  on  my  way  from  New  Af6n  to  the  Govern- 
mentofOr61.  O  L<»dt  The  fever  is  undoing  me  ainoe  tiie 
sun  went  down!  It  was  the  fever  that  made  me  leave  Af6n 

  I  was  doing  some  carpentering  theie         I  am  a 

carpenter         I  have  at  home  a  wife  and  two  daughters 

--have  n't  seen  them  these  three  years         Friends!  Bat 

eveijrtliing  

"  We  wiU,  you  need  n*t  ask  us!  '*  said  the  "student" 

"  My  Lord!  If  I  had  known  that  you  weregood,  peace- 
able people,  do  you  suppose  I  would  have  fired  at  you? 
Yon  see^  my  friends,  it 's  the  steppe,  and  night— am  I  to  he 
hiamed,  di?  " 

As  he  said  that,  he  wept,  or  to  speak  mote  correctly, 
emitted  a  quivering,  timorous  howl. 


Digitized  by  Google 


47^         The  Nineteenth  Century 


-  "  Hear  him  whine  1 "  contempttioiisly  said  the  aoldier. 
*'He  must  have  moa^  about  him,"  dedand  the 
student." 

The  soldier  blinked,  looked  at  him,  and  amikd. 

*'  You  are  a  good  gueaaer.  Say:  lei  us  make  a  fire^  and 

goto  sleep!'* 

And  he ?  "  inquired  the  "  student." 
"  The  deuoe  take  himl   What  do  you  want  ua  to  do — 

roast  him  ? ' ' 

"  We  ought  to! "  the  "  student "  shook  has  sharp-pointed 

head. 

We  went  for  the  material  which  we  had  been  gathering 
and  which  we  had  thrown  away  where  the  carpenter  had 
stopped  us  with  his  threatening  call;  we  brought  it  back, 
and  soon  we  were  sitting  around  a  fire.  It  glowed  softly  in 
the  windless  night  and  illuminated  a  small  space  which  we 
were  occupying.  We  were  feeling  sleepy,  though  we  could 
have  supped  again. 

*'  Friends!  "  cried  out  the  carpenter.  He  was  Ijring  some 
three  paces  from  us,  and  at  times  it  appeared  to  me  that  he 
was  muttering  something. 

*<  WeU?"  wBid  the  aoldier. 

**  May  I  move  up  to  you,  to  the  fire?  My  death  ia  upon 
me,  my  bones  are  addng.  Lordl  I  doo't  tlitnk  I 'U  reach 
home.'* 

"  Crawl  up,'>  decided  the  "  student*' 

The  carpenter  slowly  cnwled  along  tlie  ground  toiwaids 
the  fixe,  as  If  leaxing  to  lose  an  arm  or  1^.  He  was  a  tail 
and  dreadfully  dried  up  man:  evetytbing  bung  dreadfully 
loose  about  him,  and  his  large  dim  eyes  reflected  the  pain 
that  was  oonanming  bim.  His  wxy  &oe  was  bony  and  bad 
even  In  the  light  of  the  fire  a  kind  of  a  yellowish  earthy, 
deathly  color.  He  was  all  in  a  tremble  and  provoked  a 
contemptuous  pity.  He  stretched  out  to  the  fire  his  long, 
lean  hands,  and  rubbed  his  bony  fingers,  but  their  joints 
bent  lazily  and  slowly.   In  short,  he  was  a  horrible  sight. 

"  How  is  it  you  are  in  such  a  fix,  and  afoot  ?  Are  you  SO 
stingy  ? ' '  gloomily  asked  the  soldier. 


Digitized  by  GoogI 


Aleksydy  Maksfmovich  Pyeshk6v  479 


"  Tiuy  advised  me  not  to  go  by  aea,  but  to  walk  thnmgh 
tbe  Crimea,  on  aoooont  of  the  air.  Bat  I  can't  walk,  I  am 
dying,  farofhenl    I  'U  die  alone  in  tbe  steppe— the  biida 

will  pe^  at  me^  and  nobody  will  know  me         My  wife 

and  daughters  will  be  waiting         I  have  written  to  them 

—bat  the  lains  of  the  atqipe  will  be  bleaching  my  bones. 
My  I/nrd,  my  I/)rd! " 

He  whined  with  the  melancholy  whine  of  a  wounded  wolf. 

"  The  devil,"  cried  out  the  soldier  as  he  rose  to  his  feet 
"  Don't  howl  so  ?  Why  don't  you  give  us  people  any  rest? 
Are  you  dying  ?  All  sight,  die,  but  keep  quiet.  Who  wants 
you?   Shut  up!" 

"  Kick  him  in  the  pate!  "  proposed  the  "  student." 

"  Let  us  lie  down  to  sleep,"  said  I.  "  And  you,  if  you 
want  to  be  by  the  fire,  don't  howl  at  least." 

*  *  Did  you  hear  ? ' '  sternly  said  the  soldier.  * '  Well,  make  a 
note  of  it.  Do  you  think  we  are  going  to  pity  you  and  look 
after  you,  for  hurling  bread  at  us,  and  firing  on  us  ?  You 
mean  devil!    Others  pah  " 

The  soldier  grew  silent  and  stretched  himself  out  on  the 
ground. 

The  "student"  had  lain  down  before.  I  lay  down  my- 
self. The  frightened  carpenter  was  all  bent  into  a  ball  and 
moved  to  the  fire,  and  looked  at  it  fixedly.  I  lay  to  the 
right  of  him  and  I  could  hear  his  teeth  chatter.  The 
*'  student "  was  to  the  left  of  him  and,  it  seemed,  fell  at  once 
asleep,  having  rolled  up  into  a  ball.  The  soldier  put  his 
bands  tmder  his  head  and  lay,  face  upwards,  and  looked  at 
the  sky. 

"What  a  night!  I^ta  of  stars— wamth  "  he  turned 

to  me  after  a  time. 

"  What  a  sky  f  It  'a  a  ooveriet,  not  a  sky.  I  do  love 
this  life  of  a  trampb  my  friend.  You  suffer  cold  and  hunger, 
bat  it  'a  a  mighty  free  life.  There  is  no  superior  over  you 
— yoa  are  master  of  your  life.  You  may  diew  off  your 
bead,  and  nobody  will  say  a  word  to  you.  It 's  fine.  I 
have  starved  enough  these  days^  and  have  had  enough  cause 
§at  anger,  bat  now  I  am  lying  and  looking  at  the  sky.  The 


Digitized  by  Google 


I 


43o         The  Niaeteenth  Centuiy 

stars  are  twinkling  to  me,  as  if  to  say:  '  Never  mind,  La- 
kiitin,  wander  about  over  the  earth  and  submit  to  nobody.' 

Yes          And  my  heart  feels  light          Oh,  there,  what  do 

they  call  you  ?  Oh,  there,  carpenter!  Don't  be  angry  with 
me,  and  have  no  fear!  As  to  our  having  eaten  up  your 
bread,  that 's  nothing.    You  had  some  bread,  and  we  had 

none,  so  we  ate  up  yours          But  you  are  a  savage,  you 

fire  off  guns.  Don't  you  know  that  bullets  may  harm  peo- 
ple ?  It  made  me  dreadfully  mad,  and  if  you  had  not  fallen 
down,  I  would  have  thrashed  you,  my  friend,  for  your  im- 
pudence. But  as  for  the  bread,  you  will  reach  Perek6p  to- 
morrow, and  so  you  will  buy  some — I  know  you  have  money 
  How  long  is  it  since  you  caught  the  ague  ? ' ' 

The  baas  of  the  soldier  and  the  quivering  v<Mce  of  the  sick 
carpenter  reaoimded  for  quite  a  while  m  my  ears.  Dark, 
•hnoit  Uack  nlglit  deaoended  monandmofe  upoiifhe  earth, 
and  the  fresh,  aromatic  afar  flowed  into  my  breaat 

From  the  fire  came  an  even  light  and  vivifying  warmtiL 
The  eyes  became  gluey,  and  before  them  was  borne,  throngh 
the  dniwaineaa^  aomeddng  soothing  and  pnii^ring. 


''Getnp!  Livdytheiel  I^usgo!'* 

I  opened  my  eyea  with  a  feeling  of  terror  and  swiftly 
jumped  to  my  feet,  behig  helped  hy  the  aoldier,  who  jeribed 
me  up  fiom  the  gronnd. 

**  Uvely  theiet  Hove  on!*' 

Hia  feoe  was  stem  and  agitated.  I  looked  axoond  me. 
The  sun  was  rising,  and  ita  roae  coloured  beam  lay  upon  the 
immovable  and  blue  face  of  the  carpenter.  Hia  month  was 
open,  his  ^res  stood  far  out  of  their  sockets  and  stated  with 
a  glassy  glance^  expressive  of  tenor.  Hia  dress  was  all  ton 
over  his  chest,  and  he  lay  In  an  unnaturally  contorted  posi- 
tion.  The  "  student  *'  was  gone. 

Well,  what  are  you  tanying  for  ?  I  told  you  to  go! " 
said  the  soldier  persuasively,  pulling  me  all  the  time  by  my 
arm. 

"  Is  he  dead? "  asked  I,  shuddering  from  the  morning 
freshness. 


Digitized  by  GoogU : 


Aleksydy  Makslmovich  Pyeshk6v  4^1 


"  Of  ootM;  Yon  would  die,  too,  if  they  dtoioed  you,*' 
explained  the  soldier. 

"  What,  did  the « atndent  *?"  cried  L 

"Well,  who  else?  Maybe,  you?  Or  I?  Yes.  There 

yon  have  a  learned  man         He  got  away  with  the  man, 

and  left  his  companions  in  a  nice  fix.  If  I  had  known  that 
yesterday,  I  would  have  killed  that  '  student.'  I  would 
have  killed  him  with  one  stroke.  I  would  have  banged  his 
temple  with  my  fist,  and  there  would  have  been  a  villain  less 
in  the  world.  Do  you  undeiatand  what  he  did  ?  Now  we 
are  compelled  to  walk  in  such  a  way  that  not  a  soul  shall 
see  us  in  the  steppe.  Do  you  understand  ?  Because  they 
will  find  the  carpenter  to-day,  and  they  will  discover  that  he 
had  been  choked  to  death  and  robbed.  And  they  will  be  oa 
the  lookout  for  fellows  of  our  kind:  Where  do  you  come 
from,  and  where  did  you  pass  your  night  ?   Yes,  and  they 

will  catch  us          Though  we  haven't  a  thing  of  his — yes, 

I  have  his  revolver  in  my  bosom.  It 's  a  nice  fix  we  are 
inl" 

**  Throw  it  away,"  I  advised  the  soldier. 

"Throw  it  away,"  said  he,  thoughtfully.  *'  It 's  worth 
something.  And  then,  maybe  they  will  not  catch  us.  No, 
I  won't  throw  it  awaj'.  Who  knows  that  the  carpenter  had 
a  gun?  I  won't  throw  it  awaj'.  It 's  worth  three  roubles. 
There  is  a  bullet  in  it.  I  tell  you,  I  would  like  to  send  it 
a-flying  into  the  ear  of  our  dear  companion !  I  wonder  how 
much  money  that  dog  got  away  with!    Auathema!  '* 

"  Poor  daughters  of  the  carpenter,"  said  I. 

"The  daughters?  What  daughters?  Oh,  his.  Well, 
they  '11  grow  up,  and  they  won*t  marry  us,  so  there  is  no 
use  talking  about  them.  Come,  friend,  let  us  be  off. 
Where  shall  we  go  ?  " 

"I  don't  know   Anywhere." 

"  I  don't  know  either,  and  I  know  that  It  makes  no  difiBer- 
enoe.  Come,  let  us  to  the  right,  there  must  be  the  sea.'* 

We  went  to  the  right 

I  turned  bade.  Par  away  from  us  rose  a  dark  mound  In 
the  steppe,  and  the  sun  shone  over  it 

VOL.  n.^  31. 


482         The  Nineteenth  Centuiy 


"Ate  you  trying  torn  if  he  his  aiitenfioii  tlie  dead? 
Don't  be  afraid,  he  won't  be  up  alter  us.  The  learned  fdlov 
IB  evidently  a  man  of  ezperlenoe,  he  has  done  his  job  thor> 
onghly.  Wen,  he 's  a  fine  partner!  He  has  pat  its  in  a 
nice  hole!  Friend!  People  are  getting  worse  from  year  to 
year,  they  are  getting  worse!  *'  said  the  soldier  moomfnlly. 

The  deserted  and  apeechleas  steppe,  bathed  by  the  bright 
morning  son  and  mingling  in  the  horison  with  tiie  sky,  was 
unfolded  aronnd  ns  in  such  a  bright,  gentle,  and  abundant 
light  that  every  black  and  nnrighteous  deed  seemed  impos- 
sible amidst  the  great  extent  of  this  free  plain  that  was 
covered  by  the  blue  cupola  of  the  sky. 

"I  feel  like  having  something  to  eat,  friend!"  said  my 
companion,  as  he  rolled  himself  a  cigarette  ont  of  coaiae 
tobacco. 

' '  What  shall  we  eat  to^y,  and  where  and  how  ?  " 
It  was  a  probkml 


Having  told  me  this,  the  storyteller,  who  was  my  ndgh* 
boor  in  the  hospital,  ended  his  narrative. 

"  That  *s  all.  The  soldier  and  I  got  to  be  good  friends^ 
and  we  walked  together  to  the  Kdra  territory.  He  was  a 
good  and  very  experienced  fellow,  a  typical  barefoot  tramp. 
I  respected  him.  We  walked  together  to  Asia  Minor,  and 
then  I  lost  track  of  him." 

"  Do  you  ever  think  of  the  carpenter?  "  asked  I. 

•*  As  you  see,  or,  as  yon  heard." 

"Well,  and—?" 

He  laughed. 

"  What  am  I  to  feel  ?  It  was  not  ray  fault  what  happened 
to  him,  not  any  more  than  it  is  your  fault  what  has  happened 
to  me.  Nobody  is  to  be  blamed  for  anything,  because  we 
are  all  alike — beasts." 

Dmitri  Sergy^cvich  Merezhkdvski.  (1865-.) 

Merezhk6vski  was  born  in  1865  and  gradnated  from  the  tmlTenity 
in  1886.  He  began  early  to  write  poetry,  bnt  met  with  no  sncceas.  A 
novel  in  Turae,  tySnt,  which  be  wrote  in  1890,  however,  pteduetd  a 


Digitized  by  Google 


Dmitri  Sergyeevich  Merezhk6vski  483 


fii^onnbte  inpreiiioo.  Since  then  Vtn^Ui^nAi  liit  devoted  Uiii* 
self  mote  eopedany  to  praw.  Be  is  oppoaed  to  fbe  pfevilliiig 

democratism  in  literature,  and  preaches  a  return  to  the  ideal  of 
Piisbkin.  He  has  evolved  an  unusually  fine  stjle  for  Russian  litera- 
ture,  but  bis  conceptions  are  rather  fantastic,  and  not  always  cohe- 
rent. His  chief  interest  lies  in  the  illustration  of  the  struggle  of  two 
worids,  the  pagan  end  the  Chrietiaa.  This  idee  mm  fiiroe^  idl  hii 
criticel  eanya»  in  whidi  he  deplores  fbe  democratic  spirit  in  Ittere- 
ture  since  G^ol,  and  through  his  trilogy  of  novds,  of  which  the  first 
deals  with  Julian  the  Apostate,  the  second  with  Leonardo  da  Vinci, 
and  the  third  is  to  treat  of  Peter  the  Great. 

In  English  translation  have  appeared  :  The  Death  of  the  Gods^  The 
Xismtrreetitm  <if  the  Gods,  end  Romtmu  of  Leamanh  da  Wmet,  ikg 
Fktrenmmer,  trandeted  hy  H.  FKndi,  I<ondon,  1900,  Uie  latter  also 
New  York,  zgoe;  Julian  the  Apostaie^  Philaddphia.  1902 ;  ToiMiu 
Mam  amd  Artist^  with  Essay  on  DostaSevshi,  New  York,  1903. 

PROM  AN  ESSAY  ON  "PUSHKIN" 

Not  by  sudden  ontbttrsts  and  by  jerks,  but  premise  after 
premise,  step  by  step,  ttnavoidably  and  with  dialectic  pie- 
cisioii,  by  evolving  the  one  sphere  of  Piishkin's  harmony, 
by  sacrificing  and  killing  the  other,  has  Russian  litemtnre 
at  last  reached  that  one-sidedneas  of  I^ev  Tol8t6y,  aoanididal 
for  every  artistic  development. 

G6gol,  the  nearest  of  Pdshkin's  disciples,  was  the  first  to 
understand  and  express  the  meaning  of  P6shkiu  for  Rnssia, 
as  no  one  after  him  has  been  able  to  do.  In  his  best  crea- 
tions, in  the  Revizdr  and  in  the  Dead  Souls,  G6gol  carried 
out  the  plans  with  which  his  teacher  had  inspired  him.  It 
is  difficult  to  find  a  case  of  closer  adaptation  in  the  history 
of  any  literature.  Gogol  drew  directly  from  Pushkin,  that 
deep  and  pure  source  of  Russian  harmony.  Well  ?  Did  the 
disciple  execute  the  injunction  of  his  teacher?  G6gol  was 
the  first  who  unconsciously  and  involuntarily  betrayed 
Ptashkin;  he  was  the  first  who  became  a  victim  of  the  great 
disorganisation,  which  was  later  more  and  more  to  take 
possession  of  Russian  poetry ;  he  was  the  first  to  experience 
the  attacks  of  the  all-devouring,  sickly  mysticism,  which 
was  to  undermine  also  the  creative  powers  of  others  than 
himself. 


484         The  Nineteenth  Century 


It  is  a  tragic  fiict  in  Ruaaiaa  litmtme  tluit  In  dqiaitiiig 
with  every  step  more  and  more  from  Pfishkin,  tbat  in  de- 
stroying the  most  pnedooa  creation  of  his  apirit,^the  co-or- 
dination and  equipoise  of  two  worlds^— it  at  the  same  tune  has 
rogaided  itself  as  tbt  true  guardian  of  Pdshkin's  Isgaciea, 
Great  men  have  no  more  dangerous  enemies  than  their 
nearest  disciples, — those  who  redine  upon  their  breast,  for 
no  one  can»  Uyving  and  adoring,  with  such  innocent  cunning 
distort  the  real  image  of  tlieir  teacher. 

Turg^nev  and  Gonchar6v  made  conscientious  attempts  to 
overcome  the  incipient  discord  within  them,  the  ill-omened 
dissonance  of  L^rmontov  and  G6gol,  to  return  to  Pdshkin's 
objective  calm  and  equipoise.  If  not  with  their  hearts,  they 
understood  with  their  minds  the  heroic  deed  of  Peter  the 
Great,  remaining  strangers  to  the  Slavophile  pride  of  Dos- 
toevski, and  they  consciously,  like  Pushkin,  bowed  before 
the  majesty  of  Western  culture.  Tnrg6nev  appears  iu  a 
certain  measure  as  the  legal  heir  of  Pushkin's  harmony,  both 
on  account  of  the  perfect  clearness  of  the  artistic  architecture 
and  the  gentle  grace  of  language. 

But  all  that  resemblance,  all  that  harmony,  is  superficial 
aud  deceptive.  Neither  Turgeuev  nor  Goucharov  succeeded 
in  the  attempt  to  conquer  the  approaching  disorganisation, 
to  return  to  Pushkin.  A  feeling  of  great  fatigue  and  satiety 
with  all  cultural  forms,  Schopenhauer's  Buddhistic  nirvana, 
Flaubert's  artistic  nihilism,  were  much  nearer  to  Turgenev's 
heart  than  Pushkin's  heroic  wisdom.  In  Turgenev's  ex- 
ceedingly soft,  feminine,  and  pliable  language  there  is  no 
longer  P^hkin's  manliness,  his  sturdy  strength  and  sim- 
plicity. In  Turgenev's  bewitching  melody  you  continually 
hear  a  penetrating,  plaintive  tone,  like  the  soond  of  a  cracked 
beU,— a  sign  of  a  deepening  spiritual  discord, — the  terror  of 
life,  the  terror  of  death,  which  I«ev  Tol8t67  will  later  carry 
to  appsUing  limits. 

Turg^ev  has  created  an  endless  gallery  of  what  in  his 
opinion  are  real  Russian  heroes^  that  Ib,  heroes  of 
cripples^  unsuccessful  men.  He  hss  surrounded  hia 
Hdies  with  an  aureole  of  the  same  Galilean  poetry  which 


Digitized  by  Gooj?le 


Dmitri  Sergydevich  Merezhk6vski  485 


surrounds  the  images  of  Tatydna,  Taz(t,  the  old  gipsy.  He 
has  reached  the  highest  degree  of  his  accessible  inspiration, 
by  pointing  out  the  superiority  of  weakness  over  strength, 
of  the  little  man  over  the  great,  and  the  humble  over  the 
proud,  of  Don  Quixote's  simple-minded  insanity  over  Ham- 
let's evil  wisdom.  The  only  strong  Rnasiati  in  Ttagfymesv  is 
the  nihilist  Baxter*  Of  oourse,  the  anthiHr  of  Faikers  amd 
S0HS  was  enoogh  of  an  objective  artist  to  treat  his  hero  with- 
ont  anger  or  bias^  but  he  neverthdess  was  afiraid  of  him  and 
coold  not  forgive  him  his  strength.  The  poet  seemed  to 
say,  as  he  pointed  to  Bazirov,  without  noticing  that  he  was 
not  at  all  a  hero»  bnt  jost  such  an  abortion,  jtist  such  an  nn- 
snooeasfnl  man,  as  the  rest  of  his  snperflnous  people,  who 
created  nothing  and  who  was  doomed  to  min:  "  Yon  wanted 
to  see  a  strong  Russian, — ^here  is  a  strong  man!  See  for 
yourselves  what  narrowness  and  limitation  of  will-power, 
which  is  directed  to  destmction !  Wliat  coarseness  and  awk- 
wardness before  the  tender  mystery  of  love!  What  in- 
significance before  the  majesty  of  death !  That  is  what  your 
heroes,  your  Russian  strong  men  are  likel  Oh,  do  you  not 
a  hundred  times  prefer  my  weak,  superfluous,  little,  gentle 
heroes  of  Russian  wretchedness,  Indolence,  and  carelessness, 
my  magnanimous  unsuccessful  men  and  Don  Quixotes  ?  ' ' 

If  a  foreigner  were  to  believe  Gogol,  Turg6nev,  and  Gon- 
char6v,  the  Russian  nation  must  represent  itself  to  him  as 
unique  in  historv',  as  denying  the  very  essence  of  heroic  will. 
If  the  depth  of  the  Russian  spirit  were  exhausted  by  on/y 
Christian  meekness,  an/y  self-sacrifice,  on{y  the  p>oetry  of  the 
pariahs,  the  humbled,  and  the  offended, — whence,  then, 
comes  that  "Divine  storm,"  that  blissful  and  terrifying 
grandeur,  that  superabundance  of  success,  will,  and  merri- 
ment, that  are  felt  in  Peter  and  in  Pushkin  ?  How  could 
arise  these  two  demoniac  phenomena  of  infinite  beauty  and 
infinite  love  in  the  country  of  Buddhistic  nihilism  and 
wretchedness,  in  the  country  of  Dead  Sau/s  and  Living 
Retics  in  the  Siloam  pool  of  the  maimed  and  the  halt  ?  Or 
are  Peter  and  P^kin  not  our  own,  not  Russians  ? 
/     Gondiaf6v  has  gone  even  farther  on  this  dangerous  path 


486         The  Nineteenth  Centuiy 


The  critics  saw  iu  Oblomov  a  satire,  a  moral.  But  Gon- 
char6\r*s  novel  is  more  venomous  and  more  terrible  than  any 
satire.  For  the  poet  himself  there  is  in  that  all-embracing 
tftifltic  ssmthesis  of  Riurian  hdpteaBDCflB  and  Rnssitii  do- 
nothingness/' neither  pniae,  nor  blame,  but  there  is  only  a 
full  jufltioe,  the  representation  of  Rnaiian  reality  in  all  its 
terror  and  in  all  its  beanty.  In  his  beat  moments  OUdmov, 
a  bookish  dreamer  who  ^th  the  childlike  serenity  and  same 
chastity  of  his  infinitdy  deq>  end  simple  heart  is  unfit  for  too 
coaise  a  hnman  ezistenoe,  is  snnounded  with  the  same 
anreole  of  quiet  poetiy,  as  the  Living  Rdia  of  Tuig6- 
nev.  Gon^ar6v  would,  perhaps,  have  liked  to  be  unjust  to 
Obl6mov»  but  he  could  not,  because  he  loved  him;  he,  no 
doubt,  intended  to  be  just  to  Stolz,  but  he  could  not,  be- 
cause he  secretly  hated  him.  The  German  hero  (he  did  not 
try  to  lepreaent  a  Russian  hero,  so  unnatural  did  such  a 
phenomenon  seem  to  him)  came  out  dead,  cold,  and  formless. 
Art  reveals  the  secret  feeling  which  the  poet  dares  not  ex- 
press: is  not  the  resignation  from  stem  life,  the  primitive 
simplicity,  the  wise  inactivity  of  the  gentle  hero  of  Ru^ian 
indolence  a  thousand  times  more  noble  than  the  prosaic 
bustle  of  the  hero  of  German  precision  ?  From  Mahomet, 
Napoleon,  Byron,  the  Bronze  Rider,  to  a  puny,  hoarding, 
bourgeois  German,  and  to  a  gawky  seminarist,  a  provincial 
tempting  demon,  Mark  Volokh6v, — what  a  sad  metamor- 
phosis, what  a  fall  of  the  Piishkin  demigod ! 

But  that  is  not  yet  the  lowest  step.  G6gol,  Turg^nev,  and 
Gonchar6v  appear  as  writers  full  of  objective  equipoise, 
health,  and  harmony  in  comparison  with  Dostoevski  and 
Lev  Tolst6y.  The  emaciated  and  half -dead  Russian  heroes, 
the  Russian  strong  men,  Bazarov  and  Mark  Volokh6v,  come 
once  more  to  life  in  the  person  of  Rask61nikov,  Ivdn  Kara- 
mdzov,  in  the  monstrous  visions  of  the  Devils^  in  order  to 
undergo  the  last  degrsding  punishment,  the  most  refined, 
hellish  tortuie, — In  the  terrible  hands  of  that  demon  oif 
wretchedness  and  torment,  the  great  inquisitor  DostoMU. 

How  much  stronger  and  more  truthful  he  was  than  Tur- 
gdnev  and  Gonchar6v!  Dostoevski  did  not  hide  his  dis- 


Digitized  by  Google 


Dmitri  Sergydevich  Merezhkovski  4^7 


Ills  discoid,  did  not  deceive  himself,  nor  the  reader, 
did  not  make  vain  attempts  to  re-establish  the  disturbed 
equilibrium,— the  harmony  ol  Pfishkin*s  form.  And  yet  he 
Tslued  and  understood  this  harmony  with  mo»  penetratioa 
than  Tttrf£nev  and  Goadiai6v,— he  lofved  Pikhkin,  as  the 
most  inaooessible,  the  most  o^osite  to  his  nature,  just  as 
the  mortally  ill  man  values  health,— he  loved  him,  but  no 
longer  strove  after  that  harmony. 

The  author  of  Broihers  KaramdMOV  has  maimed  and  vio- 
lated the  artistic  form  of  the  epos,  has  with  unheard-of 
andadty  transformed  it  into  a  terrible  instrument  of  psycho- 
logical torture.  It  is  hard  to  believe  that  the  language  that 
still  possesses  such  vernal  freshness  and  chaste  serenity  in 
Pibhkin  has  been  so  transformed  as  to  serve  for  the  repre- 
sentation of  the  horrible  nightmares  and  gloomy,  fiery 
visions  of  Dostoevski. 

Dostoevski  was  more  consistent  than  Turg^nev  and  Gon- 
char6v  in  even  another  respect:  he  did  not  hide  his  im- 
measurable Slavophile  pride, — he  did  not  ogle  the  ci\alisation 
of  the  West.  Hellenic  beauty  was  to  him  Sodom,  and  Ro- 
man force  the  kingdom  of  the  Antichrist.  What  could 
meek,  youthful,  God-harbouring  Russia  learn  from  the 
haughty,  decrepit,  Godless  West?  The  Russian  nation  is 
not  to  strive  after  the  ideal  of  the  West,  that  is,  after  uni- 
versal paganism,  but  the  West  is  to  strive  after  the  ideal  of 
the  Russian  nation,  that  is,  after  universal  Christianity. 

Nevertheless,  as  an  artist  he  is  nearer  to  Pdshkin  than 
Turg^nev  and  Gonchar6v.  He  is  the  only  one  of  the  Rus- 
sian authors  who  consciously  reproduces  the  struggle  of 
two  worlds.  It  is  even  possible  that  his  dualism  is  deeper 
than  Pdshkin's.  Yet  it  is  withal,  to  its  very  depths,  a  dis- 
cord, a  struggle,  a  torment  Dosto6viki*s  great  soul  is  like 
a  battle-field,  agitated,  bloody,  full  of  gnaidiing  of  teeth  and 
sobbing  of  the  wounded,  a  fidd  on  which  two  irrecondlablo 
foes  have  met.  Who  will  be  the  victor?  No  one,  never. 
It  is  a  hopdesSk  unending  struggle.  On  whose  side  is  the 
poet?  We  only  know  on  whose  side  he  wants  to  be.  But 
in  those  very  moments  when  you  most  trust  his  Christisa 


4^8         The  Nineteenth  Centuiy 


hiiiiijlity»  his  wietchedncas,  and  his  chastity,— there  sniMenly 
happens  something  nnnsnal  and  evil  somewhere  in  the  dark, 
dangetoos  oonier  of  the  author's  pijydiological  kl^yiinth 
whefe  he  aloiwly,  like  a  spider,  entices  and  entangles  the 
inexperienced  reader,  so  that  yon  look,  and  hardly  know 
whether  it  is  he  or  not,  and  whether  it  really  is,  or  yon  only 
imagine  it  to  he,  a  terrible  were-wdlf^  a  dodUe,  or  a  wolf  in  a 
sheepskin.  And  the  great  inquisitor  whispers  with  scarcely 
audible,  insane  laughter,  which  sends  a  chill  through  your 
body,  and  through  the  meekness  of  the  mar^  flickers  the 
unlimited  conceit  of  the  devil,  through  the  wretchedness 
and  chastity  of  the  pious  sufferer  the  lustful  cruelty  of  the 
deviL 

To  such  monstrous  insanity,  to  such  epileptic  fits  of  de- 
monism  has  been  changed  the  beneficent  dualism  of  Pushkin, 
the  harmony  of  two  worlds,  the  divine  music  of  the  spheres 
that  unite  their  voices  to  glorify  the  One.  Such  is  the  venge- 
ance of  the  vilified  pagan  gods. 

It  would  seem  the  limit  was  reached,  and  that  one  could 
go  no  farther.  But  Lev  Tolstoy  has  proved  that  one  may 
go  farther  on  the  same  road, — into  the  abyss,  into  self-tor- 
ment, into  the  terror  of  dualism,  into  the  Titanic  disoxgani- 
sation. 

Dostoevski  to  his  last  breath  suffered,  thought,  struggled, 
and  died,  without  finding  what  he  sought  most  in  life,— 
spiritual  peace.  Lev  Tolst6y  no  longer  seeks  or  struggles, 
or,  at  least,  he  wishes  to  assure  himself  and  others  that  he 
has  nothing  to  struggle  for,  nothing  to  seek.  This  calm, 
this  silence  and  petrifaction  of  a  whole  subdued  world,  which 
once  was  free  and  beautiful,  but  from  the  present  standpoint 
of  its  creator  is  to  its  very  depths  pagan  and  criminal,  a  world 
whidi  majesticslly  evolved  itself  hefdre  us  in  Anna  KMitim 
and  War  and  ./Vttof,— that  tranquillity  of  Tke  XiiigAm  tf 
God  produces  a  more  disquieting,  a  more  oppressive  im* 
pKSaion  than  the  sanguinary  struggle,  contrition,  sobs^  and 
eternal  agony  of  Dostoevski.  Of  course,  Lev  Tol8t6y  did 
not  suddenly,  and  not  without  painful  efforts,  reach  the  fioal 
tranquillity,  the  final  victocy  over  the  pagan  world.  But 


Digitized  by  Gopgle 


Dmitri  Sergy6evich  Merezhk6vski  A&g 


even  in  IVar^md/^uue  and  jinma  KarhUn  we  ax<e  pieaent 
at  a  Tcqr  strange  phenomauHi:  two  elements  tfaeie  meet, 
without  tanning  together,  like  two  streams  of  one  river. 
Where  paganism  is,  all  is  life  and  passion,  loxniy  and  ardour 
of  physical  sensations.  Ontsideof  good  and  evil,— as  if  good 
and  evil  had  never  existed, — the  poet  expresses  with  infinite 
tmthfolness,  with  a  childish  and  divine  inability  of  being 
ashamed,  of  hiding  the  nakedness  of  hia  heart,  a  thirrty,  nn- 
satisfiable  love  for  everything  mortal  and  transitory, — a  love 
for  this  great  billowing  ocean  of  matter,  for  eversrthing  which 
from  the  Christian  standpoint  ought  to  appear  as  vain  and 
sinful,— for  powerful  physical  health,  for  country,  ghwy, 
woman,  and  children. 

Here  is  the  whole  gamut  of  physical  pleasures,  and  they 
are  told  with  fearless  openness,  such  as  has  never  been  in 
any  other  literature:  the  sensation  of  muscular  strength,  the 
charm  of  field  labour  in  the  fresh  air,  the  geutleness  of  a 
child's  sleep,  the  intoxication  with  the  first  games,  with  the 
mirth  of  5^outhful  banquets,  with  the  tranquil  manliness  in 
sanguinary  battles,  with  the  spveechlessness  of  eternal  Na- 
ture, with  the  bracing  cold  of  Russian  snows,  with  the  aro- 
matic warmth  of  the  deep  summer  grass. 

Here  is  the  whole  gamut  of  physical  pain,  told  with  the 
same  inexorable  candour,  which  sometimes  rises  to  cynical 
coarseness  and  shamelessness, — all  the  terrors  of  pain,  be- 
ginning with  the  inhuman  cries  of  a  beloved  woman,  dying 
in  the  agony  of  diildhirth,  up  to  the  terrible,  crushing  sound, 
when  the  spine  of  the  horse  radng  in  the  hippodrome  ia 
broken.  What  a  tenor,  what  an  intoxication  of  unlimited 
sensuality! 

Howoooldhehimsdf,  how  could  others  believe  in  the  icy, 
reflective  Christianity,  and  how  did  they  not  reoognise  in 
him  a  great,  hidden  pagan  ?  This  paganism  is  proclaimed 
in  all  the  best  productions  of  Tolst^  by  all  the  voices  of  the 
human  flesh,  which  is  fiesh  and  joyous  in  the  baby  in  its 
moUier's  embrace,  covered  with  the  sweat  <rf  the  agony  and 
half  rotten  on  the  terrible  bed  of  Iv&u  Ilfch,  blooming  and 
lusty  in  Anna  Xar^nin,  and  ndrad  and  bloody  under  the 


490         The  Nineteenth  Century 


ktdves  of  the  stugeona on  tlwopoMtiiig  tatted  tlKinilltaxj 
luMpitals.  Flesh  everywhere,  the  pagan  soul  of  flsah,  the 
one  of  the  two  strngi^los       ^  whidi  Goethe  aingv: 

"Die  eine  halt  in  derber  I4ebeslttit 
Sich  an  die  Welt  mit  klasuneniden  Oiganea." 

But  in  these  very  prodactions  there  come  also  to  the  aor- 
fece  insipid  and  offensive  parts  that  are  connected  by  no 
inner  tie  with  the  artistic  woof  of  the  production,  as  if  writ- 
ten by  a  different  man.  Such  are  the  murderous  sophistry 
of  Pierre  Beziikhov,  and  the  childishly  clumsy  and  unnatural 
Christian  regenerations  of  Konstantfn  Levfn.  In  these  dead 
pages  the  mighty  carnal  life,  which  had  just  been  welling 
up  in  a  stream,  suddenly  becomes  stark  and  frozen.  The 
very  language  which  had  reached  Pushkin's  simplicity  and 
clearness,  the  greatest  in  Russian  literature,  abruptly  changes: 
as  though  a  gloomy  ascetic  took  vengeance  upon  him  for 
his  recent  candour,  his  un-Christian  luxury  and  audacity, 
with  which  but  a  moment  ago  had  been  described  the  tor- 
ments and  pleasures  of  sinful  flesh.  The  ascetic  unsparingly 
violates  the  language,  breaks,  maims,  stretches  out,  and 
forces  into  the  Procrustean  bed  towering,  intricate  syllog- 
isms. "  Two  souls,"  that  were  united  in  Piishkin,  that 
straggled  in  G6gol,  Gooduudv,  Trng^er,  and  DottoMd, 
for  ever  abandon  each  other  in  Toil8t6y,  so  that  Hie  one  doei 
not  see,  nor  hear,  nor  answer  the  other. 

We  are  at  present  past  onr  soffeting,  we  have  beoome 
aocnstomed  to  all  moaatraaity  and  dlwaonatioe,  or  dae  we 
certainly  ahonld  have  felt  the  barbarity  and  nnaeemlinea 
of  the  artist  who^  in  killing  himadf  and  blaapheoMNuij 
treading  on  Qod'a  gift  within  himaelf,  pnblidy  recants  the 
beat  of  his  prodactions  as  a  crime:  "  What  Is  it  ymi  adnme 
In  Anna  JCarMmf**  saya  he  to  the  people:  "do  yon  not 
knowitiaadebaadi,apagannaatlneaaof  myaool?"  The 
weakness  of  the  great  artist  lies  in  his  onooaadoasneaa,  be- 
cause he  is  a  pagan  not  of  the  bright,  heroic  tjrpe,  but  of  the 
dark,  elementary,  barbaroas  type,  the  aon  ol  andent  Chaoiy  a 


Digitized  by  Google 


Dmitri  Sergy^evich  Merezhk6v5ld  491 


iUnd  HUan.  The  amall  medc  one  came  and  iilflCBd  a  can- 
ning  trap  fbr  the  great  one, — Che  terror  of  death,  the  tenor 
of  pain, — and  tiie  blind  Titan  waa  caught;  the  meek  one 
enmfuhffd  hhn  with  the  fineat  neta  of  moial  aophians  and 
Galilean  wxetchednesa,  and  he  overcame  and  vanqniahed 
him*  A  few  more  agonising  couvolaionfl^  desperate  atragglea 
and  ontbursts, — and  everything  waa  for  ever  aOenoed  and 
dead,— there  began  the  tranquillity  of  The  Kingdom  ^God, 
Only  rarely,  amtdat  monkish  hymns  and  prayers,  among  icy, 
Puritanic  discourses  about  the  use  of  tobacco,  about  the 
brotherhood  of  the  nations,  about  corporal  punishment  and 
chastity,  are  heard  in  the  depth  of  depths  a  subterranean  din 
and  hollow  thunderclaps:  it  is  the  voice  of  the  blind  Titan, 
of  indomitable  Chaos, — of  the  pagan  love  of  physical  life  and 
pleasures,  of  the  pagan  terror  of  physical  pain  and  death. 

Lev  Tolst6y  is  the  antipode,  the  complete  opposite  and 
negation  of  Pushkin  in  Russian  literature.  And,  as  often 
happens,  opposites  deceive  the  superficial  observers  by  their 
external  resemblances.  Both  in  Pushkin  and  in  our  Lev 
Tolst6y  there  is  oneness,  equilibrium,  peace.  But  Pushkin's 
oneness  is  based  on  the  harmonious  union  of  two  worlds; 
the  oneness  of  To]st6y  is  based  on  the  complete  disunion, 
disruption,  and  violence,  committed  against  one  of  the  two 
equally  great,  equal]}'  di\nne  elements.  Ptishkin's  calm 
and  tranquillity  witness  to  a  fulness  of  life;  Lev  Tolst6y's 
calm  and  tranquillity  witness  to  a  petrified  immobility,  to 
a  deadening  of  the  whole  world.  In  Pushkin  the  thinker 
and  artist  are  welded  into  one  being;  in  Lev  Tolst6y  the 
thinker  despises  the  artist,  and  the  artist  does  not  care  for 
tiie  thinker.  Pdshkin's  chastity  presupposes  passion  snb- 
ject  to  theifidittg  of  divine  moderation;  Lev  Tdlst6y*s 
chastity  flows  from  a  desperate  ascetic  negation  of  love  Ibr 
a  woman.  Pdshkin's  hope,  like  Peter  the  Oreaf  a,  was  Rus- 
sia's participation  in  the  universal  life  of  the  spirit,  in  uni- 
▼eml  civilisation;  but  Ibr  that  participation  neither  Pdshkin 
nor  Peter  denied  the  native  element,  the  peculiarities  of  the 
Russian  spirit.  Lev  Tolst6y,  an  anarchist  without  violenoe, 
preaches  the  amalgamation  of  the  waning  nations  into  a 


49^         The  Nineteenth  Century 


tmivenal  biotherliood ;  but  for  that  brotbeiliood  he  renoanoes 
love  of  country,— that  jealons  tendemefls  that  filled  Utt 
hearts  of  Pdsbkin  and  Peter;  aod  with  unsparing  haogliti- 
neas  despises  those  peculiar*  lor  him  too  impassioned,  pagan 
features  of  the  aeparate  nations,  which  he  would  like  to 
weld  like  the  living  colours  of  the  rainbow  into  one  white* 
dead  colour — into  a  cosmopolitan  abstraction. 

It  is  significant  that  the  greatest  of  Tolst6y's  productions 
discrowns  that  last  incarnation  of  the  heroic  spirit  in  history, 
which  for  good  reasons  had  an  irresistible  charm  for  all  those 
who  in  the  democracy  of  the  nineteenth  century  had  pre- 
served a  spark  of  the  Promethean  fire, — Byron,  Goethe, 
Pushkin,  and  even  L^rmontov  and  Heine.  Napoleon,  the 
Delphic  god  of  strength,  anger,  and  glors*,  "  that  wondrous 
man,  the  messenger  of  Providence,  the  fateful  executor  of 
the  nameless  order,  that  vanished  king,  vanished  like  a 
dream,  like  the  shadow  of  the  dawn,"  is  transformed  in 
Tolstoy  not  even  into  the  nihilist  Rask61nikov,  not  even  into 
one  of  the  monstrous  devils  of  Dostoevski,  who  are  still  sur- 
rounded with  the  aureole  of  terror,  but  into  a  puny,  low-bom 
parvenu,  a  self-satisfied  and  prosaic  bourgeois,  perfumed 
with  eau-de-Cologne,  with  fat  calves,  a  pusillanimous  and 
coarse-souled  French  shopkeeper,  into  a  comic  general  Bona- 
parte of  the  Moscow  chap-books.  That  is  where  the  last 
step  into  the  absrss  has  been  leacfaed,  when  it  is  not  possible 
to  go  any  fiother,  for  here  the  spirit  of  the  mob^  the  spirit 
of  trinntphant  vulgarity  blasphemes  the  Divine  Spirit,  the 
sanctity  of  fate,  the  beneficent  and  awfnl  appearance  of  the 
hero.  The  most  insinuating  and  modern  of  all  the  devils^ 
the  devil  of  equality,  the  devil  of  the  small  and  numberiesB^ 
whose  name  is  Z^S^im,  has  possessed  the  last  great  artist,  the 
blind  Titan,  in  order  to  prodaim  with  his  tiiunderons  voice 
to  ^e  whole  world:  "Behold,  here  is  your  hero^  your  god, 
— he  is  as  smatt  as  w€^  asvufforas  we/** 

Bverybody  has  understood  Tolst6y,  everybody  has  ac- 
cepted that  watchword  of  the  mob !  Not  Pdshkin,  but  Tol- 
st6y  is  the  representative  of  Russian  literature  before  the 
masses  of  the  tmiverse.  Tolst6y,  the  victor  over  Napolean, 


Digitized  by  GoQgl 


Dmitri  Sergyeevich  Merezhkdvski  495 


Is  himself  a  Napoleoii  of  tbe  tmmbedess  democratic  army  of 
the  small,  the  miserable,  the  lamenting,  and  the  crushed. 
They  disputewithTolst6y,  they  hate  and  fear  him:  this  is  a 
mga  that  his  feme  Is  alive  and  growing.  Pi&shkin's  feme  is 
becoming  ever  more  academic  and  distant,  ever  more  unin- 
telligible to  the  crowd.  Who  disputes  with  Pibhkin,  who 
in  Europe  knows  of  Piishktn  more  than  his  name?  We 
learn  him  by  heart  on  our  school-benches,  and  his  verses  ap- 
pear to  us  as  cold.and  unneceasaiy  for  active  Russian  life  as 
the  choirs  of  the  Greek  tragedies  or  the  formulas  of  higher 
mathematics.  The  most  inaccessible  and  mysterious  of  all 
the  books  is  called  the  book  of  the  vulgar,  the  **  Vulgate." 
Pdshkin  has  become  the  Vulgate  of  Russian  literature. 
Svecybody  is  ready  to  honour  him  with  dead  lips,  with  dead 
laurels, — who  honours  him  with  his  soul  and  spirit  ?  The 
crowd  purchases  in  the  acknowledgment  of  the  great  the 
right  of  ignoring  them,  and  avenges  its  too  noble  enemies 
by  a  memorial  plate  in  the  academic  Pantheon,  and  by 
oblivion  in  fame.  Who  would  believe  that  this  god  of  the 
teachers  of  Russian  literature  is  not  onlj-  more  alive,  more 
modem,  but,  from  the  standpoint  of  bourgeois  vulgarity, 
even  more  dangerous,  more  audacious  than  Lev  Tolst6y  ? 
Who  would  believe  that  the  irreproachably  aristocratic 
Pushkin,  the  singer  of  the  Bronze  Rider,  the  nursling  of  his 
old  nurse  Ariua,  is  nearer  to  the  heart  of  the  Russian  people, 
than  the  herald  of  universal  brotherhood,  the  merciless 
Puritan  in  the  sheepskin  coat  of  the  Russian  peasant  ? 

To  what  extent  the  heroic  side  of  Pushkin's  poetry  is  not 
understood  and  despised,  is  evident  from  the  fact  that  two  of 
the  greatest  of  Pdshkin's  admirers,  G6gol  and  Dostoevski, 
as  if  by  common  agreement,  do  not  attach  the  slightest  im- 
portance to  it  However  strange  it  may  be,  if  we  leave  out 
of  consideration  the  text-books  and  the  dead  academic  recog- 
nition, P6ahkin,  the  only  baid  of  the  only  hero  in  the  country 
of  Lev  Tolst6y  and  of  Dostoevski,  in  the  counlry  of  Russian 
nihilism  and  Ruasiatt  democracy,  is  a  fecgotten  baid  of  a 
forgotten  hero^ 


INDEX 


Abr^k,  iU  definition,  105 
Aksdkov,   S.   T.,  biographical 

sketch  and  extract,  21Q  seq.; 

and  see  19,  236 
Alexander~lVi  and  his  period,  ^ 

bis  liberalism,  la,  16;  and  see 

240 

Alexander  II.  and  bis  period,  4,  ^ 

Alexis  Mikhdylovich,  40,  239 
American  Constitution  andAlex- 

ander  Lj  1.2 
American  War  and  Karamzfn, 

A^lysis,  in  literature,  22;  in 

Dostoevski,  21 
Anna  Karinin,  5,  391  seq.;  and 

see  L.  N.  Tolstby 
AHna    Rodi6novna,  Piisbkin's 

nurse,  122,  49^ 
Art  for  art's  sake,  in  literature, 

16,  20;  criticised  by  Ksarev, 

Tid^seq, 

Baratynski,  B.  A.,  Pibhkin's  in- 
fluence on,  17J  biographical 
sketch  and  extracts,  149  seq. 

Bdtynshkov,  K.  N.,  estimate  of, 
13  seq.;  biographical  sketch 
and  extracts,  73  seq.;  and  see 

Beecher-Stowe,  Russian,  237 
Belles-lettres,  peculiar  course  of, 

in  Russia,  6  seq. 
Best6zhev,  A.  A.,  biographical 

sketch  and  extract,  isa.  seq.; 

and  see  4 
Boborykin,  5 

Boris  Godunbv,  by  Piishkin,  143 

seq.;  and  see  16 
Bowring,  Sir  John,  not  the  first 

translator  from  the  Russian,  v 
Boj&n,  22 


Bronze  Rider,  The,  Peter  the 
Great  so  called,  12^493 

Byelinski,  V.  G.,  the  Nat- 
ural School,  4,  i^,  and  Kolts6v, 
176;  biographical  sketch  and 
extract,  205  seq.;  and  see  5,  6^ 
9  186.  3^492 

ByHnas,  by  ArK.  Tol8t6y,  246 

Byron,  bis  influence,  on  Russian 
literature,  8^  10,  i6j  i^I  0° 
Pushkin,  161  on  KoildvT  68; 
on  L^rmontov,  155 

Byzantine  period,  1^ 

Catherine  II.,  12,  23^ 
Censorship,   ana   literature,  6; 

after  1848,  20;  and  see  303 
Chekhov,   A.   P.,  biographical 

sketch  and  extract,  4^  seq.; 

and  see  5 
Chemyshevski,  ^  389 
Church-Slavic,  and  Shishkdv,  12; 

and  Karamzin,  28 
Cloaky  The^  prototype  of  later 

novels,  19 
Comedy,  (Jriboy^dov's,  I2i  and 

see  Griboyidov,  Gbgol 
Cosmopolitanism  of  the  newer 

Russian  literature,  23 
Crime  and  Punishment,  ^  and 

see  Dostoevski 
Crimean  War  and  literature,  5 
Criminals,  portrayed  in  literature, 

21;  and  see  Dostohiski 
Critics,  evolution  of,  5:  and  see 

Byelinski,  Dobrolyubov^  Me^ 

rezhkbvski,  Pfsarev 
Culture  in  nineteenth  century,  2 

Danil^vski,  2a 

Dead  Souls,  ^  iSj  and  see  C6gal 
Death,  early,  of  literary  men,  fi 


495 


496 


Index 


Decembrist  conspiracy,  marking 
an  epoch,  ^  aud  Rylyeev,  86^ 
and  sec  iq2 

D^lvig,  A.  A.,  Pfishlcin's  in- 
fluence on,  121  predecessor 
of  Kolts6v,  iSi  biographical 
sketch  and  extracts,  L2q  scq. 

Democracy,  Russian,  defined,  9] 
in  the  forties,  20,  2f; 'Dostoev- 
ski's, 21J  and  Nekrdsov,  22 

Democratic  critics,  their  effect 
on  poetry,  ^ 

Democratisation  of  Roasian  so- 
ciety, 9 

Demon,  The,  i2i  and  see  Lit- 

montov 

Derzhdvin,  I2i  16 

Desyatina  =  various  land  meas- 
ures, from       acres,  passim 

Didacticism  passing  away,  23 

Disenchaotment  in  Russiantiter- 
ature,  id  sea. 

Dmitriev,  and  Karamzin,  27;  and 
see  161  126,  2Q& 

Dobroly6bov,  N.  A.,  and  OhW- 
mov,  9j  biographical  sketch 
and  extract,  tji  seg.;  and  see 
5.  6,  389 

Dolgortiki,  L  M.,  16 

Dolgoriiki,  Princess,  68 

Domostrby,  238 

Dostoevski,  F.  M.,  estimate  of, 
21;  biographical  sketch  and  ex- 
tract, 322  seq,;  and  see  4.  5.  IQ. 

81^  296; 

Drama,  Ostr6v8ki's,  22,  ^  seq.; 
Chekhov's,  459;  andseecWi^</y 

Eighteenth  century  in  litera- 
ture, 12 

£i{{hties,  characterisation  of  pe- 
riod since,  u 

Emancipation  of  serfs,  due  to 
literary  propaganda,  6;  and 
Turg^nev,  21 

England,  j^.  ^^9- 

English,  literature  compared  with 
Russian,  3]  aristocracy  com- 
pared witn  Russian  nobility, 
8;  and  Russian  literary  styles, 
13:  people  and  Karamzln,  ^ 

Enthusiasm,  in  Russian  litera- 
ture, 8i  of  Russian  youths,  m 

Evghii  Onyigin,  161  121  and  see 
Pushkin 


Fables  and  Kryl6v,  14.  41  sfq. 
Family  Chronicle,  Tne,  i^j  and 

see  Aksdkov 
Fathers  and  Sons,  41 8,  ^  and  see 

Tufghtev 
Fet,  4,  I2i  391;  and  see  Shcnshfn 
Fifties,  the,  4 
Filar^t,  40 
Flaubert,  484 

Folktales,  naturalism  in,  18 
Fon-Vizin,  27 

Forties,  the  novelists  of  the,  4 
Forty  years,  apogee  reached  by 

literary  men  at,  6 
France,  its  influence  on  Russian 

literature,  19 
French,   and^^  Russian  literary 

styles,  12;  realism,  compared 

with  Russian,  2Q 

Gaj,  241 

Garshm,    V.    M.,  biographical 

sketch  and  extract,  443  seq.; 

and  see  6 
German,  Romanticism  in  Russia, 

8;  influence,  L5x  ISl  philosophy 

in  the  forties,  2Q 
G^rtsen,    A.  biographical 

sketch  and  extract,  236  seq.; 

estimate  by  Dobrolyfibov,  272 

seq.;  and  see  242 
Glinka,  F.  N.,  78  seq. 
Gny^ich,  14 
Goethe,  492 

G6gol,  N.  v.,  novelist  of  the 
forties,  4]  obscuring  P^hkin, 
16;  estimate  of,  18;  marks 
end  of  older  writers,  2Q ;  com- 
pared with  Tolst6y,  21 ;  and  Nar- 
y^zhny,  49;  biographical  sketch 
and  extracts,  185  seq.;  and 
ByeUnskif  2c6  seq.;  and  Tur- 
genev,  281;  and  Dostoevski, 
323;  estimate  of,  by  Merezh- 
k6vski,  48^  seq.;  and  see  4,  in, 
L56,  206^  212,  2tl2i  369,.  329 

Gonchar6v,  L  A.,  estimate  of, 
21;  biographical  sketch  and 
extract,  259  seq.;  and  Dobrol- 
yfibov,  221  seq.;  estimate  of,  by 
Merezhkovski,  484  seq.;  and 
see  ^q, 

Gorki.  M.,  ^  23;  and  see  Pyesh- 
kdv 

Government  and  progress,  ID 


,  Googk 


Index 


497 


Gray's  Elegy  and  Zhak6vski, 

54 

Griboy^dov,  A.  S.,  estimate  of, 
17;  biographical  sketch  and 
extract,  92  seq.;  and  see  4,  9 

Grigor6vicni  D.  V.,  and  peasant 
in  literature,  5;  biographical 
sketch  and  extract,  256  seq. 

Hamlets  in  Russian  life,  21 
He^el.  his  influence  on  Russian 

hteratiire,        and  Byelfnski, 

2d6 
Heine,  492 

Hero  ojour  Time^  121  and  see 

Ltrmontov 
Herzen,  see  Ghisen 
History  and  Karamzin,  27 

niad  in  Russian,  l4 
Intelligence  Comes  to  Griefs  17; 

and  see  Griboyidov 
Italian  poetry,  in  Russian,  14 
Ivan  III.,  ^  lu 
Ivan  IV.,  40,  246  seq. 
Izmdylov,   A.  E.,  biographical 

sketch  and  extracts,  46  seq.; 

and  see  14 

Jefferson,  Thomas,  and  Alexander 

youmey  from  St.  Petersburg  to 
Moscow,  12 

Juvenal,  Nekr&sov  called  the  Rus- 
sian, 342 

Karamzfn,  N.  M.,  compared  with 
Piishkin,  2^  and  Sbishk6v,  4] 
and  literary  style,  13J  biograph- 
ical sketch  ana  extracts,  Tiseq.; 
and  see  ^  12^  IA-16.  55, 8ij  208^ 
2ii  240 

Khomyak6v,  A.  S.,  and  Slavo- 
philes, 19]  biographical  sketch 
and  extracts,  229  seq.;  and  see 
236.  229 

Koltsov,  A.  v.,  estimate  of,  i8i 
biographical  sketch  and  ex- 
tracts, 176;  and  see  22^  120,  -^61 

Korol^nko,  V.  G.,  biographical 
sketch  and  extracts,  4.^6;  and 
see  5i  468 

Kozl6v,  L  L  biographical  sketch 
and  extracts,  62  seq. 
VOL.  u.— 3a. 


KryI6v,  LA.,  biographical  sketch 
and  extracts,  41  seq.;  and  see 
14,  Id 

La  Fontaine  and  Kryl6v,  14 
Lazh<5chnikov,  L  biographical 
sketch  and  extract,  111  seq.; 
and  sec  A 
Ltrmontov,  M.  Y.,  estimate  of, 
17;  biographical  sketch  and  ex- 
tracts. 155  seq.;  compared  with 
Ogarev,  242;  and  Dobroly6bov, 
272  seq.;  estimate  of,  by  Merezh- 
kOvski,  484  seq.;  and  see  3,  4, 
6,  12^ 

Levitov,  A.  I.,  biographical  sketch 
and  extract,  412  seq.;  and  see 

Lewis,  W.  D.,  first  translator  into 
English  from  the  Russian,  v 

Literary  language  and  Karam- 
zin, 13 

Literature  and  progress,  10 
Little-Russian  authors,  18^  ^  185 
Lyapun6v,  240 
Lyceum  at  Tsdrskoe-Sel6,  2 

MarHnski,  see  BestHzhev 
Masonic  societies,  12,  22 
Maturity,  early,  of  literary  talent, 

Mdykov,  A.  N.,  biographical 
sketch  and  extracts,  339  seq.; 
criticised  by  Pisarev,  386  seq.; 
and  see  ^  17 

Mdykov,  V.  Li  239 

Metnoirs  of  ajfJuntsman,  and 
liberation  of  serfs,  6;  and  see 
Turginev 

Merezhk6v8ki,  D.  S.,  aud  didacti- 
cism, 23;  biographical  sketch 
and  extract,  482  seq. 

Merzlyak6v,  ifi 

Middle  class,  and  culture,  8;  in 

literature,  22 
Moscow,  circles  in  the  forties, 

19;  merchant  class,  22^  369 
Murav^v,  2I 

N^son,  S.Y.,  biographical  sketch 
and  extracts,  4^  seq.;  and  see 
6 

Napoleon,  in  Russian  literature, 
^  seq.;  and  see  14  seq.y  4^ 


Index 


Nary&hny,  V.  T.,  biographical 
sketch  and  extract,  ^ieq.;  and 
see  lii 

Natural  School,  and  Byelinski,  4 ; 
and  G6gol,  186;  defined  by  Bye- 
linski,  2q6  seq.;  and  see  {&. 

Naturalism  in  Russian  literature, 
18 

Negation,  in  Russian  literature, 

5,  8:  and  Tolst6y,  21 
N^rasov,  N.  A.,  his  influence  on 

poetry,  4;  and  democracy,  aa; 

biographical  sketch  and  ex- 
'  tracts,  ^  seq.;  and  see  120. 
•  234^  S^ii  365 
Neledinski,  16 

Nicholas  literature  under,  3,  5; 
andreaction,  2qj  and  Slavophil- 
ism, 240  seq. ;  and  see  240 

Nihilism  denned,  by  Turg^nev, 
283  seq.;  by  Merezhk6vski,  485 

Nilcitin,  Afan&si,  114 

Nikftin,  L  S.,  biographical  sketch 
and  extracts,  361  seq.;  and  see 

6,  22 

Nobility  and  culture,  1 
Novel,  the  Russian,  17,  iS 
Novelists,  of  the  forties,  4;  of  the 

people,  22 
Novikov,  27 

Obldmov,  as  a  type  of  Russians, 

5;  and  see  Goncharbv 
Ogar^v,    N.    P.,  biographical 

sketch  and  extracts,  242  seq.; 

and  see  2^ 
Optimism  in  Russian  literature, 

m8 

Ostrdvski,  A.  N.,  biographical 
sketch  and  extract,  36^  seq.; 
and  see  22 

Ozerov,  12^  241 

Pan,  a  Little-Russian  (and  Polish) 

word  =  Mr.,  ^  seq. 
Pan  slavism,   238  seq.;  and  see 

Slavophilism 
Peasant,  in  literature,     in  Tur- 

gdnev's  sketches,  20;  and  Bye- 

Unski,  213  seq.;  and  Usp^nski, 

408  se^.;  and  see  176 
People,  Its  definition,  22  seq. 
Periods,  in  literature,  3  seq.;  by 

reigns,  5 


Pessimism,  in  the  forties,  20;  and 

Baratynski,  149 
Peter  the  Great,  estimate  of,  by 

Merezhk6vski,  4S3        and  see 

2.  18,  40,  64,  123,  341 
Philosophy,  its  "weakness  in  Rus- 
sian literature,  ^ 
Pisarev,    D.     1^  biographical 

sketch  and  extract,  385^  seq.; 

and  see  6^  9 
Piscmski,    K.   F.,  biographical 

sketch  and  extract,  310  seq.; 

and  see  4^  22. 
Pleshch^ev,  A.  N,,  biographical 

sketch  and  extracts,  363  seq. 
Poetry,  Zhukdvski's  conception 

of,  55;  and  see  4 
Politics  and  litcrattire,  6^  11 
Pol6nski,   Y.   P.,  biographical 

sketch  and  extracts,  303  seq.; 

and  see  4,  12 
Pomyal6vski,  and  peasant  in  lit- 

erature,  3 
Populists,  IQ 

Potipenko,  L  N.,  biographical 
sketch  and  extract,  448  seq.; 
and  see  5 

Progress,  carried  by  youths,  9 
seq.;  and  Turgdnev,  20;  of 
Russian  literature  in  nineteenth 
century,  23 

Protest  an  important  note  in 
Russian  literature,  S 

Pud,  measure  of  weight  =  about 
36  lbs.,  passim 

P^hkin,  A.  S.,  and  Byron,  lo; 
estimate,  16  seq.;  renewal  of 
his  cult,  17]  and  naturalism,  18: 
and  Merezhk6vski,  23;  and 
B&tyushkov,  73:  his  death,  and 
L<5rmontov,  156;  biographical 
sketch  and  extracts,  122  seq.; 
and  Dobrolyfibov,  2'j2seq.;  es- 
timate of,  by  Merezhk6vski, 
4835^^-.;  et passim 

PyMhkov,  A.  M.,  biographical 
sketch  and  extract,  467  seq, 

Radfshchev,  12 

Reaction,  periods  of,  in  literature, 

11;  after  1848,  2Q 
Realism  and  Turg^nev,  20 
Revizbr,  The,  1881  and  see  Gdgol 
Romanticism,    and   novels,  4] 

early,  in  Russia,  Si  and  Zhn- 


L  ,,  ^  „  . ,  y  Google 


Index 


499 


Rom  anticism —  Con  iin  ucd. 
k6vski,  14,  54;  and  Pfi5hkin, 
16;  and  ^gol,       and  Bestd- 
zbev,  102;  and  Byelinski,  207; 
and  Turjjdnev,  2&i 

Russian  language,  13,  28 

Rosfian  literature  compared  with 
English,  3 

Ryesb^tnikov,  22 

Ryly^ev,  K.  F.,  and  Decembrist 
conspiracy,  P6sbkin's  in- 
fluence on,  17^  biographical 
sketch  and  extracts,  86  seq.; 
and  see  14,  102 


Saltyk6v,  M.  B..  and  satire,  22] 

and    Dobrolyubov,    aja  seq.; 
biographical  sketch  and  ex- 
tract,        seq.;    and  Pisarev,  j 
391;  aMsee  .^86 

Sam^  and  Saltyk6v,  22^  and  see 
Saltykdv 

Scepticism  in  the  forties,  2Q 

Schaden's  school,  22 

Schelling,  his  influence  on  Rus- 
sian  literature,  205 

Schools  and  culture,  2 

Schopenhauer,  484 

Scott,  Sir  Waller,  his  influence 
on  Russian  novel,  4 

Sentimentalism,  22 

Seventies  in  literature.  22 

Shakspere,  his  influence  on 
Piishkin,  16;  and  Karamzfn, 

Sl^edrfn,  see  Saltykdv  \ 
Shcherbdtov,  i^^  22  j 

Shebiiyev,  240 

Sbenshin,  A.  A.,  biographical 
sketch  and  extracts,  319  seq. 

Shishk6v,  his  antiquated  style, 
4]  and  Church-Slavic,  12^  28] 
and  Aksdkov,  217 

Slavophiles,  their  enthusiasm,  10; 
studying  customs,  22j  defined  ; 
by  G^rtsen,  22J_5eq.:  and  Os-  ' 
tr6vski  369;  and  see  \^  2%(t,  \ 
484  I 

Slavophilism  due  to  German 
philosophy, 

Soilers,  iq 

Sons  and  fathers,  10 

Styles  of  language,  12  seq.;  and  , 
see  5 


Talent  not  concentrated,  2 

Taaso  and  Bdtyushkov,  1^ 
75  seq. 

Tatishchev,  22 

Theatre  and  Ostr6vski,  369 

Theology  and  literatureTKhom- 
yak6v*s,  230 

Tolst6y,  A.  K.,  biographical 
sketch  and  extracts,  245 

Tolst6y,  L.  N.,  novelist  of  the 
forties,  4 ;  departing  from  real- 
itv,  5;  as  negator,  9;  estimate 
of,  21 ;  biographicalsketch  and 
extracts,  391  seq.  ;  estimate  of, 
by  Merezhk6vski,  483  seq. ; 
and  see  81 

Tolst6yi8ts,  392 

Tradition,  absence  of,  in  home 

life,  2  ;  in  school,  & 
Tsdrskoe-Sel6,  lyceura  at,  2 
Tugendbund  in  Russia,  15 
Turg^nev,  L  S.,  novelist  of  the 
forties,  4^  and  emancipation  of 
the  slaves,  6;  a  Westerner,  19; 
estimate  of,  2Q  sea.  ;  an^  style, 
21;  and  Dobrolyubov,  7^2  seq.; 
hiographical  sketch  and  ex- 
tracts, 2S0  seq.;  estimate  of,  by 
Mere7.bk6vski,  4S4  seq.;  and 
see  9,  234,  303,  385 
Ty^tchev,   F.  I.,  biographical 
sketch  and  extracts,  234;  and 
see  417 

Usp^nski,  G.  1^  and  peasant 
in  literature,  ^  biographical 
sketch  and  extract,  408  seq.; 
and  see  22^  428.  468 

UvArov,  Count  S.  S.  (lived  1786- 
1855),  famous  for  his  perfervid 
loyalty  to  the  throne,  24I 

Venevitinov,  12 

Vyfizemski,  P.  A.,  his  literary 
death,  4;  biographical  sketch 
and  extracts,  ai  seq. 

War  and  Peace y  391  seq.;  and  sec 

L.  N.  ToUtby 
Western  ideals,  in  Russia,  2i  ISi 

and  TuT^^nev,  2Q 

Word  of  Igor's  Arfna*nent,  The^ 
modernised  by  Mdykov,  340 


500 


Index 


Yazykov,  N.  M.,  Pfishkin'a  in- 
flaence  on,  i^;  biographical 
sketch  and  extract,  152  seq. 

Yoong  men,  and  school  tradi- 
tions, 2i  in  coltoral  movements, 

Zag6skin,  240 


Zhuk6vaki,  V.  A.,  and  Romanti« 
dsm,  biographical  sketch 
and  extracts,  54  seq. ;  and  s^e 
3,  16,  62,  68,  81,  152,  iM 

Zlatovrdtski,  N.  N.,  biographical 
sketch  and  extracts,  422  s^q. ; 
and  ue  22^  46S 


d  by  Google 


V 


WORKS  IN  UTERATURg 

THB  UTBlUkRT  HISTORY  OP  THS  AMBSICAlt 

REVOLUTION. 

By  Moiu  Corr  Tylu,  Professor  of  Aaericaa  HiitMy,  COm«U  Unirmitf. 

Two  volnnti,  10I4  MpanUelj.   8*.  eu^  l3>oo 

VolniMl.,  176^-1796;  Volttine  II.,  1776-1783. 

"Prof— or  Tylf*i  b>ww»  wwk  l»  rich,  iri—hriiig.  lafanriig,  — d  daiitfrtiiL  Aad  hta 
Mt  oaly^fayiairim,  itMlf,  bat  it  b  a  hnlMas  gni(M  ^^o.     whpls  sbwadMy fonsJ,  mi 


A  Hnrromr  w  amsrican  utbmturb  durimo 

THB  COLONIAL  TIMB. 


Bf  Mofxs  CoiT Tvui,  N«ir  •dUloB, iwffM.  Two* 

8*.  e«ch,  ' 

Volume  I.,  i6o7->i676;  Volume  II.,  1676-1763. 


t idi.  to 0—1  y,  hjHlittW     ....  13.00 

THB  LITBKABT  MOVBIIBirr  IN  PBANCB  DURINQ 
THB  NINBTBBNTH  CBNTURT. 


Bf  Gbokobs  Pblussikr.   Authorised  English  wmAam  If  AMtm  Q.  BaiMloii, 
together  with  a  General  Introduction.  8*  

Tha  aniaaat  French  cntic  M.  FcrdioAod  Biuaed^  uty*  of  thia :  **  M.  PalllMier'i  votk  is 
BO  l«m  the  picture  th&n  the  histonr  of  coatcmponry  litentore.  In  addltloa,  it  U  alao  Ae 
phjloaophy  of,  <»  rath«r  describes,  the  erolutioa  of  the  literary  aoTeaaal  tA  our  oouattir.'* 

A  HISTORY  OF  GERMAN  LITERATURE. 

By  John  G.  Robkktson,  Professor  in  the  University  of  Strassburg.  8'. 
pp.  xxTiiL  +  635  ^^et,  $3.50 


rroftwor  RobartKwi  dwanraa  high  pcatw  tor  dia  werit  ha  haa  do— .  It  •how*  wide  read- 


tag  amd  palnsraHng  acfadaiship,  aod  both  EauriUh  aad  AaMrieaa  smdinw  of 
lass  M  ha  ooBcfatubiad  apon  die  pubHoaaoa  of  ao  good  a  book.**— /MM 


THE  HISTORY  OF  FRENCH  LITBRATURB. 
L  Proa  its  Origin  to  tho  Rca&Us&oco. 

IL  Wnm  tho  RwiilMMif  i  to  tit  Ctott  •!  tl»  Ro<g«  of  Lite  BIV; 
m.  FWoithoRoif  ofLoaioXnr.tothololNipolon  IIL 

9f  Hkn'sy  Van  Laun.  Thno  vote,  io  000.  Half  ImAm,  dolh  iides,  8*, 

pp.  34a.  39ai  467      ....      .      .      .      .      .  Is.so 


AMERICAN  LITERATURE,  1607-1885. 

Bj  Prof.  Charles  F.  Richakdson.  of  Dartaooth  CoUaf*.    Two  vols..  8*, 
pp.  XX.  4-  535,  456  $6.00 

Viopilv  odMoo.    T^  vols,  is  ooo,  hdf  boood,  8*,  pp.  b.  +  9gt,  is.10 

Piortl.— Tho  Dovolopaoot  of  Ameiicoa  Tkoai^ 

Plort  II.— Americon  Poetrj  aatf  Plction. 

'It  Is  acifcleiallhwei.  anil  srigliial.  Aswt^  Que  iiMcl  iMilast  ml  a       eeist  ef 


G.  P.  PUTNAM'S  SONS.  New  York  and  Lonoom. 


Digitized  by  Google 


Knickerbocker  Uta'atore 'Series 

Prepared  as  Supplementary  RmUaf^  for  tbe 
Va»  <f  HlHwr  Qm§§  Omm 

Edited  by  FRANK  UNCOLN  OLMSTED 

I.  BpiiodM  Iram  '^TIm  Winning  of  tiie  Wmt  ** 

By  Thbodorb  Roosiyblt 

9.  AbnluuB  Unonin:  His  Bogrliood  and  BuiyMaB^ 
h90d.  witii  a  Brief  Acoonnt  of  hit  Later  Life 

By  Noah  Brooks 

3*  The  Fur  Traders  of  the  Columbia  River  and  the 
Roclcy  Mountains  as  described  by  Washington 
Irving  in  his  Account  of  ^'Astoria  "  and  the  reootd 
of  the  '^Adventures  of  Captain  Bonneville,**  with 
some  additions  by  the  Editor. 

la*  iw#  90cla> 

Tide  Mcies  hit  been  pcqwied  to  praent  in  eoaveaieBt  f on  for 

the  ttvdent,  and  for  the  nse  of  literature  classes,  the  rabetaaee  of 
the  works  of  certain  noteworthy  authors.  Volumes  wUI  be  pr^ 
pared  based  upon  the  complete  texts  of  certain  American  elastics, 
•ad  to  edited  as  to  leave  unimpaired  the  essential  portions  of  the 
aarrative,  while  praerviag  eaovf^  of  iaddent  aad  off  detoQ  to  eon- 
piete  the  pictures  of  the  periods  aad  placet  adectod.  The  Bttia 
text  will  be  left  in  the  language  of  the  original  authors. 

The  first  group  in  the  series  will  comprise  four  volumes  devoted 
to  the  literature  illustrating  the  exploration,  the  conquest,  and  the 
devdopOMat  of  tbe  tenitoiy  of  tht  Wert.  The  Fint  VohnM  irill 
oootihi  the  atoiy  off  *'The  Wlaafaig  off  the  Weat,"  by  Theodore 
Rooaevelt,  and  with  the  chroaological  narrative  will  preaent  the 
complete  text  of  certain  of  the  more  dramatic  and  noteworthy  inci- 
dents in  this  very  picturesque  chronicle.  The  Second  Volume  will 
|ffctent  in  like  manner  the  conaecative  narrative  and  the  more  note- 
worthy iaddeate  froni  "Aatoria"  aad  **Adveatni«e  off  Ceptoia 
Bonneville,"  by  Washington  Inriag,  g^viag  a  chronicle  of  the  ex- 
plorations of  the  fur  traders  in  the  outposts  from  which  their  work 
was  done.  The  Third  Volume,  based  upon  Cooper's  *'  Last  of  the 
Mohicans,"  will  present  a  romantic  picture  of  the  Indians  and 
hnaleiB  off  the  border.  The  Fonrth  Vdlome,  beied  opoalha  **  Life 
off  Liacobi,'*  by  Noah  Brooke,  althooi^  deeliag  with  a  aadi  toter 
period  of  time,  tells  of  eiperienees  off  a  boyhood  aad  yoaag  aian> 
hood  passed  in  these  sobm  piooeer  satronndings. 

Each  ▼olnme  ffwitaina  lUaatrations  and  maps, 
PervolaoM  .  75  eta.  to  f  x.oo  m/ 

a  P.  PUTNAM'S  SONS,  New  Yoric  and  ijoadoa 

C  r  4  8  .} 

0* 


Digitized  by  Google 


mniiiiiiini 

3  2044  020  079  018 


This  book  should  be  returned  to 
the  Library  on  or  before  the  last  date 
stamped  below. 

A  fine  is  incurred  by  retaining  it 
beyond  the  specified  time. 

Please  return  promptly. 


DOE  APR  '66  H 


.r-  t 


Digitized  by  Google 


